Title       : SBIR Phase I: Fuzzy CMAC for Real-Time Enhancement of Scanning Probe Microscope
               Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9560717

Award Number: 9560717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74551              (Estimated)
Investigator: ChiMan Kwan ckwan@i-a-i.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Automation Inc
	      7519 Standish Place, Suite 200
	      Rockville, MD  208552743    301/222-0444

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 This SBIR Phase 1 project will exploit a new type of neural net to improve
              the accuracy of images captured using scanning probe microscopes (SPMs).
              Scanning probe microscopes view materials down to atomic dimensions, and this
              ability is becoming increasingly important in many industries. A primary source
              of error in the images obtained from atomic force microscopes is caused by
              probe geometry. Current `probe calibration` systems yield some benefits but
              much more can be done. Probe calibration systems use mathematical models to
              compute the geometry of the probe based on measurements of known samples. If
              the microscope output indicated the contact between the surface of the probe
              and the known standard sample when a sample is scanned, then it would be
              possible to compute the probe shape from the measured sample geometry. In
              practice, however, this does not work well. The force sensed by the atomic
              force microscope does not depend only on the interaction between the surface of
              the probe and the sample. All of the forces involved depend non-linearly on the
              shape, size, magnetization, electrostatic charge, and on other characteristics
              of the probe. The Phase 1 effort will validate the feasibility of the fuzzy
              CMAC based error compensation approach for atomic force microscopes. The beauty
              of using a neural-net approach, and particularly a Fuzzy CMAC, is that it is
              not necessary to develop a closed form relationship between the measurements
              made on the standard sample and a model of the probe geometry. All that is
              necessary is to scan the standard sample providing enough learning sets to
              train the net. Likewise it is not necessary to develop closed form relations to
              exploit a computed error model to correct measured data.   The output of the
              Fuzzy CMAC will generate the correction values in real-time based on the
              learned relationship between ideal and measured data. Scanning probe microscope
              sales are increasing worldwide at approximately 40 to 60% per year, and they
              are being used in an increasing number of industries. This technology will
              improve the accuracy of these machines and increase a user's ability to observe
              the atomic structure of whatever they are producing. This firm has a joint
              development agreement in place with one of the world's leading suppliers of
              SPMs, thereby providing a natural path to early commercialization.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
