Title       : SBIR Phase I: Paragenetic Chemical Limits on Asbestiform Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9560922

Award Number: 9560922
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74385              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Vinopal standrd@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Standard Geological Svcs
	      6920 Jordan Road, Suite M
	      Englewood, CO  801124248    303/680-4816

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1037,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop an
              approach for identification of asbestos which uses polarized light microscopy
              preceded by a major-minor elemental analysis of at least 100 mg of ashed
              sample. The reliability of current methods of identification of asbestos depend
              upon the raw skill and experience of microscopists, the variations caused by
              sample heterogeneity based upon a few micrograms of materials examined under a
              microscope, or the need for extremely expensive and often slow equipment to
              overcome the variable human error that arises from variable skills of
              microscopists.  The major-minor elemental analyses can be done rapidly with
              inexpensive, low maintenance, nonspecialized equipment such as atomic
              absorption spectrophotometers.  A pilot study with a few samples has shown that
              this combined system easily eliminates the most common sources of error that
              microscopy alone produces in analyses of building materials for asbestos.  Many
              individual building materials  have mineral fillers that come from a restricted
              paragenesis based upon local sources.  Thus mineralogy, major, minor and trace
              elements should be indicative of a rock source that is or is not likely to
              contain asbestos minerals.   This project seeks to extend the elemental
              analysis in conjunction with the microscopy to back-calculate likely mineral
              percentages present based upon the most reasonable of several computer models
              that are written to calculate minerals from analyses based on assumptions of
              particular paragenetic suites.  This would tend to eliminate many false
              positives, especially in the difficult samples that contain asbestos at low
              levels.       Inexpensive, time-saving procedures which improve the reliability
              of asbestiform mineral analysis have immediate commercial application. Entities
              performing asbestos analysis such as government agencies, industrial
              hygienists, consulting laboratories, and educational institutions are a
              potential market.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
