Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Automatic Monitoring of Software Requirements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9560648

Award Number: 9560648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74899              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Feather feather@compsvcs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Computing Serv Support
	      5777 West Century Boulevard
	      Los Angeles, CA  900455600    213/299-3136

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2880,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will improve
              dramatically the adaptability, maintainability, and robustness of software
              systems that operate in complex, ever- changing environments.  current practice
              requires the end users of many software applications to customize those
              applications to their own requirements and environments.  Such customization is
              particularly problematic when those requirements are dynamic  and difficult to
              predict.  This project will demonstrate the utility and feasibility of
              employing run-time monitors that detect failures to fulfill requirements and
              violations of assumption about the operating environment upon which current
              choice of system configuration is based.  Users describe requirements and
              assumptions in a language to be designed for this specific purpose.  From
              expressions of requirements in this notation, a run-time monitor is
              automatically generated, and installed to run alongside the monitored system.
              in its normal operating context. Run-time monitors of this kind alert users
              about mismatches between expected and actual operating conditions, thereby
              providing vital data necessary for either human users or a piece of software to
              reconfigure the system appropriately.       Automated monitoring for
              reconfiguration has tremendous commercial potential in existing software
              products such as: databases, spreadsheets, graphical user interface kits,
              system administration tool suites, etc. Commercial products from this research
              could be a) Valuable additional `monitoring` modules packaged into existing
              products by their vendors; b) Stand-alone tools to monitor the requirements of
              systems from the outside environment.  Both   kinds of products have great 
              commercial value.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
