Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Wireless Remote Evaluation of Bridge Abutmentsand Piers (WREBAP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9560834

Award Number: 9560834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74907              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Maser kmaser@infrasense.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : INFRASENSE, Inc
	      14 Kensington Road
	      Arlington, MA  021748016    617/648-0440

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1037,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop and
              demonstrate a low cost system for Wireless Remote Evaluation of Abutments and
              Piers (WREBAP).  The WREBAP system addresses the most common cause of bridge
              failure: i.e., from floods, during which scour of bridge foundations causes
              failure of piers and abutments.  Accurate and timely evaluation of these
              critical bridge abutment and pier conditions that can lead to such failures is
              a critical part of implementing a cost-effective, safety conscious bridge
              management program.  The WREBAP system is based on long-term monitoring of pier
              and abutment movements caused by thermal and dead loading.  These movements,
              and their relationship to measured distortions, are combined with parameter
              estimation models to determine the characteristics of unknown foundations and
              overall condition of the pier or abutment.  The information is transmitted
              autonomously to the Department of Transportation bridge management database
              where it could be used for rehabilitation planning and budgeting,
              prioritization, and rapid and emergency response.  By eliminating wires and
              using low cost, mass produced electronic components, the system will be low
              cost (target = $5000-$10000 per bridge).  This price range makes the system
              affordable for implementation on a large number of structures, so that the
              population of bridges can be effectively monitored.  The key technical issues
              to be faced in the development of the WREBAP system are: (1) the reliability
              and accuracy of pier and abutment evaluations using long term monitoring data;
              and (2) the ability of the proposed system to provide data of adequate quality.
               The Phase I program will address these two issues by (1) conducting simulation
              pier and abutment evaluations using simple models and synthesized data; and (2)
              designing and demonstrating field data collection using an experimental
              prototype system mounted to an in-service bridge.       The proposed system,
              when fully developed, will be applicable to all bridges owned by State and
              Local departments of transportation, railroad companies, and toll and tunnel
              authorities.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
