Title       : SBIR Phase I: Spherical Pointing Actuator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9560519

Award Number: 9560519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74542              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cesar Bandera   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst Systems Inc
	      30 Wilson Road
	      Buffalo, NY  142217026    716/631-0610

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              high speed, high accuracy pointing mechanism for active machine vision systems.
              Space system applications place demanding spatial and temporal resolution, and
              wide field-of-view (FOV) requirements on machine vision. Foveal active vision
              features imaging sensors and signal processing with graded acuity, coupled with
              context sensitive sensor gaze control, analogous to that prevalent throughout
              vertebrate vision. Foveal systems operate more efficiently than uniform acuity
              systems because resolution is treated as a dynamically allocatable resource.
              Wide FOV and localized high acuity are simultaneously supported while limiting
              sensor data to that which is relevant. The development of high performance
              foveal systems is hampered by the need for pan-tilt pointing mechanisms, which
              must be faster and more accurate than those used in uniform acuity active
              vision. This program will investigate two novel designs for servo pointing
              actuators that implement pan-tilt motion using orthogonal torsional magnetic
              fields; they act simultaneously on the foveal imager. One of these approaches
              uses two crossing coils surrounding the sensor, and the other uses two
              non-overlapping coil ring pairs that bracket the sensor. The performance of
              these two approaches will be evaluated experimentally, and control strategies
              that minimize settling time will be investigated. A controller implementing the
              most promising strategy on the most promising actuator design will  e built and
              tested. The actuators will be faster and feature an order of magnitude less
              size, weight, and power requirements than conventional motion-on-motion
              pan-tilt mechanisms (cascaded turntables). They will also feature better
              settling time and calibration than other multi-axis electromagnetic
              configurations.       Foveal systems offer space vision systems improved
              performance at lower system cost. They interrogate targets with high resolution
              to reduce classification errors, while supporting a wide FOV that improves
              multi-target detection and tracking. Foveal systems feature orders of magnitude
              less computational latency and hardware than conventional systems with the same
              maximum resolution and FOV. The spherical pointing actuators developed under
              this program will maximize gazing performance and support other optical
              applications, including beam steering.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
