Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Asynchronous Integration of Processors and Hardware for Real-Time
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560574

Award Number: 9560574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74498              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare Savaglio   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AD Inter
	      3800 Stone School Road
	      Ann Arbor, MI  48108    313/973-1300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2865,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project deals with a new
              methodology for real-time testing of embedded controllers and other actual
              system hardware using simulation of major parts of the system. For example, a
              jet engine controller might be interfaced to the real-time simulation of a jet
              engine to test the engine controller over the full operating envelop of the
              engine. Simulations of dynamic systems involving `hard-in-the-loop` are
              commonly called HIL simulations. This new methodology involves completely
              asynchronous operation of processors and hardware subsystems and has the
              potential for producing enormous simplifications and gains in efficiency for
              HIL simulations.  In this new methodology, variable step-size integration
              methods are used for the first time in hard real-time HIL simulations. This is
              a major breakthrough for this type of simulation. The extrapolation techniques
              used in the asynchronous methodology compensate for latencies inherent in a
              simulation having multiple processors and external hardware, thus providing
              greater simulation accuracy. The basic concepts of the asynchronous methodology
              can now be demonstrated in a multi-processor environment.  A commercial
              software package containing a development shell, run-time system, and
              debug/monitor package that incorporates this new asynchronous methodology is
              envisioned. The primary output for this research would be a specification for
              such a software package. An example simulation with external hardware
              interfaced to it will be developed and used to test the asynchronous
              methodology concepts and in experiments that help define various aspects of the
              proposed software package, particularly in the areas of debugging tools and the
              interpretation of calculated estimates of dynamic errors in the simulation.    
                The use of embedded microprocessor-based controllers for all types of
              products has literally exploded over the past few years. HIL simulation is a
              proven tool for reducing time to market for new products, improving product
              quality, and reducing the potential for product liability claims by making it
              possible to test embedded controllers faster and much more thoroughly than
              through the use of other types of testing. The software product to be defined
              in this project would enable the cost of developing HIL simulations to be
              reduced significantly, thus encouraging ever greater use of HIL simulations in
              testing embedded controllers. This would be highly beneficial to the developers
              of both commercial and military products.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
