Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Bottleneck Dynamics Decision Support System for Scheduling and
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9560046

Award Number: 9560046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Morton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Parsifal Systems Inc
	      311 South Craig Street Ste. 2A
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133731    412/682-8080

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1465,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9560046  Morton         This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
              project develops a new simulation-oriented methodology for fast, accurate, and
              intuitive scheduling in manufacturing operations.  Under escalating pressures
              of zero inventories, time based competition, and make-to-order requirements,
              finite scheduling is emerging in industrial practice.  However, current methods
              are simple simulation approached with manual control or else rather complex and
              expensive automatic schedulers that allow little interaction with the user. 
              This methodology, called bottleneck dynamics, is expected to allow a full range
              of manual, automatic, or mixed control and work fast.  Bottleneck dynamics is
              intuitive in many shops where individual activities do not dominate, i.e., the
              structure is close to convex (in the aggregate).  This suggests that: (a)
              heuristic dual prices are meaningful, providing approximate sensitivity
              analysis, (b) such prices can be used to fashion a broad variety of heuristics,
              including transfer pricing between different levels and parts of the shop, and
              (c) heuristic prices can be improved by iteration (hill climbing).  This
              approach to scheduling has been explored in computational studies on automatic
              sequencing for a variety of objectives.  The SBIR Phase I will extend
              bottleneck dynamics to routing, parallel machines, and sequence dependent
              setups through laboratory testing.  Phase II is projected to add a decision
              support interface and two-level scheduling and control, and to test a prototype
              of a commercial system.       Bottleneck dynamics is expected to provide small
              manufacturers with planning and scheduling software tools in manual, automatic
              and mixed modes of use.  It is expected to support them in fast, accurate,
              easy-to-implement-and-use finite capacity scheduling opereations at affodable
              costs.
