Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ultra-Sensitive Airborne Detection of Trace Gas Chemical Species
               Using Counter-Propagating Phase-Sensitive Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9560563

Award Number: 9560563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74989              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Leitch jleitch@ophir.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : OPHIR Corporation
	      10184 W Belleview Ave, Ste 200
	      Littleton, CO  801271700    303/933-2200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,1524,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a new
              airborne trace gas sensing spectroscopic technique called Counter-Propagating
              Phase-Sensitive Spectroscopy. Unlike present conventional spectroscopic methods
              which utilize molecular absorption (based on the imaginary part of the complex
              index of refraction), this method relies on the anomalous dispersion which is
              also associated with every molecular resonance line (based on the real part of
              the complex index of refraction) as quantified by the Kramers-Kronig
              relationship. The instrument will thus sense gas concentration via beam phase
              and fringe shifts in a uniquely ultra-stable interferometer rather than by
              total beam attenuation. Using this new technique, the proposed instrument
              theoretically provides sensitivities approaching the quantum noise limit and
              about 3 orders of magnitude better than presently available molecular
              absorption measuring instruments. The anticipated result will be that trace
              gases can be selectively sensed in air at the parts per trillion level. The
              instrument is conceptually small, robust, vibration-insensitive and thus
              airworthy. Any atmospheric trace gas with a molecular absorption line in the
              visible, near-IR or infrared can theoretically be sensed. This includes
              virtually every chemical compound. The sensor is theoretically capable of
              measuring atmospheric pollution at the parts per trillion level.       It is
              anticipated that Counter-Propagating Phase-Sensitive spectroscopy will yield
              trace-gas sensitivities 3 orders of magnitude better than traditionally used
              approaches. This instrument promises to be reliable, stable, tunable to a host
              of chemical compounds, and thus able to provide improved industrial safety
              monitoring, pollution monitoring, and increased sensitivity for measurements of
              trace gas atmospheric pollutants and chemical tracers.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
