Title       : SBIR Phase I: X-Ray Thermometer for Rapid Thermal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1996  
File        : a9560216

Award Number: 9560216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Kerner kerner@aracor.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ARACOR
	      425 Lakeside Drive
	      Sunnyvale, CA  94086    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1464,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              investigate X-ray diffraction as an accurate, cost-effective method to monitor
              and control wafer temperature in a Rapid Thermal Processing (RTP) furnace.  RTP
              is a key element for the next generation of semiconductor fabrication
              facilities, especially for the cluster tool environment.  A major barrier to
              wider use of RTP, as the processing method of choice, is the lack of an
              accurate, reproducible measurement of wafer temperature.  This is critical to
              the reliable production of thin films with the required physical and chemical
              characteristics.  Current methods used to monitor wafer temperature are
              handicapped by either wafer bowing or changes in emissivity resulting from thin
              film stress and growth.  Phase I will design an X-ray probe for precise
              temperature measurement which is relatively insensitive to these effects, and
              is still cost effective.  The required precision of temperature measurement
              will be demonstrated using a low-power X-ray source.       Expanded use of RTP
              equipment is expected, either as stand-alone processing tools or in the
              integrated cluster tool environment.  This would benefit both military
              electronics development, as well as commercial semiconductor manufacturering,
              as identified in the 1994 IS National Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
