Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Advanced Hardware Scheduler for Parallel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1996   
File        : a9560140

Award Number: 9560140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74395              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Belo DaveBelo@belobox.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Belobox Systems, Inc.
	      18 Technology Drive
	      Irvine, CA  92718    714/727-4115

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4710,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will advance the
              implementation of Symmetric MultiProcessing (SMP) computers by providing a
              commercially available hardware scheduler to replace the inadequate scheduling
              software used by all operating systems.  Hardware scheduling is a critical
              enabling technology in the evolution of sophisticated parallel processing
              computing systems that simplifies scheduling of complex multithreaded
              applications, permits inter-SMP computer scheduling, eliminates the extremely
              complex scheduling software, and ensures that all processors are always
              executing applications code in place of scheduling.  The objective of the
              research is to make a commercially available product that will benefit a wide
              range of operating systems and hardware platforms by specifying a simplified
              operating system interface to support any processor and validating that a full
              implementation of a sub-microsecond hardware scheduler is feasible using
              commercially available, large programmable hardware components. The research
              will include preparation of a software requirements document to permit any
              operating system to be easily interfaced to the hardware scheduler, preparation
              of a hardware requirements document for the hardware scheduler's behavior,
              investigation of commercially available, large programmable hardware components
              with the capabilities of meeting the requirements of the hardware scheduler,
              selection of several components, and verification that the required logic can
              fit in the components and obtain sub-microsecond hardware scheduling.  At the
              end of the initial effort it is expected that all objectives will have been met
              permitting the building of a cost-effective, prototype hardware scheduler
              suitable for any processor running any operating system on any system bus. 
              This prototype could then be put into production quickly and cost effectively. 
                   The hardware scheduler could become a part of every computer system,
              including single processor systems, because they would also benefit from
              elimination of software scheduling code. Therefore, any operating system would
              be capable of running SMP and inter-SMP scheduling without writing and
              maintaining the extremely complex scheduling software required for SMP
              scheduling. In addition, because the scheduling is done by the hardware
              scheduler, the processors have more time to execute application code. In
              addition, it will enable the configuration of massively parallel computing
              systems with guaranteed scheduling behavior but no additional overhead. This
              technology is particularly applicable in the client/server environment and
              transaction processing.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
