Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Personal Authentication for Database and Network Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1996  
File        : a9560455

Award Number: 9560455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74779              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Ostrem ostrem@cic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Communication Intelligence
	      275 Shoreline Drive, #520
	      Redwood Shores, CA  94065    415/802-7888

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6855,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine
              the feasibility of developing a personal authentication system for database and
              network security based on dynamic signature verification. Previous work on
              database and network security has focused on cryptographic methods such as
              digital signatures, and various security management techniques to protect files
              and transmissions over the network-- all of which is important and essential to
              creating a secure database and network, but it is not enough. In any security
              system the biggest weakness is ultimately the people who have access to the
              system. This problem has been recognized in such areas as health care, where
              new standards are being drafted that include personal authentication as well as
              cryptology for maintaining secure databases that meet legal requirements (ASTM
              draft E31.20). It is felt that personal authentication based on signature
              verification best satisfies the requirements of compliance with legal
              regulations, low cost, high performance, and user acceptance. The proposed
              Phase I work includes: 1) collection of signature data; 2) research into
              signature verification algorithms for enrollment, signature matching, and
              updating (with a current prototype signature verification technology as a
              starting point and baseline); 3) development of a real-time prototype; 4)
              thorough testing and evaluation of performance and feasibility; 5)
              investigation into how to effectively integrate signature verification into
              database and network security (in particular, integration with cryptographic
              methods such as digital signatures).       The market for personal
              authentication systems is potentially very large, including database and
              network security, general computer security, access control to sensitive areas,
              financial transactions, and anywhere else sensitive information is
              electronically stored. For electronic transactions to become widely accepted, a
              computer-based personal authentication system such as signature verification is
              needed..                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
