Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Mass Production of Periclinal Chimeric Potatoes Containing New
               Multigenic Traits for Pest Resistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560939

Award Number: 9560939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68442              (Estimated)
Investigator: Horia I. Groza   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tissue-Grown Corporation
	      414 Fourth Street A
	      Woodland, CA  95695    916/661-6898

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1118,1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
              scale up of a novel technology, the generation of periclinal chimeras. 
              Tissue-Grown Corporation scientists have developed a novel method for combining
              the best characteristics of two varieties of potato by forming chimeras.  The
              meristems of dicotyledous plants are organized into three distinct cell layers.
               Established in meristems, cell layers have set patterns of division and
              maintain their distinctive organization throughout the plant.  Chimeric plants
              are composed of cell layers from different parents.  Chimeras offer the ability
              to work with a much broader choice of genetic donor germplasm in new variety
              development.  Chimeras provide a means for rapid incorporation of wild species
              epidermal traits onto commercial varieties, without changing the tuber
              characteristics of the original varieties.  Breeders must use many generations
              of backcrossing, and must often begin with somatic hybrids from protoplast
              fusion, in order to bring a wild species gene into a commercial potato
              germplasm.  Wild species contain a wealth of disease resistance genes and genes
              of horticultural interest, but they also come with a heavy burden of genes
              detrimental to potato tuber production, such as delayed tuber set, odd colors,
              shapes and sizes of tubers, and excessive tuber glycoalkaloids.  Using
              chimeras, many well-established and valuable varieties can be enhanced without
              disturbing or damaging their primary tuber traits.       This research is
              directed toward the development of methods for the mass production of new
              potato varieties.  The specific germplasm targets would combine insect
              resistance from the wild Solanum species, S. berthaltii and the tuber qualities
              of a commercial potato variety, cv. Shepody.  If successful this would result
              in rapid generation of new potato varieties that can take advantage of wild
              germplasm traits for pest resistance without the undesirable wild tuber traits.
               Pest resistance is often a multigenic trait with consequently complex
              inheritance patterns.  Candidates for improvement include fresh market (table
              stock) as well as frozen and processed products (French fries, chips and
              dehydrated products).  Successful market penetration could generate annual
              revenues exceeding $30 million.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
