Title       : SBIR Phase I: Permanent Erasable Optical-Recording Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1996        
File        : a9560904

Award Number: 9560904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel T. Smithey Smithey@bendres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bend Research Inc
	      64550 Research Road
	      Bend, OR  977018599    541/382-4100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                 This SBIR Phase I project is directed toward developing new materials for
              optical recording. At present, no optical recording material is available that
              meets all of the requirements for applications such as optical data storage,
              high resolution spatial light modulators and reconfigurable optical
              interconnects. The ideal optical recording material would have high resolution,
              permanent information storage, read without erase capability, high sensitivity,
              high photochemical and thermal stability, and optical erase capability.
              Photochromic materials are promising optical recording materials since they
              exhibit high resolution, are easy to fabricate, are inexpensive, and are
              relatively sensitive to recording light. However, information recorded in
              current photochromic materials cannot be read without erasure unless a
              different wavelength of light is used for reading and recording. The recorded
              information also tends to fade with time and use, and the materials
              photodegrade. The overall goal for this program is to overcome the limitations
              of existing optical recording materials through the development of a novel
              photochromic material that meets all of the above requirements for optical
              recording. This project will show that information can be permanently recorded
              into this material and subsequently read without erasure using the same
              wavelength of light. This will be accomplished by developing a novel,
              reversible fixing method. In addition, the project will show that recorded
              information can be erased and re-recorded. In Phase II, the firm will develop
              these materials with respect to the fixing method, recording sensitivity, and
              other important optical properties, and demonstrate the utility of these
              materials by investigating relevant applications, such as holography and
              optical computing.   The successful development of the optical recording
              material proposed here would enable the production of high-density optical
              memories with the potential to store 1 terabit of information within a volume
              as small as 1 cm3. Very high resolution spatial light modulators.
              reconfigurable optical interconnects, holographic recording materials, and
              optical switching materials would also benefit from this material.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
