Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A Unique High Accuracy Means of Locating Cellular Telephones Using
               the Existing Cellular Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9560808

Award Number: 9560808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steen A. Parl sig@world.std.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Signatron Tech Corp
	      29 Domino Drive
	      Concord, MA  017422845    508/371-0550

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4090,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9560808  Parl         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              involves an investigation into the application of a new, innovative, passive
              radio-based geolocation technique, developed by the proposing firm, to the
              problem of locating and tracking cellular telephones and other emerging
              wireless personal communication devices without requiring modification to the
              mobile phones. The new signal processing method is based on a technique
              developed in part under NIH funding, which was designed for use in locating
              wandering elderly and mental patients. The technique employs a
              maximum-likelihood estimation of the emitter location which is based on joint
              estimation of signal parameters at multiple existing cellular base stations.
              The proposed approach offers a potential order of magnitude increase in
              location accuracy over existing techniques and also promises to permit location
              of in-building emitters. The new technique promises to be inexpensive in
              implementation and will not require costly wide-band dedicated line connection
              to a central processing facility, as do some current techniques, nor will it
              require signal processing at the mobile terminal, as do existing GPS and
              Loran-C location determination devices. It is proposed that the new signal
              processing technique be adapted to use existing control signals that are
              periodically emitted from cellular telephones; such proposal ensures that no
              modification of the cellular telephones or existing cellular infrastructure is
              required to implement a final system.  Phase I of the program comprises the
              development a computer simulation of a multiple base station cellular telephone
              system. The simulation will be used to study the performance in terms of
              accuracy, building penetration, and required complexity of the proposed
              technique under various realistic radio propagation conditions. The results
              will be used to determine the minimum hardware configuration for Phase II
              prototype implementation. Performance models for the proposed system using 
              cellular telephone transmissions will be developed and implementation costs
              estimated. The Phase I program will conclude with the preliminary design of the
              base station hardware, plans for remote monitoring and control of the base
              station units, and estimation of system costs based on the preliminary design.
              A competitive analysis comparing the proposed technique to other geolocation
              techniques and an in-depth commercialization plan will be developed.       The
              proposed geolocation technique will have application in low-cost implementation
              of enhanced 9-1-1 services to locate wireless telephones in emergency
              situations, medical condition monitoring/location, low-cost vehicle tracking
              and navigation systems (including automated dispatch), tracking of mobile
              computers for network management, child location devices, criminal tracking,
              pet location devices, stolen vehicle recovery, lost/stolen cellular telephone
              recovery, and a wide range of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
              location-based service systems.
