Title       : SBIR PHASE I: A Global Multi-Grid GMRES Scheme for an Adaptive Cartesian/Prism
               Flow Solver on Distributed Memory Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560782

Award Number: 9560782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Z.J. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1266,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***  9560782  Wang         This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project proposes to develop and demonstrate a parallel algorithm for a newly
              developed adaptive Cartesian/prism grid flow solver on distributed memory
              parallel machines.  A global Generalized Minimal RESidual algorithm (GMRES)
              will be utilized in combination with an explicit multi-grid pre-conditioner to
              drive flow to steady state.  A hybrid domain decomposition method, i.e., a
              recursive eigenvector bisection (RSB) method on the coarsest grid and a divide
              and conquer type local cell migration method (LCM) on the finest grid, will be
              implemented to balance load on the finest grid.  The strategy ensures that the
              original structure of the coarsest grid is not destroyed with domain
              decomposition.  Overlap of one cell deep at each multi-grid level between
              domains is provided for data communication.  Message passing will be provided
              through a parallel virtual machine (PVM) package.  In addition, a novel
              communication and computation overlap (CCO) procedure is proposed to achieve
              data synchronization and zero wait time by processors.  Since both the GMRES
              algorithm and the explicit multi-grid pre-conditioner can be effectively
              parallelized, the overall approach is expected to perform very well on
              distributed memory parallel machines, both homogeneous and heterogeneous.      
                The automatic grid generation and load balancing approaches drastically
              reduce the overhead cost associated with grid generation and domain
              decomposition for parallel computers.  The parallelizable GMRES multi-grid
              solution algorithm is ideally suited for distributed memory machines and is
              expected to further speed up convergence of flow to steady state.  If the
              concept is successfully proven in Phase I, it will be extended to 3D in later
              phases.  The key commercial objective is to develop a computational fluid
              dynamics (CFD) code that is specially designed for distributed memory machines,
              which are viewed by many as the most cost-effective computer archit ecture for
              large scientific and engineering simulations.  ***
