Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Fully-Depleted Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor
               Technology for Scientific Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9560428

Award Number: 9560428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett King   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ARACOR
	      425 Lakeside Drive
	      Sunnyvale, CA  94086    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              mixed-mode Fully-Depleted Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (FD CMOS)
              technology suitable for scientific applications. This technology will offer
              higher speed performance at lower power dissipation and operate in more severe
              environments than the present bulk CMOS technology. The approach is to keep the
              process simple, utilize presently available processing equipment, avoid exotic
              materials and transistor configurations, relax the design rules, and provide
              the ultra-thin Silicon On Insulator (SOI) substrates, so that the technology
              can be introduced quickly to the community and be made available from a wide
              variety of sources.   This project will verify the computer simulations of the
              FD CMOS process and experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of processing FD
              channels in its ultra-thin Bond and Etchback SOI (BESOI) material by
              fabricating and evaluating MOS capacitors. The specific objectives are to
              adjust and validate the channel implant and anneal parameters used to set the
              n-channel transistor threshold voltage and to demonstrate that the ultra-thin
              SOI material made with our BESOI process is suitable for processing the FD MOS
              transistors. An additional Phase I objective will be to improve the quality and
              uniformity of the epitaxial films used for manufacturing the ultra-thin BESOI
              material.   The FD CMOS technology is being considered for next-generation
              commercial products which require high levels of integration and ultra-low
              power. The results of this program will be commercialized through specialized
              detector products, process licensing, and the manufacture of ultra-thin SOI
              substrates.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
