Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Real Time Analyzer for Chlorinated Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9560132

Award Number: 9560132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Bomse dbomse@swsciences.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Sciences Inc
	      1570 Pacheco Street, Suite E-11
	      Santa Fe, NM  875053993    505/984-1322

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1581,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I program will test a novel
              method for detecting chlorinated hydrocarbons, and has particular application
              to monitoring soil, subsoil, and vadose zones. Chlorinated hydrocarbons
              comprise one of the most widespread, chemically long-lived classes of hazardous
              waste The compounds are denser than water and migrate downward through
              groundwater and vadose zones. It is often difficult to verify the effectiveness
              of subsurface remediation methods because remediation activities--such as soil
              washing and solvent extraction--may exacerbate the migration. Thus, improved
              methods are required to monitor concentrations of these compounds. Any new
              analysis technique must be field deployable, provide rapid (real time)
              response, and must be selective for chlorinated hydrocarbons in the presence of
              large backgrounds of inorganic chlorides.   This will be a monitoring method
              that can provide continuous determination of changes in the local
              concentrations of the chlorinated solvents during remediation. The approach can
              be engineered for use with cone penetrometers or can be implemented in fixed
              locations including well headspace areas. Vapor including chlorinated organic
              compounds is sampled through a membrane used to exclude liquids, then is
              decomposed in an electric discharge. The concentration of discharge-produced
              HCI is measured by near-infrared diode laser spectroscopy. Fiber optics bring
              the laser light to the measurement region from a miniature diode laser that is
              kept above ground and that can be multiplexed among numerous measurement
              points. This approach guarantees rapid time response and low operating costs. 
              Ppm detection limits for chlorinated hydrocarbons with a 1 second response time
              and a measurement dynamic range of 104 are anticipated.       The proposed
              technology is designed to be compatible with cone penetrometry in order to take
              advantage of the market for remediation diagnostics that has already been
              created around the use of cone penetrometers. Chlorinated hydrocarbons account
              for 35 to 40% of contamination in soil and ground water at thousands of sites
              requiring remediation.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
