Title       : SBIR Phase I: Carbon Nitride for Superhard Coatings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9560591

Award Number: 9560591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fereydoon Namavar fnamavar@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1774,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will synthesize a
              C3N4 phase and develop a method to stabilize the C3N4 films. The hardest
              material which can be synthesized is based on a combination of B, C, and N.
              However, materials and compounds based on these elements are metastable at
              standard pressures and temperatures. Therefore, one needs a novel,
              non-equilibrium method to process and synthesize them. The firm has developed
              such methods, including ion beam assisted deposition (IBAD) and deposition from
              electron cyclotron resonance (ECR).   (C3N4 should be harder than diamond. The
              synthesis of C-N films with a hardness about half that of diamond and a
              smoothness of about 0.5 nm has been documented. These films were adherent on
              most substrates, including steel and magnetic thin-film materials (as in
              computer disks), however, no direct evidence of a carbon nitride phase was
              demonstrated.   IBAD is an advanced, low-temperature, thin-film deposition
              process combining evaporation with simultaneous ion bombardment; it is capable
              of depositing adherent films on virtually any substrate. The Phase I project
              will deposit carbon nitride films using IBAD with an ionized-vapor source for
              carbon. Ionizing both carbon and nitrogen would enhance the probability of
              forming carbon nitride films. Stress is the major obstacle in the formation of
              thick films with the theoretically expected hardness value; stress reduction
              will be addressed by a number of methods, including the introduction of a third
              element such as boron.   A process designed to deposit super-hard films on
              essentially any shape substrate has extremely high commercial promise. Carbon
              nitride films are inexpensive, extremely hard and scratch resistant, and easily
              applied to metal surfaces or polymers.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
