Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Fiber-Optic, Simultaneous, Multi-Point Turbulent Kinetic Energy
               Rate Dissipation Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9560930

Award Number: 9560930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yogesh C. Agrawal yogi@sequoiasci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sequoia Scientific, Inc.
	      9725 SE 36th Street, Suite 308
	      Mercer Island, WA  98040    206/230-8166

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1670,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project proposes a laser
              device for the measurement of the dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy
              in the sea as well as in the laboratory. The sensor would be valuable in a
              number of oceanographic/fluid dynamics applications. For example, since the
              dissipation rate scales typically with the third power of the friction
              velocity, it is the most sensitive measure of dynamics in the ocean bottom and
              surface boundary layers; it is similarly vital to observations in the ocean
              interior where mixing in the ocean is of strong fundamental interest as well as
              of applied interest in the study of carbon cycling via organic and geochemical
              particulate transport. The new sensor concept is based on the unbiased, direct
              estimation of acceleration variance for short-time segments, and subsequent
              conversion to spatial gradients using Taylor's hypothesis for each segment. The
              laser device will not only be able to operate from a fixed platform providing
              Eulerian measurements of dissipation, it is also suitable for much higher
              dissipation rates than can be measured with existing sensors. Finally, the
              capability proposed here will not only provide measurements at a single point,
              it will be a simultaneous multi-point sensor based on work in progress in
              another SBIR grant. Because of the combined capabilities of extension to
              Eulerian measurement, high range in dissipation rate and multi-point
              capability, the development could make significant contributions to a broad
              range of science in oceanography/fluid dynamics. The resulting instruments will
              also be useful in the study of dynamics of marine aggregates which are
              postulated to break apart depending on the dissipation microscales.       The
              dissipation sensor resulting from this development will be of broad use of to
              scientists studying boundary layer processes on the ocean surface and bottom to
              other scientists studying biological primary productivity and its interaction
              with turbulence and to those studying mixing processes in the ocean interior.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
