Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Plant-Assisted Removal of Chelated Heavy Metals and Radionuclides
               from Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1996   
File        : a9560603

Award Number: 9560603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69109              (Estimated)
Investigator: Slavik Dushenkov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Phytotech Inc
	      1 Deer Park Drive
	      Monmouth Junction, NJ  08852    908/438-0900

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1182,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will explore the
              use of terrestrial plants for the removal of chelated heavy metals and
              radionuclides from contaminated water streams.  Heavy metal pollution of water
              is a major environmental problem facing the modern world.  Removing chelated
              heavy metals and radionuclides in water is one of the most recalcitrant
              problems in water treatment, since conventional methods are not very effective
              against metals bound to organic compounds.  The use of plant roots to remove
              toxic heavy metals from water (rhizofiltration) is an emerging environmental
              clean-up approach.  This technology utilizes live roots of hydroponically grown
              terrestrial plants e.g. Indian mustard (Brassica juncea (L.) Czern.), sunflower
              (Helianthus annuus L.) and various grasses to effectively remove radionuclides
              and such heavy metals as Cu+2, Cd+2, Cr+6, Ni+2, Pb+2 and Zn+2 from aqueous
              solutions.  While the treatment of soluble metal ions in water has been
              demonstrated, the use of rhizofiltration for the removal of chelated heavy
              metals and radionuclides has never been attempted.  This project will evaluate
              the feasibility of using hydroponically cultivated plant roots to extract
              chelated heavy metals and radionuclides from water by exposing the roots to
              solutions of chelated metals and measuring metal accumulation in the roots, the
              rate of metal removal from solution and the residual metal concentrations after
              treatment.  The expansion of this application to the treatment of metal
              contaminated soils will also be evaluated.       Scale-up and commercialization
              efforts will immediately follow a demonstration of feasibility for
              rhizofiltration of chelated heavy metals in water.  This company was founded
              solely to commercialize plant-based remediation technology, and has secured
              sufficient financial resources to develop the most promising applications.  A
              successful demonstration of this technology will lead to improved and lower
              cost methods for conserving water resources, restoring water quality and
              providing a significant new use for existing crop plants                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
