Title       : SBIR Phase I: High-Selectivity Membranes for Separations in the Chemical Process
               Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9560778

Award Number: 9560778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74883              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott B. McCray mccray@bendres.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bend Research Inc
	      64550 Research Road
	      Bend, OR  977018599    541/382-4100

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  95-60778  McCray     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
              is directed toward the development of highly selective membranes for use in the
              chemical process industry (CPI). The potential advantages of simple and
              efficient membrane separation processes are well known. Membranes, however,
              have not made major inroads into the CPI for three reasons: 1) many CPI feed
              streams contain components that dissolve or swell current membranes or module
              materials, 2) many CPI separations occur at temperatures too high for
              commercial modules to withstand, and 3) many membranes that show high
              selectivity when tested on pure-component feed streams lose this selectivity
              when operated on multicomponent feed streams. The proposed membrane is a new
              type of hybrid polymeric material that can be used to make membrane coatings
              for a wide range of organic/organic separations in the CPI. These coatings will
              be applied to unique solvent- and temperature-resistant hollow-fiber supports
              (developed in previous work) to form thin-film-composite (TFC) membranes.
              These, in turn, will be used in high-efficiency, solvent-resistant modules that
              will enable the use of membrane technology in many applications for the first
              time. During Phase I, the hybrid materials will be developed, tested as
              flat-sheet membranes, and applied to the most promising material as a coating
              on a solvent-resistant support in a hollow-fiber module. In Phase II, the use
              of hybrid coatings for a wide range of separations and conduct parametric and
              long-range tests of modules will be examined. Research conducted during Phases
              I and II will provide the foundation for field testing and commercialization of
              the technology in Phase III.   Annual CPI expenditures (largely for separation
              unit operations) exceed $23 billion, with key separations including the
              separation of mixtures of organics, such as aromatics from aliphatics and
              olefins from paraffins. Additionally, separation processes account for more
              than 40% of the energy consumption in t he CPI. TFC membranes based on the
              proposed hybrid materials could be applied to a wide range of separations in
              the CPI, including the separation of aromatics from aliphatics (e.g., benzene
              from gasoline) and olefins from paraffins (e.g., propane from propylene).
              Examples of potential separation applications range from the treatment of
              natural gas at the wellhead through the refining process to the production of
              finished chemicals.
