Title       : SBIR Phase I: High-Efficiency Closed-System Chemical Vapor Infiltration (CVI)
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9560313

Award Number: 9560313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Fortini art.fortini@ultramet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ultramet
	      12173 Montague Street
	      Pacoima, CA  913312210    818/899-0236

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              demonstrate the feasibility of a novel, high-efficiency process for the
              infiltration/densification of fiber preforms.  This method, designated
              closed-system chemical vapor infiltration (CSCVI), offers several advantages
              over conventional CVI.  Raw material is used in a highly efficient manner, and
              unreacted raw material is easily recycled for future use, thereby minimizing
              materials costs.  Because the process takes place inside a sealed system, there
              is no waste stream, and only extremely small amounts of hazardous material are
              used.  The dramatic reduction in the waste stream translates into greatly
              reduced costs for waste treatment.  This project will specifically address the
              manufacture of fiber-reinforced ceramic matrix composites (CMCs).  By operating
              at high efficiencies and minimizing the waste stream, it is expected that the
              cost reduction per part will be about 45%, based on material costs alone. 
              Furthermore, because the waste stream is reduced by orders of magnitude,
              capital equipment required for waste treatment will be greatly reduced.      
              Essentially any system currently utilizing conventional CVI can benefit from
              the application of CSCVI.  A successful demonstration of CSCVI is expected to
              improve the economics of ceramic matrix composites.  CMCs have benefitted from
              the success of carbon/silicon carbide (C/SiC) and SiC/SiC materials.  The cost
              of these materials is quite high, however, and any technique that will
              significantly reduce their cost is expected to find a large commercial market. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
