Title       : SBIR Phase I: Theory and Simulation of Strongly Anisotropic Turbulence:
               Applications to Separation and Purification Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9560876

Award Number: 9560876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya Staroselsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Hydrodyn Inc
	      P O Box 1403
	      Princeton, NJ  085421403    609/683-1515

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1415,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                9560876  Staroselsky       This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
              project will capitalize upon the success of the renormalization group
              (RNG)-based turbulence models recently developed by Cambridge Hydrodynamics in
              order to develop an effective approach to predict the behavior of difficult,
              highly anisotropic turbulent flows often encountered in chemical engineering
              devices. Although existing RNG models have already demonstrated superior
              performance in physical situations where the anisotropy of turbulence scales is
              moderate, they require an extension to handle significant body forces due to
              high swirl, buoyancy, etc. The primary technical objectives include the
              extension of RNG two-equation models to a tensorial framework to handle
              significant small-scale anisotropy induced by high swirl. These models will
              then be tested and refined on a variety of prototype cases. Finally,
              proof-of-concept studies of separation and/or purification devices will be
              performed followed by detailed comparisons with experimental data and
              alternative prediction techniques. If Phase II is approved, the models will be
              extended to handle other sources of anisotropy such as strong stratification
              effects.       The final product of the Phase I-III effort will be a
              commercially viable design and analysis tool for chemical engineering
              applications which should yield a major improvement in the confidence level for
              flow prediction in complex real-world devices.  The prediction of the behavior
              of advanced separation and purification devices remains a difficult problem.
              The work proposed here will replace empirical estimation by predictive
              capability and should find wide applications throughout chemical engineering.
              The implementation of Cambridge HydrodynamicsO new models in the commercially
              viable computer code FLUENT, marketed by our Phase III partner Fluent, Inc.,
              will ensure wide application of project results.
