Title       : SBIR Phase I: Design of an Efficient, Variable Energy, Variable Intensity Photon
               Beam
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1996     
File        : a9560868

Award Number: 9560868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phil L. Morton ssdm@Best.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RxD, Inc
	      14228 Amherst Court
	      Los Altos, CA  94022    415/854-2682

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9134,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses
              development of  a comparatively inexpensive system that can produce a tunable
              quasimonochromatic high energy photon source.  Because such beams can be
              polarized, have low emittance and small energy bandwidth, they are applicable
              to a broad spectrum of commercial and medical uses.  The ideas to be explored
              in this proposal can also be used to provide compact, stable, efficient,
              intense particle beams, further enhancing their commercial prospects.  The key
              elements of this proposal are the RF electron gun, recirculation of the
              electrons with acceleration, wigglers, chicanes and achromatic bends based on
              permanent magnetic materials, and the recirculation of the intermediate photons
              generated by the wigglers.  The technique of Compton backscattering to boost
              the intermediate photon energy gives the variable, quasimonochromatic source of
              high energy photons.  The basic goal of the Phase I effort is to design the
              photon source and simulate the behavior of the electrons and the UV photons as
              they circulate within their respective structures.   The purpose of Phase I is 
              to design and fabricate one period of the short period helical wiggler
              demonstrating the feasibility of a significantly improved wiggler capability
              both from the standpoint of wavelength and variable polarization.  Phase I
              effort will also develop detailed specifications for the magnetic, optical, and
              RF components of the design for Phase II testing at an existing facility.      
              RXD has identified a number of areas such as isotope production, nuclear waste
              remediation, food, water, and medical instrument sterilization, and accelerator
              based medical treatment of diseases, which would benefit directly and quickly
              from breakthroughs in access, safety, affordability, and flexibility such as
              might be provided with this photon source.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
