Title       : SBIR Phase I: Rock Art Data Recording, Management and Analysis: An Integrated
               System Incorporating 3-dimensional Digitizing, Geographic Information Systems &
               Photogrammetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9560452

Award Number: 9560452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74779              (Estimated)
Investigator: James I. Ebert jebert@ebert.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ebert and Associates
	      3700 Rio Grande Blvd. NW
	      Albuquerque, NM  871071109    505/344-2345

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,1391,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9560452  Ebert   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses
              on the current lack of integrated techniques and methods by which rock art data
              can be completely and accurately recorded three-dimensionally, managed within a
              three-dimensional database, and analyzed with respect not only to formal
              features of individual rock art elements, but also to interrelationships among
              figures, the rock on which they are placed, and associated sites, places, and
              views.  The research investigates the feasibility of developing an integrated
              system for rock art data recording, management, and analysis incorporating
              infield three-dimensional digitizing, the use of electronic distance
              measurement (EDM) and global positioning systems (GPS) for control and site
              mapping, computer-assisted drawing (CAD) and geographic information systems
              (GIS) technologies for data input and database management, and computerized
              photogrammetry and such additional technical adjuncts as analog and digital
              photography, all linked by specially designed software and methods.  Research
              objectives include an exhaustive survey of current data user needs as well as
              an assessment of new data possibilities and theoretical directions that such a
              system would provide.  The appropriateness and feasibility of integrating both
              off-the-shelf and modified technologies, including hardware and software, will
              also be investigated.  Finally, the nature of software specifically designed to
              link systems components, as well as methods by which these will all be used as
              a consolidated system, will be examined.  Systems components and integrative
              software and methods will be preliminarily tested in rock art data field
              situations.   Rock art researchers, cultural resource managers, Native American
              groups, anthropologists, art historians, and other rock art and rock art data
              users-- in the United States and worldwide--will benefit from the development
              of such methods.  An additional, related field of study and social concern,
              graffiti studies an d control, offers another potential market.
