Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ultrathin SiC-on-Insulator (SiCOI) for ALE Growth of Low-Defect
               GaN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9560131

Award Number: 9560131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fereydoon Namavar fnamavar@spirecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spire Corporation
	      One Patriots Park
	      Bedford, MA  017302396    617/275-6000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores
              the use of low-defect, high-quality silicon carbide on ultrathin
              silicon-on-insulator (SOI) structures as a lattice-matched substrate for growth
              of GaN by atomic layer epitaxy (ALE). Recent experiments have fabricated
              ultrathin Si on SiO2 as thin as 140 Angstroms by the low-energy Separation by
              IMplantation of OXygen (SIMOX) process.  SiC thin films will be fabricated by
              carbonizing the ultrathin Si top layer of SIMOX wafers.  The carbonization
              technique has produced the lowest defect density in epitaxial SiC on Si;
              however, due to different lattice constants, a strained layer exists at the
              interface which limits the usefulness of this material for device applications.
               Thin Si films allow rapid conversion of the entire Si layer to SiC and result
              in SiC in contact only with SiO2, which is amorphous and softens at the
              carbonization temperature.  In the absence of a lattice mismatch, the source of
              stress is eliminated (similar to SIMOX), thus paving the way for formation of a
              high-quality SiC layer.  Preliminary work on the growth of SiC on ultrathin
              SIMOX structures suggests very good quality SiC as compared to those grown on
              thick SIMOX or bulk Si.  Phase I will produce SiC films under varying material
              and processing conditions, and GaN will be grown by ALE on the lowest-defect
              material.  If approved, Phase II would include optimization of processing
              parameters, and fabrication of device structures.         Fabrication of
              large-area, inexpensive, Si-based substrates for growth of low-defect SiC and
              GaN films are the basis for radiation-hard, high-temperature electronics. 
              These substrates are essential for integration of LEDs, lasers, detectors, and
              a variety of other devices into silicon-microelectronic chips.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
