Title       : SBIR PHASE I: Environmentally Safe Destruction of Chlorinated Aromatic Compounds
               by a Novel Photothermal Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9560978

Award Number: 9560978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Lavid mlenergia@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M.L. Energia, Inc
	      PO Box 470
	      Princeton, NJ  085420470    609/799-7970

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1440,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9560978  Lavid   This SBIR Phase I project offers a novel reductive photothermal
              process for environmentally safe destruction of chlorinated aromatic compounds
              such as Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs).  It utilizes UV light to
              photo-initiate hydrodechlorination of PCBs at moderate temperature, leading to
              their complete conversion into valuable hydrocarbons and HCl.  The process is
              conducted in a reducing atmosphere of hydrogen, providing the necessary radical
              chain-carriers and circumventing production of soot and toxic oxychlorinated
              species.  A large number of sites are contaminated with chlorinated hazardous
              wastes such as TCA, TCE, PCE, PCB, etc.  These compounds have been widely used
              and their presence entails severe environmental concerns.  All current remedial
              technologies are inadequate.  They suffer from high cost, incomplete
              destruction, emission of toxic products, and disposal/liability problems. 
              Consequently, there is a clear need for the proposed new process for the
              treatment of these compounds.  The main objective of Phase I is to
              experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of converting PCBs into
              environmentally benign products.  This objective will be met by a five-stage
              work plan. .Unique UV light sources will be employed and two proprietary
              options pursued, single-stage and two-stage processes.  A detailed kinetic
              model for a representative PCB will be developed, and computer predictions will
              provide guidance to the experimental effort.  Experiments with two
              representative PCBs will be performed in a bench-scale photo-thermal flow
              reactor.  Successful completion of Phase I will provide the technical
              foundation for a comprehensive Phase II, in which a prototype demonstration
              unit will be designed, constructed, and tested.   This novel reductive
              photothermal process will lead to a "green" technology for environmentally safe
              conversion of aromatic chlorohydrocarbons (e.g., PCBs).  It will provide a
              unique and cost-effective clean-up technology circumventing all the problems
              associ ated with current methods, such as high cost and emission of soot and
              other toxic products.  Consequently, it will be of great benefit to Federal and
              State governments and to the private sector in their remediation efforts.
