Title       : SBIR Phase I: A General 3-Dimensional Quantitative Structure-Property
               Relationship (QSPR) Algorithm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9560439

Award Number: 9560439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74595              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Tokarski John.Tokarski@uicvm.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chem 21 Group Inc
	      1780 Wilson Dr
	      Lake Forest, IL  600453551    312/996-6002

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1938,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research project will produce a general
              algorithm, and corresponding software package, based upon tensor representation
              of multidimensional data blocks, to express relationships between dependent
              properties and independent molecular feature measures. The solutions to these
              data riet problems are three-dimensional quantitative structure-property
              relationships, 3D-QSPRs.   While this proposal focuses on three-dimensional
              relationships, the formalism can easily be extended to higher dimensions. The
              molecular features are partitioned into the intrinsic molecular shape tensor,
              the molecular field tensor, a non-shape/field feature tensor, and an
              experimental feature tensor. The intrinsic molecular shape tensor contains
              information on the shape of a molecule within the contact surface while the
              molecular field tensor contains information outside of the contact surface.
              Molecular features not directly related to molecular shape are placed in the
              non-shape/field tensor. Experimental measures not being used as dependent
              variables can be considered as independent molecular features in the
              experimental tensor. The 3D-QSPR is realized by constructing the transformation
              tensor which optimizes the statistical significance between the dependent and
              independent variables. Factor analysis, partial least squares regression and
              multidimensional linear regression analyses will be explored individually, and
              in combination, to determine the transformation tensors. The proposed formalism
              has beran applied (in a limited fashion) to a raet of flexible M2/M3 muscarinic
              inhibitors leading to a 3D-QSA (Property=Activity) R in which an active
              conformation has been identified, and to a set of benzylpyrimidine inhibitors
              of dihydrofolate reductase where the enzyme bound conformation and alignment
              have been correctly identified. Other data sets to further explore the utility
              of the proposed formalism are presented.   The proposed algorithm has
              far-reaching implications in the field of computer-aided molecular design. It
              is the only method proposed to date, which once developed, will provide the
              researcher with general, analytical functions which quantitatively relate
              structure to properties of members of sets of flexible molecules which can
              assume multiple alignments.   The proposed 3D-QSPR algorithm product is likely
              to be purchased by all sites currently used CoMFA in order to facilitate
              treatment of conformational flexibility and multiple alignments. In addition,
              the general features to compute molecular shape propertles (molecular shape
              analysis) make the package a stand-alone 3D-QSPR product. More than
              installations have been targeted as likely within 18 months of version 1.0
              product release.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
