Title       : SBIR Phase I: High Definition Raman Imaging Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9560600

Award Number: 9560600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Miller pjmiller@world.std.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cambridge Res & Instrumen
	      21 Erie Street
	      Cambridge, MA  021394260    617/491-2627

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1938,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
              ultra-narrowband liquid crystal tunable filter (LCTF) as the basis of a Raman
              chemical imaging microscopy station for non-invasive chemical characterization
              of solid-state materials. The advantages in performance and practicality
              provided by this technique will allow Raman chemical imaging to become a
              mainstream analytical methodology for the first time, accessible even to
              non-experts and applicable for routine industrial process monitoring and
              materials analysis.   Raman chemical imaging has the capability to characterize
              heterogeneous systems without the need for significant sample preparation.
              Chemical imaging allows one to visualize the composition and spatial
              distribution of constituents that dictate material function, which is
              fundamental to characterizing advanced composite materials. An optimized Raman
              imaging system based on an LCTF can readily be used to analyze a wide variety
              of materials, including polymers, corrosion resistant alloys, and
              pharmaceuticals.   In Phase I, we will demonstrate feasibility by constructing
              a high resolution filter and using it in a microscope to obtain Raman images
              from test samples.   A Raman chemical imaging system will have broad
              applicability in the polymer and coatings industries for chemically specific
              visualization of domains and defects without the need for sample staining.
              In-situ monitoring of corrosion in ferrous alloys is another important use,
              while a third application lies in quantitative studies of polymorphism in
              pharmaceutical crystalline materials.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
