Title       : SBIR Phase I: Nondestructive Evaluation for Seismic Damage Assessments Using
               Real-Time X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Imaging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9560332

Award Number: 9560332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-lou Cao PotomacCSL@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : INOVIX Imaging Tech
	      11821 Parklawn Dr, Lower Level
	      Rockville, MD  20852    301/984-1986

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1474,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9560332  Cao         Quick and effective laboratory and field nondestructive
              evaluation of structural damage is important for earthquake studies. A
              conceptual design using the CSL high sensitivity, direct photon-electron
              conversion x-ray or gamma-ray image system is proposed to investigate a novel
              real-time nondestructive structural damage measurement technique. This new
              technique is to develop an x-ray or gamma-ray image detecting and processing
              system to directly visualize and quantify the structural damage, including
              damage location, damage pattern and sizes. A real-time assessment of the
              earthquake damaging process is also possible to be monitored by this fast
              respond x-ray or gamma-ray detector and the associated system. The proposed
              system can be used either in the Laboratory or in the field. During the
              proposed Phase I effort, CSL will work together with the National Center for
              Earthquake Engineering Research at Suny Buffalo to conduct a series of
              experiments to quantify the major design parameters of the system to prove the
              practicality of this novel technique. This research shall result in a portable,
              effective, low cost and easy to use x-ray or gamma-ray inspection system for
              structural damage assessment. This system will benefit both laboratory and
              field work, and reduce the cost of earthquake damage assessment significantly. 
                   The proposed research would lead to better understanding of structural
              damages caused by earthquake. The technique, once developed, offers a very
              useful tool for laboratory studies and field inspection, monitoring and
              measurement of earthquake damages. The proposed real-time, nondistortion, high
              spatial/temporal, and portable x-ray and gamma-ray system shall also help
              generate business opportunities for inspection and monitoring of public
              structures, utilities and component production.
