Title       : SBIR Phase I: Improvement in Magnetic and Tensile Properties by Coating Iron
               Powder with Phosphorus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1996  
File        : a9560161

Award Number: 9560161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74279              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Moyer Moyer@waterw.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Magna-Tech P/M Labs, Inc
	      4 Green Briar Lane
	      Cinnaminson, NJ  080773876    609/786-9061

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1771,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project should improve the
              magnetic and tensile properties of phosphorus iron parts fabricated using the
              P/M process. The phosphorus irons fabricated using P/M technology are being
              widely used in industry today. They are formulated by admixing iron powder with
              Fe2P or Fe3P powder. During sintering, a liquid phase occurs at 1056oC (1950oF)
              which diffuses the phosphorus into solid solution in the iron. Problems exist
              in that only two powder producers sell the product, and large pores can remain
              in the sintered part, owing to the melting of the ferrophosphorus particles.  
              Several attempts have been made to coat the phosphorus on the iron prior to
              sintering.(l) The first attempt was to add P205 to methanol and spray it on the
              iron powder. The trial resulted in failure because the phosphorus did not
              reduce the oxide or the water atomized powder, and perhaps provided additional
              oxide which acted as a barrier. A second series of tests were made by
              introducing phosphine to the heated bed of iron powder. Although magnetic and
              tensile properties were significantly improved, phosphine is expensive, and
              safety precautions preclude its use.   Red phosphorus is not a safety problem.
              If hydrogen is introduced to the heated iron powder, it will reduce the surface
              oxide. A clean surface would then be available to accept the phosphorus
              coating, and the particles could be coated inexpensively and with no safety
              concerns. It is believed that the same improvement in properties would result
              from this process.   If the process is successful, the proposer would consider
              construction of a plant to furnish coated phosphorus iron powder for commercial
              usage. Licensing of the process would also be considered. A market for the
              powder is already established. P/M phosphorus iron parts are currently widely
              used in fuel injectors and sensors in present day automobiles. They are also
              widely used for relays, solenoids and other magnetic devices. The introduction
              of a coated phosphorus iron powder to the marketplace would result in more
              efficient, reliable magnetic devices that would be lighter or more power
              efficient.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
