Title       : SBIR Phase I: Intelligent Cameras for Crime Fighting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1996     
File        : a9560676

Award Number: 9560676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74695              (Estimated)
Investigator: ChiMan Kwan ckwan@i-a-i.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelligent Automation Inc
	      7519 Standish Place, Suite 200
	      Rockville, MD  208552743    301/222-0444

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposal
              describes the next generation of security cameras. These cameras will provide
              two improvements over current technology. First, the `Smart Camera` will
              provide much higher resolution images of person's in its field of view than is
              possible with today's security cameras. With today's security cameras, a
              suspect's image captured by a security camera could easily have only a small
              number of pixels actually focused on the person. This may not be enough for
              identification or for irrefutable evidence in court. The `Smart Camera` will
              capture a much higher resolution image. Based on initial computations, for
              typical situations, thousands of fixed cameras with telephoto lenses would be
              required to reliably capture the same resolution image of a suspect as would be
              captured by a single `Smart Camera.`  The second improvement over current
              security cameras is that this type of camera captures images with high
              precision 3 dimensional information. If the camera were mounted two meters from
              a person as the person entered a bank, Government building, etc., the face
              data, including depth information across every feature of the face, would be
              captured with an accuracy of approximately .4 mm.  Accurately measured three
              dimensional images of a person's face may prove to be nearly as unique as a
              fingerprint. `Faceprints` could be captured visibly as a subject walks into a
              building or even walks along a street. Since 3 dimensional images contain
              literally an entirely new dimension of data, images should be able to be
              compared more quickly and reliably. Images of people entering major facilities
              such as train or bus stations could be automatically matched in real-time
              against most wanted lists, or suspects in recent crimes.       The bombing of
              the Federal Building in Oklahoma City has focused attention on the need for
              increased security. Potential criminals should be significantly deterred by
              better security cameras, and by automatic means to identify and apprehend
              criminals. For those that are not deterred, the system will provide a next
              generation of tools for identification and apprehension.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
