Title       : SBIR Phase I: Controlled Atmosphere Disinfestation of Raw Agricultural Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9560950

Award Number: 9560950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Swette lswette@ginerinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GINER, INC.
	      89 Rumford Avenue
	      Newton, MA  024661311    781/529-0500

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1417,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  95-60950  Swette     This Small Business Research Phase I project is
              directed to development of a method for disinfestation of raw agricultural
              products. The use of containerized cargo transport in which containers carry a
              dedicated refrigeration unit ("reefers") has presented the opportunity to
              employ controlled-atmospheres for preservation of perishable products. Giner,
              Inc. has developed and is currently testing a system for active continuous
              removal of oxygen leaking into "sealed" reefers to very low levels (< 1000 ppm)
              to extend controlled-atmosphere technology to other food preservation
              applications. This is being implemented with an on-board Electrochemical Oxygen
              Removal (EOR) system developed by Giner, Inc. The confluence of refrigerated,
              sealed controlled-atmosphere shipping containers and active oxygen removal now
              presents the further opportunity to implement disinfestation by
              controlled-atmosphere modification, typically low oxygen and high carbon
              dioxide. The oxygen level must be lowered sufficiently for disinfestation but
              not below the tolerance level of the respiring produce. Building upon the EOR
              currently under development by Giner, Inc. for on-board low-oxygen maintenance,
              this Phase I project will attempt to design and construct a prototype
              Electrochemical Oxygen Control (EOC) system suitable for disinfestation.
              Development of a land-based independent system whose control is based on
              intrinsic sensing of the oxygen concentration is proposed and a feasibility
              demonstration with fresh produce will be performed.   The advent of
              containerized refrigerated cargo transport has allowed fresh agricultural
              products to be shipped to ever more distant markets and conferred the ability
              to readily transfer containers between different modes of transport as required
              without rehandling of the cargo. Insect infestation of raw agricultural
              products is a universal problem in produce storage, processing and shipping
              that must be effectively addressed to minimize health concerns and to mainta in
              an appetizing appearance, shelf life and marketability. Cargos that cross state
              and national boundaries are also generally subject to stringent regulations for
              all the same reasons as well as to prevent the importation of harmful new
              agricultural pests. The anticipated benefits of this line of research are
              greater availability of fresh healthy agricultural products without the loss of
              quality associated with disinfestation by heating or freezing or the chemical
              residues from pesticides. There should also be substantial cost savings
              associated with the prevention of losses that would otherwise occur for
              producers, shippers and consumers. This technology may also open more distant
              markets for American products by ship transport that are now only accessible by
              limited, expensive air transport. In addition, the technology developed is
              anticipated to find application for disinfestation in many other environments
              where insect infestation is a problem.
