Title       : SBIR Phase I: Continuous Total Mercury Analyzer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9560771

Award Number: 9560771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. Sorensen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Senova
	      1435 North Hayden Road
	      Scottsdale, AZ  85257    602/945-2840

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1938,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the
              national need to continuously measure the total mercury emissions from
              stationary sources such as incinerators and coal-fired boilers. The proposed
              development of a compact sample conditioning system for the production of
              elemental mercury vapor from ionic mercury compounds, which can then be
              interfaced to a low-cost micro-sensor-based mercury vapor analyzer, yields a
              unique combination of advantages to satisy this need. The small sample size
              required by the micro-sensors in these instruments will both prolong their
              useful lifetime in corrosive environments and greatly simplify any
              sample-conditioning requirements. Moreover, they can be mass produced on
              silicon wafers using standard methods to significantly reduce costs, while
              achieving high reproducibility and minimizing calibration requirements. The
              Phase I research will focus on the development, evaluation, and optimization of
              the sample conditioning system for continuous monitoring of total mercury from
              stationary sources.  The successful development of the proposed technology will
              result in a new generation of continuous total mercury monitoring systems with
              an unprecedented combination of features, including ruggedness, low
              maintenance, rapid response, high sensitivity, compactness and low cost. These
              new monitoring systems will be used to measure and verify reductions in mercury
              emissions from stationary sources as well as to perform water and soil
              analysis. Markets for the instrumentation include thousands of individual
              coal-fired power plants, municipal waste incinerators, industrial boilers,
              refineries, minerals processing and smelting facilities, metal fabrication
              shops, and the pulp and paper industry.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
