Title       : Dynamics of Ultrafast Magnetization in Magnetic Thin Films and Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0074080

Award Number: 0074080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arto V. Nurmikko arto_nurmikko@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gang Xiao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Focused Research Group project involves two faculty members and several
              industrial collaborators who will study ultrafast, spin dependent processes
              that reflect nonequilibrium magnetization dynamics in ferromagnetic thin films
              and heterostructures on a picosecond time scale and below.  A core question
              relates to the ultimate "speed limits" of magnetization reversal, which will be
              approached experimentally by employing all-optical, ultrashort pulse laser
              techniques.  Unlike conventional approaches, which use pulsed magnetic fields
              to study magnetization switching in storage media, the physics in this research
              focuses on selective optical excitations of spins within the ordered magnetic
              medium, so as to modulate the exchange interaction and related electronic
              correlations by light in an nonthermal manner. In addition to studying
              optically activated magnetoelectronic processes in laterally uniform magnetic
              multilayers and exchange biased bi- and multilayers, the project includes the
              study the dynamics of collective micromagnetic effects in high density planar
              arrays where the individual submicron magnetic particles are coupled via
              dipolar (or possibly exchange bias) forces.  Thin films of conventional
              transition metals (Co, NiFe) form the starting materials base for the project
              work, but a significant component of the research emphasizes selected
              transition metal oxides, most notably the half metallic ferromagnet CrO2.  The
              research involves students and postdocs in cutting-edge fundamental research
              that has immediate relevance to current technology.  The training prepares
              student for a variety of careers in academe, industry or government.
%%%
The
              slowest part of a typical computer is the magnetic hard drive.  While there are
              several steps involved in storing and retrieving data from the thin film disk
              medium, the process of encoding information into magnetically aligned atoms is
              reaching its practical limits of speed.  In this project work we aim to use
              ultrashort laser pulses to influence the disk material's magnetic properties
              and to achieve the reversing the magnetic alignment of groups of atoms in as
              little as a few trillionth of a second-approximately a hundred times faster
              than the speed of the process in today's disk drives.  The all-optical
              technique allows the team to investigate the fundamental interactions involved
              in such fast magnetic switching, and it may lead to extremely fast data storage
              devices in the future.  One specific approach focuses on aiming the laser
              pulses at a sandwich of two magnetically coupled thin film magnetic films,
              whose collective interaction determines the overall magnetic properties of the
              bilayer which is efficient in resisting an externally applied magnetic field. 
              By selectively absorbing the laser radiation at the interface, only a few
              atomic layers thick, the magnetic coupling between the two materials is
              abruptly interrupted, freeing one of the layers (the 'free' ferromagnet) to be
              rapidly reversed by an oppositely-directed static magnetic field, applied from
              the outside. While the concept could some day be used in fast data storage, the
              team will be using it mostly to study the basic processes of "flipping
              ultrasmall compass needles" at unprecedented speeds.  Many physicists have
              studied the reversal of a single atom's magnetic moment, but the collective
              process of flipping the moments of many thousands of atoms at once is not well
              understood at a fundamental level.   The research involves students and
              postdocs in cutting-edge fundamental research that has immediate relevance to
              current technology.  The training prepares student for a variety of careers in
              academe, industry or government

