Title       : POWRE: Mathematical Models for Optimization of Anti-Cancer Chemotherapy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0074985

Award Number: 0074985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ardith Elkareh elkareh@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of the project is to apply engineering methods for
              modeling mass transport to the problem of optimizing delivery of several
              commonly used anti-cancer drugs to tumor cells.  The models will provide a
              rational basis for selecting among treatment options.   An important feature
              will be consideration of the kinetics of cellular influx in addition to
              transport across microvessels and through tissue.  Because of the wide
              variation in transport properties between different drugs, the models are
              specialized to the drugs melphalan, methotrexate, cisplatin, doxorubicin and
              5-fluorouracil, all of which are widely used.  Where necessary, spatial
              gradients of the drug within the compartments will be accounted for.  Transport
              equations for processes such as diffusion and convection within and between the
              body compartments will be developed. All values of transport parameters will be
              taken from data in the biological literature.  The resulting systems of
              ordinary or partial differential equations will be solved numerically.

The
              three specific objectives are: (1) to determine the optimal schedule of
              intravenous infusion for the drugs melphalan, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil,
              for both well-vascularized and poorly vascularized tumors; (2) to study the
              effects of spontaneously occurring intermittent flow, as well as artificially
              induced alterations in tumor blood flow, on the delivery of melphalan,
              methotrexate, doxorubicin and
5-fluorouracil.  Connections between
              time-varying blood flow and such phenomena as drug trapping, long tumor
              half-life of drug, or enhanced retention will be investigated; (3) to develop
              spatially distributed models to compare cellular delivery of the drug cisplatin
              to abdominal tumors (such as ovarian or colorectal) when administered
              intra-peritoneally or intravenously.  These models will be used to examine the
              theoretical
rationale behind intra-peritoneal chemotherapy.

One of the PI's
              career objectives is to apply theoretical principles and modeling to improve
              cancer therapies.  She feels strongly that there is a need for a better
              understanding of drug delivery, and that theoretical studies have lagged behind
              experimental work and development of new therapies.  The PI's work in this area
              was interrupted when she recently took two maternity leave.  This POWRE grant
              at this point in her career will help her to regain momentum as an independent
              researcher in this area and to become competitive for standrad federal grant
              programs.

