Title       : POWRE: Solid State NMR of Battery Materials and Ionic Conductors: Calculations
               and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0074858

Award Number: 0074858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87142              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare P. Grey cgrey@sbchem.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,5915,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is for the P.I. to broaden her expertise to encompass a
              variety of theoreti-cal methods for studying local properties (e.g., atomic and
              electronic structure and ionic mobil-ity) in solids. The approach involves
              collaborations and extended visits to groups at the Univer-sity of Oxford and
              at the University Louis Pasteur in Strasbourg. The P.I. will conduct
              theoretical studies and develop collaborations to assist with interpreting and
              understanding experimental data. Theoretical studies are needed to understand
              experimental data and significantly enhance the information extracted from NMR
              experiments. Equally important is to ensure that questions posed and addressed
              by theoretical calculations are targeted at specific experimental
              observa-tions. The visits to France will also allow the P.I. to develop
              collaborations with battery groups, to ensure that the P.I. has access to the
              most technologically important cathode materials. In order to improve the data
              that can be acquired from these typically paramagnetic materials, the PI will
              acquire an extremely fast MAS probe; fast MAS should reduce the
              electronic-nuclear dipolar coupling allowing spectra from unenriched 7 Li
              materials to be obtained.
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made
              under the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education
              (POWRE) program. The project provides partial support for a sabbatical year
              which will allow the PI to understand how relevant theoretical methods work,
              the current approximations, and how the methods may be applied to her own
              research program. Three differ-ent POWRE activities will be carried out: 1. The
              PI will visit Dr. Mark Wilson and Prof. Paul Madden in the Department of
              Physical Chemistry at the University of Oxford, to work with them to model
              ionic transport and local structures in the PI's fluoride systems. 2.
              Semi-empirical cal-culations of 19 F chemical shifts for the PI's disordered
              fluorides and oxyfluorides will be per-formed, in collaboration with Dr.
              Francis Taulelle at the University Louis Pasteur. 3. The P.I. will develop
              collaborations with a theory group, in order to perform density functional
              theory calcu-lations, to rationalize the local electronic structures that have
              been proposed from NMR data of lithium-ion cathode materials. The project is
              co-supported by the Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

