Title       : POWRE; Digital Divide, IT Workforce, and High School Quality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0074604

Award Number: 0074604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mo-Yin S. Tam moyintam@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The new digital economy has been experiencing a surge in demand for workers in
              the area of information technology (IT).  Individuals with IT education are
              rewarded with high salaries.  The proposed study will examine the 'digital
              divide' in terms of information technology (IT) education in college using the
              University of Illinois undergraduate student data and the logit regression
              technique.  It will show the extent to which a college student's participation
              in IT education is affected by the student's gender and race, controlling for
              other factors including his or her math ACT score and high school.  Using the
              Illinois Goal Assessment Program (IGAP) high schools data and census data, the
              study will go on to examine how the distribution of the ACT scores of students
              in a high school is influenced by the high school characteristics and the
              students' socioeconomic backgrounds.  High school characteristics encompass
              teacher training/qualification, class size, expenditures per students, ethnic
              composition of students, computer ownership, and Internet accessibility. 
              Socioeconomic variables are family income, education level of the parents, and
              household type.  

The empirical findings of the proposed should expand
              significantly those in the existing literature.  The study examines a different
              aspect of the 'digital divide'.  It couches the 'divide' in terms of IT
              education instead of simply access to technology.  Also, it uses a different
              regression technique, namely the quantile regression, instead of the ordinary
              regression technique.  This different approach can reveal impacts of
              contributing factors to the 'divide", which ordinary regression technique will
              overlook. These results will identify factors that enable access,
              participation, and diversity in IT education in college.  Such knowledge
              provides empirical basis for implementation of policies to narrow the "digital
              divide' by both high school and university administrators.

