Title       : POWRE: Characterization of a Novel ATPase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a0074617

Award Number: 0074617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Bisson bisson@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9117,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                      All plant cells must actively export sodium from the cytoplasm. 
              Accumulation of sodium in the cytoplasm results in inhibition of a number of
              enzyme systems, and is a major cause of damage due to salinity, whether natural
              or due to irrigation of agricultural fields.  A knowledge of the mechanisms of
              Na+ transport is therefore not only important in general understanding of the
              function of plants, but also enhances our ability to develop crop plants which
              are more resistant to salinization.  This project will use two species of
              Charophyte algae that differ in their ability to tolerate saline conditions. 
              Re-moval of Na+ from the cytoplasm by export across the plasma mem-brane is
              important in achieving salt tolerance, and there is evidence that an ATPase may
              be involved in this transport, including biophysical evidence that a Na+/H+
              antiport is not sufficient to maintain the Na+ gradients measured,
              immunological evidence of an unusual P-type ATPase in salt-cultured algae, and
              molecular evidence for an unusual P-type ATPase in the salt-tolerant algae. 
              

        The objectives of the proposed research are 
        To isolate
              and sequence a full-length clone for an unusual ATPase from the salt-tolerant
              species, Chara longifolia. 
        To use northern blot analysis to determine
              expression of this gene in C. longifolia adapted to saline and freshwater
              media, and undergoing adaptation to salt stress.
        To determine whether
              the salt-sensitive species, C. corallina, has a similar gene and, if so, under
              what conditions it is expressed. 

Long-term goals include determining the
              transport function of the ATPase gene either by expres-sion in yeast mutants
              lacking Na+ or H+ export capability or by overexpression in Chara by
              micro-injection of mRNA into the internode.  Ultimately, information based on
              this research could be used to alter the salt tolerance of Chara and other
              plants by genetic manipulation to enhance sodium export from the cytoplasm.


                     This research will be performed under the POWRE grant program because it
              will aid the author in remaining competitive in the field of salinity studies
              in plants.  Bio-physical techniques have been successfully employed in the past
              to investigate important ques-tions in this field, but molecular aspects of the
              project must be developed in order to remain competitive. 


