Title       : Efficient and Accurate Methods for the Computation of Lyapunov Characteristic
               Exponents for n-Dimensional Continuous Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0074151

Award Number: 0074151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Firdaus E. Udwadia fudwadia@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Efficient and Accurate Methods for the Computation of Lyapunov Characteristic
              Exponents for n-Dimensional Dynamical Systems


Abstract

This proposal
              aims to develop computational methods for the efficient and accurate
              determination of the Lyapunov characteristic exponents of discrete and
              continuous dynamical systems. Since current methods are inadequate, our goal is
              to develop new computational techniques that can be used for general,
              n-dimensional systems. Thus, the development of new techniques for solving the
              variational equation of a system of nonlinear differential equations will be
              undertaken. The methods to be employed will be underpinned by mathematical
              analysis so that the algorithms developed will be both efficient and accurate.
              Several different methods will be investigated and compared with one another.
              Error analysis will be undertaken. Dissemination of the information will
              include the development of computer codes that are directly downloadable from
              the internet. 

The methods developed in this research effort will have
              applications in numerous areas of applied science and engineering. Nonlinear
              dynamics is a key feature in many structural systems, such as long span
              suspension bridges; in biomechanical systems, such as Central Pattern
              Generators for locomotion; and in the rapidly developing field of secure
              communication systems. Hence, the results of this research will have a
              considerable and direct impact on several real-life areas of application.



