Title       : POWRE: Isotopic insight into the genesis and evolution of compositionally
               diverse volcanism in the central Mexican Volcanic Belt: Implications for
               subduction-related volcanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0074610

Award Number: 0074610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawnika L. Blatter dawnika@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074610
Blatter

This study will investigate the isotopic compositions
              (Rb-Sr, Sm-Nd, Pb, and O) of volcanism in the central Mexican volcanic Belt
              (MVB) where a diverse volcanic suite has been characterized, yet no isotopic
              data is available.  This project will contribute to current understanding of
              subduction-related processes by evaluating the genesis and evolution of three
              compositionally distinct volcanic series that have erupted contemporaneously in
              this region.  The first goal of this is to determine whether geochemically
              diverse volcanism in the central MVB can be attributed to systematic variations
              in the characteristics of the mantle source.  The central MVB is an optimal
              place to study the connection between mantle processes and volcanism in
              subduction-related arcs for three significant reasons.  1. The exposure of
              fresh lavas and scoriae is excellent and three distinct compositional types
              have already been well characterized with respect to age, volume, and
              distribution.  2. The tectonic setting is constrained including slab angle,
              depth to slab, and convergence rate.  3. The shallow (sub-horizontal)
              subduction angle produces an ~200 km wide arc, which provides excellent spatial
              resolution to expose the systematic spatial distribution of the three volcanic
              series.  The second goal is to investigate the modification of mantle-derived
              magmas during their ascent through the crust, and evaluate the contribution of
              crystal fractionation and crustal assimilation to their evolution.  Isotopic
              data, major and trace element geochemical data, and storage constraints (T, P,
              fO2, and wt% H2O) available from high quality water-saturated phase equilibria
              experiments, will allow quantification of the time-scales of some of these
              magmatic processes.  The third goal of this project will be to use the isotopic
              compositions of the crustally contaminated lavas to expose information about
              the basement terranes through which they have erupted.  This data will be used
              to constrain the boundaries between the basement terranes of central Mexico. 
              This work will be conducted at the University of Colorado, Boulder in
              collaboration with Professor G. Lang Farmer, an expert in the application of
              radiogenic isotope data to igneous petrology, sedimentary provenance
              determinations, and the tectonic evolution of the Earth's crust.  Additionally,
              all of the necessary equipment and facilities will be readily available to the
              PI at University of Colorado, Boulder and CIRES (Cooperative Institute for
              Research in Environmental Sciences).  The training of the investigator has been
              that of classical igneous petrology with emphasis on experimental studies and
              fieldwork.  The POWRE award will allow the PI to optimize this necessary
              relocation by providing the opportunity for her to pursue new collaborations
              and skills, as well as contribute her unique perspective to the field of
              isotope geochemistry.  The research will involve her in learning new analytical
              techniques (mass-spectrometry) and provide her with experience in the
              application of isotope geochemistry to a variety of problems, vastly increasing
              her versatility as a petrologist.

