Title       : POWRE: Integrated Modeling and Diagnostic Analysis for HVOF Thermal Spray
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0074589

Award Number: 0074589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cyrus K. Aidun                          
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lili Zheng Lili.Zheng@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0074589
Lili Zheng, SUNY Stony Brook

This POWRE proposal
              describes the activities to conduct exploratory work on the combined modeling
              and diagnostic analysis research for the High Velocity Oxygen Fuel (HVOF)
              thermal spray process.
The primary research activities are: (1) developing
              theory and models for the HVOF spraying process; (2) conducting HVOF spray
              experiments; (3) validating the models using the information obtained from the
              experiments conducted during this program or from other programs; and (4)
              visiting the thermal spray laboratory at Idaho National Engineering and
              Environmental Laboratory (INEEL) and other institutions to learn advanced
              diagnostic techniques for thermal spray processes.
A numerical model will be
              developed that can connect the particle/jet interaction and the
              droplet/substrate interaction.  Exploratory experiments using existing
              facilities at the NSF Center for Thermal Spray Research at Stony Brook will be
              conducted for three types of powder materials: ceramic (Al2O3), cermet (WC-Co)
              and metal (Co).  The particle velocity, temperature and size during in-flight
              and the evolution of the coating layers will be acquired and data will be used
              for validating the model.  Thus the model can be further developed and applied
              to designing and controlling thermal spray processes in the future.  The PI
              will visit national laboratories and other institutes to establish the
              collaborative relationship and explore advanced non-intrusive diagnostic
              techniques for thermal spray research such as Rayleigh and Coherent Thomson
              Scattering and Coherent Anti-Stokes Raman Spectroscopy.
The main objective of
              the proposed educational activities is to attract student to science and
              engineering, to motivate them for advanced studies and multidisciplinary
              research, and to prepare them for career advancement in engineering.

