Title       : GOALI: Structure of Amorphous Materials by Fluctuation Microscopy and
               Atomic-Level Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a0074273

Award Number: 0074273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pawel Keblinski keblip@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M.M.J. Treacy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0074273
Keblinski

This is a new GOALI award funded jointly by the Division
              of Materials Research and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities. 
              Keblinski does materials modeling and is collaborating with Treacy,  a
              microscopist at NEC, to study paracrystallites (regions with medium range
              order) in amorphous Si and Ge using modeling and fluctuation microscopy.  Both
              graduate and undergraduate students will be involved in this project.  A recent
              observation of medium range order in fluctuation spectroscopy has shown the
              need of a structural model for an amorphous solid in place of the continuous
              random network which shows no medium range order.  This grant will facilitate a
              collaborative exploration: experimentally of the conditions which induce,
              sustain and remove medium range order and theoretically, atomic scale models
              with characteristics which are particularly conducive to the existence of
              medium range order.  This work will lead to a better understanding of the
              structural details of glasses as well as the thermodynamics and kinetics of
              their formation.
%%%
This is a new GOALI award funded jointly by the Division
              of Materials Research and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities.
              Keblinski at RPI and Treacy at NEC will conduct research in collaboration. Both
              graduate and undergraduate students will be involved.  The theoretical, atomic
              scale modeling and simulation will be carried out at RPI with frequent exchange
              of results and ideas with the experimental work conducted at NEC.  The newly
              discovered application of fluctuation microscopy has raised several questions,
              perhaps the most prominent is the question of medium range order.  The
              best-known model for the structure of glass, the continuous random network
              model shows no medium range order.  One needs an atomic level model to explore
              the characteristics necessary for such order to exist.  Other questions might
              be, what are the thermodynamic consequences, what are the consequences for the
              kinetic processes in these glasses.
***

