Title       : Collaborative proposal: Focused Research Group on Fundamental Problems in the
               Dynamics of Thin Viscous Films and Fluid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0074049

Award Number: 0074049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $781988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea L. Bertozzi bertozzi@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Witelski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Behringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1616,9146,9263,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0074049
Bertozzi

A combined experimental, analytical, and computational
              study of 
fundamental problems in the dynamics of thin viscous films and fluid
              
interfaces is proposed.  The recent discovery of stable undercompressive
              
waves in driven films has created the opportunity for a unique
              
collaboration between experiments and mathematical theory. This research
              
program will include related studies of solid-liquid-vapor interfaces,
              
moving contact lines, and surface tension effects. Analytical and
              
computational studies will be integrated with a series of experiments that
              
includes a search for undercompressive waves in a spin coating geometry,
              
motion of contact lines near room- temperature critical points, and
              high-
speed video imaging of the dynamics of singularity formation in
              finite-
time rupture of fluid interfaces. Mathematical analysis will include
              models 
for film rupture, stability of driven contact lines, and numerical
              analysis of 
schemes for computing these problems.

Liquid films and moving
              contact lines arise in problems ranging from 
industrial design of paints and
              microchip fabrication to medical 
applications including contact lenses and
              the lining of the lung. All of 
these problems involve interactions across
              widely different length-scales 
in which the physical laws are not clearly
              understood. This is a 
collaboration between researchers from the Mathematics
              (Bertozzi, 
Witelski) and Physics (Behringer) Departments at Duke University
              and 
the Mathematics Department at North Carolina State University (Shearer).
              
This effort combines mathematical modeling, analysis, and numerical
              
simulation with new laboratory experiments to study fundamental 
problems in
              driven films and moving contact lines.  Computational and 
mathematical models
              will direct the design of experiments investigating 
new phenomena in spin
              coating processes and dewetting films. The 
program will involve
              undergraduates, graduate students, postdoctoral 
associates, and visiting
              scientists from other institutions. This research will 
foster curriculum
              developments in the Departments of Mathematics, 
Physics and the Center for
              Nonlinear and Complex Systems at Duke 
University

