Title       : A Novel Particulate Separation Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0074788

Award Number: 0074788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151923             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Olbricht wlo@cheme.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The low Reynolds number motion of freely-suspended particles in bifurcations of
              capillary tubes will be studied experimentally.  A bifurcation is a point where
              a tube splits to form two tubes.  When a suspension of particles flows through
              a bifurcation, the partitioning of particles between the downstream branches
              differs from the partitioning of total volume (particles + suspending fluid)
              between the branches.  The difference results from a combination of
              hydrodynamic interactions between the particles and the bifurcation wall and
              the exclusion of particles from a thin layer near the walls.  This principle
              will be investigated with the aim of designing a device to separate particles
              from fluid.  Particle trajectories will be measured experimentally, and the
              effects of bifurcation geometry, particle size, and particle volume fraction
              will be determined.  Experimental results will be combined with numerical
              models based on mass and momentum conservation to predict the motion and flux
              of particles in networks of channels and build a framework for the rational
              design of a separation device.

Many manufacturing processes of biological
              and technological importance involve suspensions of solid particles in a
              viscous liquid.  Separating freely-suspended particles from the surrounding
              liquid can pose significant technical challenges, especially in cases where the
              particles are nearly neutrally buoyant in the suspending medium.  This project
              will explore the motion of particulate suspensions as they flow through
              branching tubes, and will use certain characteristics of the flow to design a
              new particle separation method.  The process has significant potential
              advantages over traditional methods, such as membrane-based separations.  The
              goal of the research is to design a continuous, stagewise separation process
              that requires little maintenance or control, is relatively insensitive to
              ambient conditions such as temperature and pressure, and requires no purging or
              disposal of filter elements. 

