Title       : POWRE: Nano-gate Engineering for Ultra-fast CMOS devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2001       
File        : a0074800

Award Number: 0074800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68756              (Estimated)
Investigator: Veena Misra vmisra@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074800
Misra

To obtain maximum performance from nanoscale CMOS devices,
              conventional polycrystalline silicon gate electrodes will have to be replaced
              by metallic layers.  However, any replacement candidate for polysilicon must
              adhere to several criteria.  Firstly, electrodes should not react with the
              underlying sub-1.0 nm gate dielectric.  Secondly, the electrodes must be able
              to withstand high temperature processing in order to preserve the self-aligned
              structure of the MOS device, which has been the foundation of today's advanced
              technologies.  Finally, to obtain desired threshold voltage for giga-scale
              performance, the electrodes must provide specific workfunctions, i.e. NMOS
              devices will require gates with workfunctions near 4 eV and PMOS devices will
              require gates with workfunctions near 5 eV.  The need for two separate metals
              significantly complicates the process technology, both in material and cost
              issues.

The goal of this POWRE project is to investigate alternate
              approaches for nano-gate electrode formation using workfunction modulation of
              conducting metal oxides.  Transparent conducting oxides offer the flexibility
              of workfunction modulation via chemical composition changes.  This property can
              be used to benefit nanoscale CMOS.  The main theme behind this proposed
              activity is to deposit a single conducting oxide layer on both the NMOS and
              PMOS region dielectrics and then via non-critical masking steps, selectively
              implanting certain elements to modulate the workfunction on N and P regions. 
              This would eliminate the need for two separate metal deposition steps and
              drastically simplify integration issues.  Moreover, conducting metal oxides,
              never before considered for Si gate electrode applications, can also provide
              superior thermal and chemical stability.  If the above proposed activities are
              feasible, i.e. workfunction of conducting metal oxides can be tuned in to match
              the CMOS requirements, then this work offers tremendous potential for nanoscale
              CMOS advancement.
***


