Title       : Multiscale Methods for the Rapid Solution of Boundary Integral Equations in
               Geometrically Complicated Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a0074553

Award Number: 0074553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johannes Tausch tausch@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is concerned with multiscale discretizations of boundary
              integral operators on geometrically complicated surfaces.  The standard
              approach, generating multiscale discretizations in parameter spaces and lifting
              them on the surface, is not efficient when a large number of parameter patches
              is required.  This project is concerned with an alternative approach to
              multiscale discretizations.  The basis is generated in a hierarchical
              decomposition of the three-space and subsequently restricted on the boundary
              surface.  This construction leads to a sparse representation of the integral
              operator even for complicated geometries.  It is planned to apply this approach
              to boundary integral formulations of general elliptic as well as time dependent
              parabolic problems.

The range of important engineering applications which
              the proposed research could impact is quite diverse.  Examples include the
              analysis of integrated circuit interconnect and micromechanical systems.  In
              these areas finding computationally efficient numerical methods for complex
              three dimensional structures is important in order to generate prototypes
              interactively on a computer.  In the past the major computational tool has been
              the Fast Multipole Method (FMM), because of its relative simplicity and its
              flexibility to geometry and integral operator.  We construct a multiscale basis
              by using a hierarchical decomposition of the three-space.  The same hierarchy
              of cubes is also used by the FMM, and therefore the proposed approach is able
              to combine the flexibility of the FMM with the strengths of multiscale methods.
               Thus the planned research can lead to faster and more robust algorithms as
              well as to a better understanding of theoretical and practical issues of both
              approaches.

