Title       : POWRE: Ethnographic Analysis of a Rural Latino (Non-migrant) Population in the
               U.S.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a0074461

Award Number: 0074461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah O. Erwin erwindeboraho@uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1390,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the cultural adaptation of recently immigrated
              Latino workers to small, rural Southern communities in Arkansas as an example
              of a new immigration pattern to the U.S.  Rapid increases (estimated at 10-20%)
              of Latinos into small, primarily Caucasian communities in Arkansas to work in
              non-migratory, year-round, poultry-processing plants has an immediate and
              long-term impact on various infrastructures and systems.  A feasibility study
              in Arkansas will explore the social, cultural, and health care issues relevant
              to these rural communities experiencing rapid Latino immigration.  A part of
              this ethnographic research project will investigate immigration patterns
              regarding gender and age, responsiveness of local educational and governmental
              systems, and problems of health care access and utilization of available
              services.  This part will include review of public documents, participant
              observation and key informant interviews. 

Unlike the sociocultural issues
              of Latinos and Hispanics in major metropolitan cities, and populations of
              migrant farm laborers in Florida, California, and some border areas, the
              Latinos in Arkansas are often entering relatively poor counties with few
              bilingual services, and are relocating to work in small, year-round
              manufacturing plants.  These Latino immigrant populations are creating an
              entirely new sociocultural infrastructure in these small towns.  Ethnographic
              analysis of this immigration process is essential for better understanding of
              the challenges and successes inherent in the process over time and to aid the
              planning for the provision of adequate services in the future.  This study will
              assist in defining the Latino population demographics and characteristics,
              mapping the community and organizational contacts and participants needed for
              appropriate communication with the Latino population, and providing qualitative
              and quantitative research questions and hypotheses, as well as pilot data, for
              future research.  This ethnographic research will provide better information
              for addressing the health, education, and general welfare status of similar
              rural populations experiencing rapid immigration by Latino workers.

This
              POWRE award will provide Erwin with additional training and support to enhance
              her research methods expertise and skills, in order to complete this research
              in a new culture group.  Specifically, the award will allow Erwin to obtain
              additional Spanish language training necessary to work within the Latino
              population and will provide time for training to enhance her analysis and
              software utilization skills.  This award will thus enhance Dr. Erwin's ability
              to serve as a leader, researcher, and educator in the anthropology and health
              of rural and minority populations. 
 

