Title       : Cellular Models of Nonlinear Flux Flow, Vortex Rivers, and Noise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2002     
File        : a0074613

Award Number: 0074613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin E. Bassler bassler@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maya Paczuski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0074613
Bassler
Many granular systems that are driven out of equilibrium
              exhibit nonlinear transport, where the dynamics is intermittent, or punctuated
              by avalanches.  These breakdown events can be small, or catastrophic
              (system-wide), or the avalanches can exhibit scaling behavior.  Understanding
              the dynamics of avalanches of granular objects is of fundamental theoretical
              and technological importance to a variety of subjects including magnetic
              fusion, superconductivity, and internet traffic.  Much of the theoretical
              effort to describe avalanche phenomena has focussed on the behavior of
              discrete, cellular models, such as sandpile models, which naturally incorporate
              both the granularity of the objects and the threshold nature of the breakdown
              process.  These models often have the added benefit of being numerically
              tractable, so that it is possible to study their behavior over a range of
              length and time scales, which is necessary to detect the presence or absence of
              scaling, and to determine universality.  However, there has been little
              success, thus far, connecting those simple models with real physical systems to
              assess their accuracy, generality, and predictive power.  

This grant aims
              to address this fundamental problem by constructing discrete, cellular models
              to study the nonlinear transport properties of vortices driven through a type
              II superconductor, and making specific, quantifiable connection with
              experiments.  As is well known, the repulsive interaction of vortices combined
              with attractive pinning due to disorder leads to a pile of quantized vortices
              in the superconductor, reminiscent of a pile of sand.   So it is natural to ask
              if a sandpile type of cellular model can accurately describe the large scale
              behavior of the vortex pile.  Furthermore, vortex dynamics provides an ideal
              test bed because of the large body of experimental work characterizing the
              internal magnetic field profile, the distribution of internal avalanches using
              micro-Hall probes, longitudinal and traverse noise measurements,
              current-voltage characteristics, thermally activated flux creep dynamics,
              magnetic relaxation, dynamical transitions at high currents, etc.  This
              research is complementary to molecular dynamics simulations that have been
              performed on this same system.  The results generated here can be compared
              quantitatively with the valuable results obtained using MD, but a
              microscopically realistic model is not sought here; instead, coarse grained,
              discrete models will be developed to try to capture the same large scale
              behavior.  From a practical viewpoint, the models used here can be studied
              numerically at significantly larger length and time scales, enabling the use of
              finite size scaling methods, and the classification into universality classes. 
              From a theoretical viewpoint, if such cellular models can be shown to be
              accurate, they provide a more general description of the phenomena associated
              with vortex dynamics, which can possibly be observed in other systems, and lead
              to a better understanding of nonlinear transport phenomena associated with
              avalanches.

This research involves collaborations between the University of
              Houston and Imperial College, London.
%%%
Many granular systems that are
              driven out of equilibrium exhibit nonlinear transport, where the dynamics is
              intermittent, or punctuated by avalanches.  These breakdown events can be
              small, or catastrophic (system-wide), or the avalanches can exhibit scaling
              behavior.  Understanding the dynamics of avalanches of granular objects is of
              fundamental theoretical and technological importance to a variety of subjects
              including magnetic fusion, superconductivity, and internet traffic.  Much of
              the theoretical effort to describe avalanche phenomena has focussed on the
              behavior of discrete, cellular models, such as sandpile models, which naturally
              incorporate both the granularity of the objects and the threshold nature of the
              breakdown process.  These models often have the added benefit of being
              numerically tractable, so that it is possible to study their behavior over a
              range of length and time scales, which is necessary to detect the presence or
              absence of scaling, and to determine universality.  However, there has been
              little success, thus far, connecting those simple models with real physical
              systems to assess their accuracy, generality, and predictive power.  

This
              grant aims to address this fundamental problem by constructing discrete,
              cellular models to study the nonlinear transport properties of vortices driven
              through a type II superconductor, and making specific, quantifiable connection
              with experiments.  As is well known, the repulsive interaction of vortices
              combined with attractive pinning due to disorder leads to a pile of quantized
              vortices in the superconductor, reminiscent of a pile of sand.   So it is
              natural to ask if a sandpile type of cellular model can accurately describe the
              large scale behavior of the vortex pile.  Furthermore, vortex dynamics provides
              an ideal test bed because of the large body of experimental work characterizing
              the internal magnetic field profile, the distribution of internal avalanches
              using micro-Hall probes, longitudinal and traverse noise measurements,
              current-voltage characteristics, thermally activated flux creep dynamics,
              magnetic relaxation, dynamical transitions at high currents, etc.  This
              research is complementary to molecular dynamics simulations that have been
              performed on this same system.  The results generated here can be compared
              quantitatively with the valuable results obtained using MD, but a
              microscopically realistic model is not sought here; instead, coarse grained,
              discrete models will be developed to try to capture the same large scale
              behavior.  From a practical viewpoint, the models used here can be studied
              numerically at significantly larger length and time scales, enabling the use of
              finite size scaling methods, and the classification into universality classes. 
              From a theoretical viewpoint, if such cellular models can be shown to be
              accurate, they provide a more general description of the phenomena associated
              with vortex dynamics, which can possibly be observed in other systems, and lead
              to a better understanding of nonlinear transport phenomena associated with
              avalanches.

This research involves collaborations between the University of
              Houston and Imperial College, London.
***

