Title       : POWRE: Responding to Crisis: Rapid Environmental and Economic Change in the
               Mid-Gulf of California Fisheries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074926

Award Number: 0074926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcela Vasquez-Leon mvasquez@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the relationship between resource users and the
              marine environment in two small-scale fishing communities in the mid-Gulf of
              California, Mexico.  Its purpose is two-fold:  First, it will look at how
              fishing impacts and is influenced by fluctuations in regional environmental
              conditions and market forces.  Second, it will examine changes in fishing
              patterns and household economic diversification strategies as coping mechanisms
              to deal with a number of severe pressures such as high competition, resource
              scarcity, increasing economic instability, and significant policy
              transformations.  The research will take a political ecology perspective.  It
              will integrate site specific anthropological research, including the study of
              local household economic patterns and perceptions of the marine environment,
              with a more regional analysis of the marine ecosystem using direct biological
              observations and assessments of fishing technologies.  It will also examine
              local resource users and communities in the context of regional markets,
              resource management and conservation policies, and competition with external
              users. 

This project will contribute to the theoretical and methodological
              development of political ecology.  By acknowledging equally the cultural and
              the biological and by assessing the nature of environmental changes and trying
              to understand the actual causes of these changes, this study will contribute to
              more empirically informed models for the sustainable management of natural
              resources.  This research will also contribute to the sub-field of maritime
              anthropology by providing an understanding of economic and ecological
              adaptations to risk in marine environments.  The complex situation that will be
              investigated is occurring in marine areas all over the world and constitutes a
              significant global scale change in rural life, whose consequences remain
              alarmingly uncertain.  Given the widespread collapse of commercial fisheries,
              other disciplines are beginning to look at maritime anthropology as a field
              that has access to a critical part of the puzzle that up to now has been absent
              from policy.  By linking the study of marine resource use, household economics,
              economic and biological assessments of fishing, and perceptions of the marine
              environment, this study will contribute a promising approach for the integrated
              evaluation of policies affecting environmental change and living conditions in
              coastal communities.  The study also will demonstrate that actual human
              behavior rarely conforms to the behavior assumed by bioeconomic models. 
              Rather, individuals' decisions are based on considerations that combine and
              mold their social, political, and economic realities with the constraints and
              limitations imposed by ecological forces.

This study, the third one to be
              carried out in different parts of the Gulf of California by Dr. Vasquez-Leon,
              will allow for updating of basic fisheries data, re-examination of the larger
              economic and political contexts, and re-evaluation of the privatization and
              conservation policies that began in 1991.  It will also permit comparisons in
              space and time, providing a more comprehensive picture of the Gulf of
              California. 

This POWRE grant will provide Dr. Vasquez-Leon with a unique
              opportunity for professional growth at a critical point in her career.  After
              family considerations forced her to interrupt her career for two years, she was
              able to obtain an institutional affiliation, from which she receives no salary
              or benefits.  This POWRE grant will provide salary, allowing her to continue
              doing research on human/environmental interactions in marine contexts and also
              allowing her to complete a book currently under preparation for publication. 
              Thus, it will enhance the potential for her to find an appropriate tenure-track
              position in the future.

