Title       : RUI: Ultrafast THz Spectroscopy of Spin Dynamics in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0074622

Award Number: 0074622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189238             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Heyman heyman@macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Crowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will use ultrafast THz spectroscopy to study spin excitations in
              narrow-gap semiconductor quantum wells. These systems exhibit a large
              spin-orbit coupling, permitting the spin-state of carriers to be controlled
              with an electric field such as that from a gate contact. These systems will be
              investigated with a time-resolved spectroscopic probe tuned to the energy scale
              of the spin-orbit interaction (1-5meV). The lifetimes and energy spectra of
              spin excitations will be determined for a number of quantum well structures.
              Such measurements are made possible by the spin-orbit interaction, which will
              allow optical generation of carriers in a well-defined spin-state, and optical
              probes of the evolution of spins.  Ultrafast THz spectroscopy will also be used
              to perform pulsed-EPR measurements at terahertz frequencies on donor electrons
              in InAs. The successful performance of these experiments will demonstrate the
              applicability of this technique to a wide range of physical systems. Terahertz
              frequency generation on patterned semiconductor surfaces will also be
              investigated. It is expected that surface patterning will boost the efficiency
              of generation of optically pumped THz pulses from semiconductor surfaces by
              about one order of magnitude.   Lastly, carrier lifetimes will be investigated
              in picosecond carrier-lifetime materials such as low-temperature grown GaAs and
              radiation damaged semiconductors.  Undergraduate students will participate in
              this research which will be performed at Macalester College and the University
              of Minnesota. The project will also benefit from collaboration with an
              industrial partner. The students will thus also acquire research experience in
              a setting of a major research enterprise.  
%%%
As advances in technology
              push the size of transistors towards atomic dimensions, their properties will
              be increasingly influenced by quantum mechanics.  For this reason, scientists
              are exploring devices that rely on quantum phenomena for their function. One
              such promising area involves semiconductor devices in which an electron's spin,
              rather than its charge, is used to control the flow of electric current. At the
              present time the most promising systems for realizing such semiconductor
              spin-transport devices are thin layers of materials such as indium arsenide and
              indium antimonide. Realizing these new technologies requires, however, a
              detailed understanding of the behavior of electron spins in these systems at
              ultra-short time intervals.  This research is devoted to an experimental
              investigation of the optical properties of indium arsenide and indium
              antimonide by means of infrared spectroscopy at a time resolution of one
              trillionth of a second. Such measurements will reveal how much energy is
              required to change the direction of the spin in these systems, and how long the
              spin remains in the newly oriented state. Additional experiments will be
              performed to demonstrate the feasibility of pulsed magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy at these ultra-short time scales.  This research will be conducted
              at Macalester College as well as at the University of Minnesota. The project
              will also benefit from the participation of an industrial collaborator. 
              Undergraduate students will be engaged in this research.  They will thereby
              acquire skills and knowledge in a forefront area of condensed matter physics
              and materials science.  They will be prepared for advanced studies with an
              appreciation for the needs of advanced technology and for entry into the
              scientific/technological workforce.


