Title       : Modeling Flow in Porous Media with Vugular Meso-scale Heterogeneities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0074310

Award Number: 0074310
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd J. Arbogast arbogast@ticam.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Bryant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,9263,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Arbogast
0074310

     Sedimentary rocks sometimes contain void regions
              called vugs that are much larger than the usual intergranular pores.  Vugular
              heterogeneities raise both practical and theoretical problems for understanding
              fluid flow through such rocks at the field scale.  For example, standard
              sampling methods are at a scale too small to resolve these heterogeneities. 
              Moreover it is nontrivial to identify the correct physical formalism for
              modeling flow or interpreting flow measurements, and it is not clear that
              traditional homogenization approaches are applicable.  In this project, the
              investigators tie microscopic (CT scan) and macroscopic measurements of a large
              sample (about 17,000 cubic cm) of Cretaceous carbonate rock containing
              centimeter-scale vugs directly to high-resolution computation of flow fields. 
              This framework allows the testing of different physical models for flow in the
              geometry of the sample.  The specific objectives are to: (1) Map CT scan pixels
              of the sample to permeability and porosity; (2) Simulate flow in the
              micro-scale system; (3) Determine the macro-scale governing relations for
              single phase flow; and (4) Determine the macroscopic model parameters in terms
              of the microscale characterization.  Research in algorithms and upscaling
              procedures is conducted to achieve the second and third objectives.  Subsequent
              numerical experiments determine the influence of alternative depositional
              environments and diagenetic histories by changing the connectivity of the vugs
              and the permeability distribution of the matrix material.  This results finally
              in the ability to more confidently predict flow in vugular media in full-field
              simulations.

     The flow of fluids through porous rock is of economic and
              environmental interest.  Examples include oil and gas production, obtaining
              adequate water supplies (groundwater accounts for about one third of the water
              used in the US, with many cities depending exclusively on wells), and
              remediating subsurface contamination at Superfund sites and many Department of
              Energy facilities.  The sedimentary rocks through which these flows occur
              sometimes contain relatively large holes or void regions called vugs.  The
              dissolution of fossil fragments is a common mechanism for creating vugs in
              carbonate rocks, which contain more than half the world's oil reserves and
              comprise many of the biggest aquifers in the US.  Vugs are more conducive to
              fluid flow than the much smaller pore space between the rock grains, and this
              raises both both practical and theoretical problems for understanding
              large-scale flows.  This project aims to construct models for this type of rock
              that predict the effective flow properties over hundreds of yards to several
              miles.  Because direct experimentation over these distances is not feasible, an
              essential component of the research is the integration of intermediate-scale
              physical and large-scale computational experiments.  This effort also relies on
              basic research in numerical algorithms and modeling techniques.  Establishing
              the correct relations governing the flow of fluids in such rocks enables more
              confident predictions from full-field simulations.

