Title       : POWRE: Marriage Migration in China: Structure, Agency, and Socialist Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0074261

Award Number: 0074261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Fun C. Fan fan@geog.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will study the processes and determinants of marriage migration in
              China.  Marriage is the most important reason for female migration in that
              nation, where large proportions of women move over long distances to join their
              husbands' households upon marriage.  This study will investigate macro-level
              structures, such as sociocultural traditions and legacies of socialist
              institutions, and micro-level strategies, responses, and processes of decision
              making, in order to understand the origins and nature of marriage migration. 
              The research will involve analysis of census-type data, as well as in-depth
              field surveys and interviews, in two villages in western Guangdong and southern
              Beijing.  The research will examine in what ways marriage is transactional and
              pragmatic, the varied opportunities, constraints, and considerations of men and
              women, the formation and evolution of social networks that facilitate and
              encourage marriage migration, and the implications of the above for women's
              mobility.

Much of our knowledge about human migration is drawn from Western
              market economies.  But Asian societies are increasingly mobile and are subject
              to sociocultural and institutional traditions that are poorly understood and
              seldom the subject of theory.  Existing work on the internal migration of China
              focuses primarily on work-related migration and rarely differentiates between
              the movements of men and women.  A better understanding of marriage migration
              in China will help advance our knowledge about the heterogeneity and
              complexities of human movements.  Empirical evidence from this study will
              demonstrate the importance of integrating migration theory with perspectives on
              gender, culture, social hierarchy, inequality, and the status, constraints, and
              strategies of women.  Findings from this study will yield insights for the
              relationships between socialist transition and spatial and social processes,
              and for hypothesis testing concerning marriage migration and women's mobility
              in other parts of the world.

This research will further Fan's career goal to
              develop new research areas and methodologies and to prepare to play major
              leadership roles in the profession.  Through this study, she will evaluate if
              gender, women and feminist perspectives should be central to her future
              research agenda.  She will gain experience in using new qualitative methods
              such as focus group interviews, and will assess whether these methodologies
              should constitute new directions in her future research.  These career
              developments may enable her to advance from middle to senior rank in the
              profession, increase her visibility through international collaborations, and
              support her goals of promoting diversity in education including studies of
              underrepresented populations and training of underrepresented students to
              become prominent scholars.

