Title       : POWRE: Methods for the Analysis of Data with Multiple Levels of Correlation and
               a Comparison of Several Fundamental Statistical Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0074569

Award Number: 0074569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Justine Shults jshults@cceb.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We will develop improved statistical approaches for the analysis of potentially
              non-Gaussian data with multiple levels of correlation, as might be encountered
              when repeated observations collected on siblings within families are correlated
              due to within subject, or within family, similarities. Our first objective is
              to fulfill the need in the literature for a relatively straightforward approach
              for analysis of multi-level
correlated data by extending the method of
              quasi-least squares (QLS) [Chaganty (1997), Shults and Chaganty (1998), and
              Chaganty and Shults (1999)]. We will implement QLS using a correlation model
              discussed in Shults (2000) that is a generalization of a structure proposed by
              Lefkopolou, Moore, and Ryan (1989). Motivational examples for our research
              include an international trial to promote exclusive breast-feeding (Morrow,
              Guerrero, Shults, et. al., 1999) and an ongoing study of Interstitial Cystitis
              at the University of
Pennsylvania (Mazurick, Landis, et. al., 2000).

Our
              next objective is to explore issues related to the benefits and implementation
              of approaches that use patterned correlation matrices to model association
              among outcomes. We will examine the impact of failure to specify an appropriate
              model for the correlation structure of our data, by considering several study
              designs and examining the loss of efficiency when the correlation structure has
              been incorrectly specified.  Of particular interest will be the effect of
              ignoring one or more levels of correlation for data with multiple levels of
              association.  Simulations will also be conducted to explore the effect of
              misspecification on the mean square error of the estimates of the regression
              and correlation parameters for small samples. We will then explore the
              development of improved guidelines for selection of an appropriate correlation
              structure when several plausible models are available.

Our final objective
              is to explore the theoretical underpinnings of QLS and contrast QLS with
              pseudo-likelihood (PL, Carroll and Ruppert, 1998) and several other fundamental
              approaches that have been described in the statistical literature. We will then
              describe a modified PL approach that is closely related to QLS and will explore
              the development of this approach for several models for the correlation
              structure of our data.

This POWRE project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
