Title       : POWRE: Molecular Control of Interfaces in Insitu Polymer-Hydroxyapatite
               Composites for Bone Replacement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0074662

Award Number: 0074662
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kalpana S. Katti kalpana.katti@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1592,9102,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
0074662
Katti
In the quest for new materials for bone replacement, it is of
              interest to design composites with mechanical properties similar to that of
              bone to avoid problems such as stress shielding of surrounding bone that are
              associated with the current coated metallic implants. The focus of this POWRE
              award is to investigate means of controlling mechanical properties in insitu
              hydroxyapatite(HAP)-polymer composites for their potential use as bone
              replacement. A molecular control of crystallization of inorganic phases by
              organic compounds has shown great promise for fabrication of new composites for
              several applications. Ionic polymers such as poly(acrylic acid) (PAAc) are
              suitable due to their ability to strongly bind Ca ions. The major aim of the
              proposed research is to identify and determine fundamental molecular
              interactions between HAP and polymeric additive during mineralization of HAP.
              This will allow for a control of microstructural evolution of HAP and hence the
              observed mechanical behavior in insitu HAP/polymer composites. The specific
              research objectives are: 

1. To develop a fundamental understanding of
              molecular level interactions of organic and inorganic phases in
              polymer-hydroxyapatite insitu composites. The specific role of ionic polymer
              chains on microcrystalline aggregate formation and nucleation and growth of HAP
              will be investigated. 
2. Correlate molecular parameters (such as vibrational
              band intensity changes and shifts) to macroscopic mechanical behavior such as
              tensile and compressive strengths. 

The PI is a new faculty at NDSU. The
              POWRE grant will help her establish an independent research program and further
              her career development. This grant will help the PI to develop a first research
              initiative to establish a Biomaterials research and education program at NDSU.
              The PI proposes to integrate research with education in the Biomaterials field
              by involving undergraduate women and/or minority students into active research.
              At the conclusion of the proposed studies, the PI plans to integrate results of
              the study into development of a new course on Biomaterials. This course will be
              focussed towards senior level and graduate engineering students and will
              promote the importance of Biomaterials in the engineering community at
              NDSU.
*** 


