Title       : POWRE: The Effects of Deletion of DBH on Osteocalcin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a0074957

Award Number: 0074957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Buckendahl buckendp@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Osteocalcin, a protein synthesized in bone, has an extraskeletal role in
              maintaining calcium homeostasis under normal conditions and during acute "fight
              or flight" stress.  This function will be impaired in the absence of
              catecholamines, resulting from deletion of the gene in mice for dopamine
              beta-hydroxylase (DBH-/-).  DBH is the enzyme that converts dopamine to
              norepinephrine (NE), from which epinephrine (E) is formed by action of a second
              enzyme.  DBH-/- mice make it possible to determine more precisely the effects
              of the catecholamine hormones on osteocalcin in circulation and in bone.  It
              will also be possible to separate effects of NE from those of other sympathetic
              neural hormones released in response to stressful stimuli.  Bone resorption
              requires NE, therefore will be decreased, leading to a greater quantity of bone
              in mutant mice compared with heterozygous littermates.  Vertebrae and femurs
              from mutant and heterozygous (normal) littermates will be prepared for
              extraction of mineral and osteocalcin.  Bone calcium, phosphorous, and
              osteocalcin will be analyzed.  Plasma osteocalcin, corticosterone, and
              prolactin from the same mice will also be analyzed.  Subsequently, experiments
              will be performed to determine the response of these mice to foot-restraint
              immobilization, an acute stressor that acutely increases NE, E, and
              corticosterone, and also osteocalcin. Both normal bone metabolism and the acute
              stress response are expected to be altered in DBH-/- mice.

Data obtained
              from this POWRE award is expected to provide a sound foundation for submission
              of a regular research proposal.  The work described is an innovative, though as
              yet untried, approach to bone research.  Demonstration of the ability to obtain
              external funding could have a significant impact on this PI's future
              career.


