Title       : POWRE: Evolution of Sociality in a Behaviorally Flexible Marmot
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0074458

Award Number: 0074458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine R. Maher cmaher@usm.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Southern Maine
	      96 Falmouth St
	      Portland, ME  041049300    207/780-4411

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                     Evolution of animal social behavior often involves a series of steps
              whereby individuals live near relatives, become more tolerant of each other,
              share more space and increasingly cooperate with those relatives.  One group of
              mammals, the marmots, offers excellent opportunities to study evolution of
              sociality because its members demonstrate many levels of sociality, ranging
              from the less social woodchuck to the highly social alpine marmot. Marmots may
              have evolved from an ancestor that most resembles today's woodchucks in terms
              of social behavior and organization.  Thus, by discerning the woodchuck's level
              of social organization, the evolution of sociality in marmots can be understood
              more completely.
       This project will investigate social organization in
              woodchucks, which traditionally are described as asocial and aggressive but
              which show greater development of sociality in some populations. The objective
              is to assess genetic relationships among woodchucks, to document mating
              systems, behavioral and spatial patterns, and to explore relationships among
              these factors. Specifically, the PI will determine (1) if females settle closer
              to relatives than males do, forming kin groups, and (2) if close relatives are
              more tolerant of each other than distant relatives and share greater amounts of
              space. The PI will employ DNA fingerprinting techniques to assess genetic
              relatedness and the mating system. She also will use implanted
              radiotransmitters to gather information about where animals settle and patterns
              of space use, and she will observe marked individuals to collect information
              about interaction rates and about breeding pairs.
       After five years in a
              tenure-track position, the PI moved to a new institution, which necessitated a
              change in research focus.  This POWRE award will allow her to learn the
              surgical and molecular techniques required for testing ideas about evolution of
              sociality.  It will lay foundations for future work and will provide
              exceptional opportunities for undergraduate students to gain valuable research
              experiences both in the field and in the laboratory.


