Title       : POWRE: Properties of Amorphous Diamond-like Carbon Films; Research Enhancement
               at the University of Toronto
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0074682

Award Number: 0074682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatiana B. Allen Tatiana-Allen@utc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Chattanooga
	      615 Mccallie Avenue
	      Chattanooga, TN  374032504    423/425-4141

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to study physical and technological aspects of doping of
              a-C:H. The overall research goal of the project is to use the Saddle-Field Glow
              Discharge (SFGD) deposition method to produce a-C:H films with electrically
              efficient and controllable p- and n-type doping for subsequent use in
              microelectronic devices. The structural, optical and electrical properties of
              the samples will be characterized by a variety of techniques. Specific tasks
              include: (1) Obtain "hands-on" experience with a SFGD deposition system. (2)
              Optimize SFGD deposition parameters to provide controllable and electrically
              efficient p- and n-type type doping. (3) Study effects of substitution of
              hydrogen in an amorphous matrix by tritium. Understanding the effect of
              dangling bonds produced by tritium beta decay on the opto-electronic properties
              of materials will add to fundamental knowledge in the physics of amorphous
              semiconductors, and may lead to applications in opto-electronic devices. (4)
              Study possibilities of modifying film properties after deposition by annealing
              and free-electron laser irradiation. It will help her to overcome
              scientifically limited environment of a small teaching institution. The PI will
              acquire additional experimental skills in the area of thin film deposition. The
              anticipated outcomes from this project are a deeper understanding of (1) the
              growth and doping mechanisms of a-C:H, and (2) the physical properties of
              dangling bonds in tritiated amorphous semiconductors. Both outcomes will have
              fundamental and immediate practical impact. The long term benefits for the PI's
              research program will occur through both continued collaboration with
              University of Toronto researchers and the acquisition of the deposition
              equipment for her home institution. The expansion in the depth and scope of the
              PI's research will strengthen her position at UTC and in the larger research
              community, and make her an efficient role model for young women in
              science.
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made under the
              Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE) program.
              The project covers a sabbatical year and two consecutive summers, which the PI
              will spend doing full-time research at the Electrical and Computer Engineering
              Department of the University of Toronto, collaborating with Professor Stefan
              Zukotynski. The career-related goal of this proposal is to re-establish the PI,
              whose research career has been interrupted for three years, as an active
              researcher in the field of semiconductor physics/materials science. The POWRE
              award will provide the PI and her students with the opportunity to use
              world-class research facilities and to interact with leading researchers in the
              field of amorphous semiconductors. The research is expected to contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of special relevance to the
              behavior of electronic materials. The project also places emphasis on the
              integration of research and education through undergraduate student
              participation in research. The project is co-supported by the Division of
              Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).
              
***

