Title       : POWRE: Gibbs Regression for Social Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0074456

Award Number: 0074456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne Seymour   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1333,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research investigates a Gibbs regression model, which quantifies overall
              and individual-level effects simultaneously for a social network while modeling
              a desired response from an individual within that network.  This model may be
              viewed as an extension of a logistic regression model to include a term for
              modeling pairwise interactions between responses; it may also be viewed as a
              Gibbs random field on a complete graph; hence, the model's name.  A very
              promising preliminary application of this model to mental health service data
              took a practical nonparametric approach to estimating the interactions, and
              precipitated the development of a Markov chain Monte Carlo goodness-of-fit
              test. The PI will explore the model further using new data gathered
              specifically for use with Gibbs regression, modeling responses such as whether
              clients find adequate housing or receive necessary treatment for illness and/or
              substance abuse.

This model holds great theoretical and applied potential. 
              The wealth of questions which arise from this model address parameter
              estimation, model selection, and model diagnostics.  Answering these questions
              will involve extending and unifying aspects of both logistic regression and
              random fields, and will include both the frequentist and Bayesian perspectives.
               Towards applications, the Gibbs regression will be useful for modeling
              networks of dependent multinomial responses in any field of scientific research
              (e.g., the social aspect of spread and severity of disease; the relatedness of
              languages or cultural artifacts; perhaps even the effects of seemingly
              unrelated gene clusters on inherited characteristics).

The POWRE program is
              a particularly appropriate avenue for funding this research due to its
              exploratory nature.  Though it is a ripe area of research for a young
              researcher such as the PI, it requires a little more development before it is
              worthy of a full NSF research grant proposal.  The POWRE award also enhances
              the career of the PI, which - in spite of a necessarily slow start due to a
              "two-body problem" - is at its critical pre-tenure stage.  

