Title       : hp Finite Element Methods in Failure Prediction and Material Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0074160

Award Number: 0074160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manil Suri suri@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT OF PROJECT

The goal of this project is to formulate, analyze and
              numerically test new computational algorithms geared towards solving problems
              of deformation and failure in structures and materials.  We use the p/hp finite
              element methods, where the degree p of polynomials used can be increased to
              achieve accuracy.  The first topic is the investigation of a linearized
              algorithm for the buckling of three-dimensional objects, recently implemented
              in the commercial hp code STRESS CHECK.  Spurious predictions are unavoidable
              due to the non-compactness of an underlying eigenvalue problem.  We develop a
              mathematical theory which analyzes the algorithm, helps in ensuring the
              reliability of the computations, and leads to useful extensions. The second
              topic is the development of a p finite element method for woven composite
              materials.  An algorithm will be developed whereby each periodic cell is
              identified with a specialized p-type element, which can incorporate the various
              geometric and material properties.  The periodicity is exploited since no mesh
              sub-division is used, but accuracy achieved by increasing the degree in the
              local elements.

It is well known that when a thin vertical beam is loaded
              too much, it will eventually buckle.  This project mathematically develops a
              new engineering method for predicting such maximum buckling loads for
              complicated three-dimensional structures.  The goal is to ensure that the
              results predicted by the engineering method (already in use in the commercial
              software STRESS CHECK, which has been used e.g. to study the buckling of space
              shuttle panels) are reliable.  The second part of this project develops a new
              method to computationally study woven composite materials.  These materials,
              which are composed of fibers that are woven together and imbedded in a
              surrounding matrix are often both very strong and lightweight, and have several
              useful industrial applications (e.g. aeronautical components).  Due to their
              complicated structure, their analysis by conventional methods can be quite
              cumbersome and expensive. Our new method overcomes several difficulties by
              exploiting the repeating nature of the material, and will lead to useful
              materials science applications, such as the design of new composites with
              specific properties.


