Title       : Quantum Information Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0074566

Award Number: 0074566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Beth Ruskai MaryBeth_Ruskai@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

	The primary focus of this project is the study of a variety of
              mathematical problems in quantum computation and information theory.  Although
              building quantum computers remains a formidable experimental challenge, they
              have the potential to efficiently handle problems whose computational
              complexity puts them beyond the scope of classical digital computers.  Some
              aspects of this proposal, such as error correction and the exploration of
              multi-bit gates, are directly related to quantum computation.  However, the
              main emphasis is on problems in the related area of quantum communication,
              particularly channel capacity, optimal encoding and decoding schemes and
              classification of entanglement.  The P.I.'s past work on the analysis of
              multi-particle systems in strong magnetic fields, the properties of
              quantum-mechanical entropy, and maps on operator algebras provides a strong
              starting point for developing new mathematical tools needed to deal with these
              challenging issues. 

	The possibility of using quantum computers to
              efficiently factoring large numbers, is a potential threat to the security of
              existing cryptographic protocols.  Fortunately, using quantum particles for
              communication, which is more feasible experimentally, offers new mechanisms for
              distributing cryptographic keys as well as encoding messages and transmitting
              information.  These include both procedures based on the transmission of
              quantum particles for encoding and sending information; and innovative new
              protocols, based on a quantum phenomenon known as entanglement, involving
              particles at distant sites augmented by some classical communication. As with
              classical communication, one must be prepared to deal with noisy channels and
              much of this proposal deals with the mathematics of noisy channels.  Some of
              this work has direct implications for experimental design, since it is
              important to know how to best allocate resources and choose coding schemes to
              minimize the effects of noise.

