Title       : Mathematical Theory and Numerical Methods for Microscale Biomedical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0074043

Award Number: 0074043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $707227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mitchell Luskin luskin@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans G. Othmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. James  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1616,9181,9183,9216,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The Investigator and his colleagues study new active
materials and their
              possible use in micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) for biomedical
              applications.  The research project
is motivated by the biomedical revolution
              based on the use of
emerging materials and emerging mathematical methods of
              analysis
and simulation for applications to noninvasive surgery and
              drug
delivery at nanoscale to milliscale.  The work concerns the use of
small
              scale actuators based on smart materials, especially
shape-memory and
              magnetostrictive materials.  They study the
growth of tissue on materials and
              the interactions with
surrounding tissue and biological fluids, as well as
              novel
designs of actuator systems.  They consider remote actuation
based on
              the use of a magnetic field applied external to the
body, and they explore the
              possible use of MRI.
     New active materials --- materials that can change
              shape
under moderate stimuli, for example --- hold great promise for
building
              MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical systems) for a variety of
applications. 
              Opportunities in biomedical applications are
particularly intriguing; they
              include noninvasive surgery and
drug delivery at nanoscale to milliscale
              lengths.  This project is
aimed at biomedical MEMS based on the use of new
              active
materials.  The investigators study the properties of
              active
materials, the behaviors of MEMS that could be built with them,
and
              the interactions between the materials and surrounding
biological tissues and
              fluids.  The work requires new mathematical
methods of analysis and
              simulation.  Investigators focus on the
use of small scale actuators based on
              shape-memory and emerging
ferromagnetic shape-memory materials, energized by a
              remotely
applied magnetic field.  They study the growth of tissue on
              the
materials and materials interactions with the elastoviscous
surrounding
              tissue, as well as novel designs of actuator systems
based on molecular beam
              epitaxial growth of films.  The use of
MRI for simultaneous imaging and
              actuation is explored.
