Title       : POWRE: Methane Oxidizer Biofilms in Landfill Cover Soil: A Study of Film
               Formation and Community Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0074970

Award Number: 0074970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helene A. Hilger hhilger@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,1592,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074970  Hilger  This research will examine microbial methane oxidizers in the
              context of their growth in a soil biofilm.  Methane oxidizers exposed to high
              methane concentrations in landfills can produce copious slime secretions, and
              it is hypothesized that these viscous exopolysaccharides (EPS) may limit
              diffusion of gases to cells embedded in the biofilm and thereby control methane
              oxidation rates.  The experimental objective of this project is to define the
              time dependent growth and spatial orientation of methane oxidizers in a biofilm
              typical of the vadose zone of landfill cover soils.  Biofilms enriched in
              methane oxidizers will be developed on strips of membrane filter paper buried
              in or placed on top of landfill cover soil and exposed to synthetic landfill
              gas in a laboratory simulation.  Oligonucleotide flourescent dye-tagged probes
              will be used to investigate methanotroph species distribution in the film and
              the spatial patterns of the methanotrophs relative to the film secretions.  The
              biofilm structure will be preserved using cryoembedding techniques and observed
              after cryosectioning using flourescence microscopy-based image analysis.  The
              results of the project will be used to evaluate whether EPS secretions are a
              significant and heretofore unrecognized influence on methane oxidation capacity
              in landfill cover soil.  If so, the findings could have implications for global
              methane and climate change models, for the design and management of landfill
              covers to mitigate methane emissions, and for volatile organic compound
              emission, adsorption and cometabolism.  The techniques and findings may also be
              applicable to studies of other vadose zone methane oxidizer environments, such
              as intermittently drained wetlands, bioremediation sites, biofilters, natural
              gas recovery and leaks through soil and coal mine operations. ***
