Title       : POWRE: The Role of Right Frontal Cortex in Episodic Memory Encoding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074848

Award Number: 0074848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen B. McDermott kbmcderm@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this POWRE award is for McDermott to become fully proficient in the
              latest functional neuroimaging methodology, functional magnetic resonance
              imaging (fMRI).  That complete proficiency should then allow her to become
              competitive in that research environment and put her in a position to apply
              independently for major federal funding for future studies involving the
              functional neuroimaging of human cognition.

The specific research goal for
              this award is to understand the role of right inferior frontal gyrus in the
              encoding of nonverbal information.  Thus far, most neuroimaging studies
              examining frontal cortex have focused upon verbal processing and have neglected
              nonverbal processing.  Further, most studies focusing on nonverbal processing
              have targeted regions in the posterior aspects of the brain.  This study will
              target a specific region of frontal cortex, the right inferior frontal gyrus,
              which has been shown to be important in the processing of nonverbal
              information.  There is still a great deal to be learned about the types of
              neural computations performed by this brain region.  These experiments will
              focus on its contribution to the encoding of new information into
              memory.

Results from these experiments will have the potential to inform
              educational practice.  That is, by enhancing understanding of brain regions
              involved in encoding information into memory, we will better understand how
              people learn new information.  In addition to enhancing basic understanding of
              human cognition, this information may have implications for enhancing
              performance in the classroom.

