Title       : Collaborative Research: Optimal Transportation: Its Geometry and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0074037

Award Number: 0074037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfrid Gangbo gangbo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luis A. Caffarelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mikhail Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

Optimal Transportation:  Its Geometry and Applications

This
              project focuses on the analysis of a collection of variational optimization and
              dynamical evolution problems centered around the theme of optimal
              transportation --- which enters the dynamical setting whenever the evolution
              conserves a scalar locally. The central problem can be sketched as follows:
              Given a distribution of iron mines throughout the countryside,  and a
              
distribution of factories which require iron ore,  decide which mines should
              supply ore to each factory in order to minimize the total  transportation
              costs.  Here the cost per ton of ore transported from the mine at x to factory
              at y is specified by a function c(x,y) --- so the problem
can be formulated as
              a linear program.  However, when the mines and factories are distributed
              continuously throughout Euclidean space or a curved landscape with obstacles
              --- and the cost is related to the distance on this landscape, then the problem
              has a rich structure and 
deep connections to geometry and non-linear PDE
              which have only begun to be 
explored.  Incarnations of this problem embed in
              current models for surprisingly diverse phenomena.  Along with basic questions
              concerning the structure and qualitative features of optimal mappings, the
              proposed research addresses models for  front formation in the atmosphere,
              dissipative equilibration in kinetic theory, fluid flow, elastic crystals,
              
and granular materials,  geometric and dynamical inequalities, and
              microeconomic decision problems formulated in the principal-agent framework
              which involve designing price systems, tax structures, or contracts in the face
              of informational asymmetry.

After half a century of mathematical neglect,
              the past decade witnessed a revival of interest in optimal transportation,  and
              watched as it blossomed into a fertile field of investigation as well as a
              vibrant tool for exploring diverse applications within and beyond
              mathematics.The transformation occurred partly because long-standing issues
              could finally be resolved,  but also because unexpected connections  were
              discovered which linked these questions to problems in physics, geometry,
              computer vision, partial differential equations, earth science and economics.
              The time is ripe for a collaborative effort on an international scale to
              explore existing connections and unearth new ones, while simultaneously
              developing the basic theory of optimal
maps and introducing students and
              colleagues to the challenges and promise of the field --- thus for the
              formation of a focused research group with these goals.  The core of our plan
              is to arrange sustained interactions between and around members of the group, 
              who in addition to collaborating scientifically, will work together over the
              next several years to create the research environment and manpower necessary
              for transportation research to flourish. To achieve this goal, we plan to
              organize a series of three semester long periods of emphasis and two workshops
              on different aspects of the subject in several of our home institutions. 
              Furthermore, we plan to 
share the responsibilities of training graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows, by using funds from the grant to support
              young researchers while allowing them to divide their time between their home
              institutions and the semesters of emphasis.  This unique arrangement will give
              participants 
access to an unusually broad assortment of perspectives and
              expertise. Moreover, we believe a three-year nurturing window for young
              researchers  to learn the subject and become involved --- if established now  -
              will ultimately advance progress in the field by more than a decade. 


