Title       : POWRE: Hurricane Risk Modeling and Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0074686

Award Number: 0074686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel A. Davidson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1038,1592,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0074686
Davidson
The PI has several years experience in earthquake risk
              analysis.  This POWRE award will allow her to expand her research to include
              hurricane risk analysis as well, with the goal of ultimately adopting a
              multihazard approach to risk assessment and management. This project will give
              the PI the skills, background, and connections necessary to make this
              transition. The study has two main goals. First, the PI will gain expertise and
              forge relationships in a new research area, hurricane risk analysis, with the
              support of experts in the field, Dr. David Rosowsky, Dr. Lian Xie, and their
              research colleagues at the Clemson University Civil Engineering Department and
              the North Carolina State University Marine, Earth, and Atmospheric Sciences
              Department, respectively. As consultants on this project, Rosowsky and Xie each
              will host the PI and her research assistant for a two-week visit. Second, more
              specifically, participation in this study will prepare the PI to conduct a
              planned collaborative project with Rosowsky and Xie to forecast hurricane risk
              as it changes over time. As cities grow, age, and evolve, their exposure and
              vulnerability to natural hazards changes dramatically. Risk assessors and
              managers, therefore, will always be a step behind the problem unless they
              anticipate how the world will change, estimate what the risk will be at that
              time in the future when the next hurricane occurs, and plan for that future
              scenario. The planned forecasting study will develop a model of how hurricane
              risk changes over time so that risk managers can plan more
              effectively.

These two goals will be achieved through the accomplishment of
              the specific objectives of the POWRE project. First, the PI will work with the
              consultants to develop a deep understanding of the hurricane wind hazard model
              Rosowsky has developed and the coastal flooding hazard model Xie has developed.
              Second, the PI will develop vulnerability models that predict damage due to
              hurricane winds and coastal flooding. Third, interfaces between the Clemson
              wind model, NCSU coastal flooding model, and vulnerability models will be
              developed so that together they form a prototype risk assessment system.
              Finally, the hazard and vulnerability models will be applied to the coast of
              North Carolina to test the interfaces and demonstrate the feasibility of the
              prototype risk assessment system.
***

