Title       : POWRE: Self-Affirmation and Resistance to Persuasion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074342

Award Number: 0074342
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74231              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia Z. Jacks jrjacks@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              


Compared to our understanding of the principles of persuasion, very little
              is known about the processes that motivate and enable resistance to persuasion.
               This research will test the thesis that resistance is motivated, in part, by
              the need to protect the self-concept.  This thesis will be tested using the
              logic and methodology of self-affirmation theory.  This theory argues that if a
              given behavior (e.g., resisting persuasion) is motivated by the need to protect
              the self-concept, then affirming the self will reduce the need to engage in
              that behavior.  In three studies, individuals will or will not be given the
              opportunity to affirm their self-concept before being exposed to a persuasive
              message.  Study 1 will examine the influence of topic-relevance (i.e., whether
              or not the affirmation concerns the same topic as the persuasive message) on
              the resistance process.  Study 2 will examine the role of attitude strength in
              moderating the effects of self-affirmations on resistance.  Study 3 will
              examine a vital methodological question concerning the timing of the
              self-affirmation opportunity (i.e., whether it occurs before or after exposure
              to a persuasive message).  This research will contribute to our basic
              understanding of the processes that motivate and enable resistance to
              persuasion.  In addition, it will contribute to the development of a
              comprehensive theory of persuasion dynamics that is capable of explaining both
              yielding to and resisting persuasion.  The need for such a theory is critical
              not only for advancing basic science but also for practical reasons.  We must
              be able to teach ourselves and our children how to resist changing the things
              we should not change, how to change the things we should, and wisdom to know
              the difference.  This POWRE research program represents an innovative line of
              research that is different from Jacks' graduate training.  In addition, as a
              non-tenured assistant professor, she is at a critical stage in her career.  The
              release from teaching obligations enabled by this POWRE award will allow more
              time for research and thus will be vital to her ability to achieve her career
              objectives.
