Title       : Scalable Submesh Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0074278

Award Number: 0074278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Mandel jmandel@math.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We will develop new algorithms, mathematical foundations, and a new
programming
              methodology for the fast parallel solution of elliptic
problems with aspects
              that are crucial in practice but present serious
difficulties to existing
              methods. We will investigate new robust iterative
substructuring methods that
              perform well even in the presence of interface
roughness on element scale. The
              performance of existing methods
deteriorates in this case, but smooth
              decompositions are typically not
available in practice. We also propose to
              investigate fast methods for the
discretization and iterative solution of high
              frequency wave propagation
and scattering problems by representing the
              solution locally as a
combination of waves on a coarse mesh and exploiting
              connections with the
fast multipole method. Finally, we propose to develop new
              programming
approaches and prototype tools for latency tolerant implementation
              on
parallel machines, transforming a high level program with new
              directives
into multiple independent tasks queued on processors.

The
              project will advance the state of the art in modeling complicated
problems in
              Mechanical Engineering with irregular geometries on
high-performance computers
              with high accuracy and efficiency, improve the
technology underlying radar,
              sonar, and ultrasound imaging, and create a
new highly efficient methodology
              and prototype tools for High-Performance
Computing. Potential applications
              include computational analysis and
modeling of automobiles and aircrafts and
              accurate high resolution
ultrasound imaging. It is expected that the new
              methodology for
High-Performance Computing will be important for futuristic
              technologies,
where the speed of light is the limiting factor of communication
              between
the processors, as well as for more immediate distributed computing
              on
networks of computers.

