Title       : POWRE: Palynological Investigations at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0074745

Award Number: 0074745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle F. Goman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074745
Goman

Sediment samples collected from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania will
              be analyzed for fossil pollen.  The sediment samples were collected from
              deposits recognized as lake or wetland environments from two well-defined
              strata, Bed I and Lowermost Bed II, from the gorge.  These deposits, which date
              to 2.03-1.78 million years ago (m.y.a.) and 1.75-1.70 m.y.a respectively, are
              an important area of research for archaeologists investigating early hominids,
              i.e. Homo habilis.  Recent archaeological and geological investigations at the
              gorge have focused upon reconstructing the landscape and paleoecology of the
              region in order to better understand the environment within which these
              hominids subsisted.  The palynological work consists of several parts.  At
              first the PI will need to familiarize herself with African pollen taxa and with
              preparation methodologies for early Pleistocene material.  Second, samples from
              a variety of fossil wetland environments identified from Lowermost Bed II will
              be analyzed for their fossil pollen content.  Third, a calibration data set
              combining the modern pollen spectra and water quality data from varied wetland
              environments at nearby sites thought to be comparable analogues for Oldowan
              wetland environments will be developed and then applied to the data collected
              from Lowermost Bed II.  It is hypothesized that the pollen spectra from
              different wetland habitats will serve as a proxy for determining paleo-wetland
              environments and water quality conditions.  Finally, samples of laminated lake
              sediments from Bed I will be analyzed for fossil pollen and the regional
              paleoecology determined.  The paleoecological and inferred water quality
              information will provide key insights into early Pleistocene environments and
              landscape at Olduvai, at a key time in Hominid history.  This information will
              be of critical importance to the landscape models archaeologists and geologists
              are constructing for this period and region.  Not only does this POWRE proposal
              provide a unique opportunity for the PI to work with scientists from other
              disciplines in order to develop a more complete picture of early hominid land
              use, it comes at a critical time in the PI's career after taking time off from
              active research to raise a family.

