Title       : Impact of Hydrogen and Carbon Monoxide on Lean Premixed Hydrocarbon Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0074428

Award Number: 0074428
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280724             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory S. Jackson gsjackso@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose L. Torero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth T. Kiger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this study are (1) to characterize experimentally stretched,
              lean, premixed flames under laminar and mildly turbulent conditions using
              particle thermometry and laser-induced fluorescence; (2) to assess enhancement
              of flame stability and lean-burning limits in premixed hydrocarbon (methane or
              propane) flames by addition of hydrogen or hydrogen/carbon monoxide mixtures;
              (3) to develop and validate reduced mechanisms to predict flame behavior
              (including extinction) of methane/ hydrogen/ carbon monoxide fuel mixtures; and
              (4) to develop analytical understanding of how multicomponent fuels with
              different Lewis numbers impact flame stability.  The experimental studies and
              subsequent validation of numerical models rely detailed characterization of
              counterflow, opposed-jet, premixed flames.  Independent variation of the
              hydrogen and carbon-monoxide concentrations in the fuel feed offer a new mean
              of exploring and influencing the chemical pathways in lean, premixed
              hydrocarbon combustion, in particular near extinction.  To measure extinction
              conditions in the counterflow flames, flow fields are probed with laser Doppler
              velocimetry and temperature fields are measured by observing emissions from
              micron-size particles with a sensitive infrared camera.  Laser-induced
              fluorescence (LIF) along the flame centerline probes flame structure through
              measurements of hydroxyl and formaldehyde fluorescence signals.  

Previous
              studies have shown that small amounts of hydrogen in the fuel stream can
              substantially extend the stability limits of stretched, premixed flames,
              suggesting that this may be a way to enhance the operability of lean, premixed,
              dry, low-NOx combustion systems.  Such systems are used for space heating,
              power generation, and other industrial applications.  This concept is further
              explored in this study.

