Title       : Calabi-Yau Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0074980

Award Number: 0074980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonella Grassi grassi@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract 0074980--Grassi

The research of the investigator is on the interface
              of  algebraic geometry and the physics of string theory.  Most of the  work of
              the investigator involves the study of elliptically fibered Calabi-Yau
              varieties; the symmetry of the generic fiber is identified with a symmetry of a
              physical model.   Since many Calabi-Yau varieties are in fact elliptically
              fibered, this extra structure gives way to new approaches to understand
              Calabi-Yau varieties in general.  Certain relations in string theory, known as
              dualities, predict surprising connections among the mathematical properties of
              the Calabi-Yau varieties; vice-versa one can use mathematical comparisons
              between the Calabi-Yau varieties associated by the dualities to learn more
              about the dualities themselves.  The investigator studies  transformations of
              Calabi-Yau fourfolds and their "dual counterpart", Calabi-Yau threefolds with a
              gauge bundle, determined by the structure of the fourfold.  In another project
              the P.I. investigates the singularities naturally associated to the gauge
              groups, and their relations to representation theory.  This is also motivated
              by (and it has applications) to the physics of string theory.

String theory
              is expected to explain the apparent contradictions that arise when one tries to
              combine relativity with quantum mechanics. In the model proposed by string
              theory, 6 (real) dimensions of our ten dimensional world have a very special
              structure, in particular they are complex algebraic varieties, called
              "Calabi-Yau".  A general question is  understanding properties of these
              manifolds, in order to get a better description of the physical theory.  In
              practice, the interdisciplinary nature of this project has been mutually
              beneficial to physics and mathematics and has spurred much progress and
              activity in both fields.  For example, it was shown that although there seems
              to be many different Calabi-Yau varieties which could describe the 6 extra
              dimensions, there are in fact surprising relations among them.  This is also
              related to the presence of black holes and to special transformations in
              algebraic geometry.  The research of the investigator involves  studying these
              type of relations for ``elliptically fibered" Calabi-Yau varieties.


