Title       : Adaptive Multigrid Methods for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0074299

Award Number: 0074299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jinchao Xu xu@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ludmil Zikatanov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

(NSF proposal: DMS-0074299, PI: Jinchao Xu)

The proposed project
              is on the study of advanced solution methods for partial differential equations
              that arise from scientific and engineering applications.  The theme of research
              is on the development, application and analysis of multigrid methods.  The
              multigrid method is among the most powerful techniques for solving large scale
              linear and nonlinear systems arising from the discretization of partial
              differential equations.  But the method has not been used in practice as often
              as they should be (because it is often not easy to code and to use), nor as
              efficiently as they could be (because it is often not easy to get the method
              work correctly).  Our research is, on one hand, to develop special type of
              multigrid methods that are relatively easier to use for general users for some
              standard applications and is, on the other hand, to develop multigrid methods
              that are carefully tailored for some special class of practically interesting
              problems.  One major component of the proposed research is a systematical
              investigation on various fundamental theoretical issues related to multigrid
              methods in general and also theoretical questions related to the algorithms to
              be developed for several specific problems of practical interests.

The
              multigrid methods we propose to develop and study are expected to be applicable
              to a large class of practical problems including numerical simulations for
              electrochemical power devices (batteries) and advanced materials such as
              lattice block materials and liquid crystalline materials.  These multigrid
              methods are expected to make a major impact in these and related applications
              and in particular to make it possible to simulate these problems in three
              dimensions in such a way that other traditional approaches may not be feasible.
               For example, the proposed study of advanced numerical methods for simulating
              electrochemical batteries has been and will be making a significant
              contribution to advanced battery technologies and manufactures that are vitally
              important in our everyday life, from the watch and the camera flash to
              electromobilies, modern space vehicles and wireless communications in
              information technology.  Because of the practical backgrounds of these
              problems, the proposers and their research associates and graduate students are
              expected to actively interact and collaborate with physicists, engineers,
              computational scientists and practitioners from industries.

