Title       : POWRE: Quantitative Trait Loci Controlling High Temperature Adaptation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0074870

Award Number: 0074870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Vierling vierling@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Research supported by this POWRE award will use Quantitative Trait Loci (QTL)
              analysis to understand plant adaptation to high temperature in the model plant
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  The long-term goals are: (1) to identify genes involved
              in plant adaptation to high temperature during reproduction and other phases of
              the life cycle, and (2) to test the hypothesis that variation in heat-shock
              protein (Hsp) structure or expression contributes to genetic variability in
              plant heat tolerance.  Although dramatic progress in genome sequencing has
              provided the complete genetic blueprint of many organisms, including
              Arabidopsis, only 5% of sequenced Arabidopsis genes have an established
              phenotypic function.  Thus, defining gene function, particularly as it relates
              to plant phenotype, remains a major challenge.  Genetic variation in
              Arabidopsis offers an underexploited resource for identifying gene function,
              which can now be accessed by QTL analysis.  QTL analysis allows the genetic
              dissection of complex traits and is an important new approach not only to
              identifying gene function, but also for testing long-standing ecological and
              genetic hypotheses.  The proposed studies will be initiated by the P.I. as
              sabbatical research in the laboratory of Dr. Maarten Koornneef in Wageningen,
              the Netherlands, where she will learn how to use Arabidopsis for QTL analysis. 
              Application of QTL analysis to the problem of high-temperature tolerance in
              plants will represent a major new scientific direction for the P.I. that will
              greatly enhance her research program, in line with the guidelines of the POWRE
              program.  A secondary goal of the sabbatical leave will be to expand and
              solidify international collaborations with other groups in the U.K. and the
              Netherlands.  In particular, the P.I. will learn current computer methods for
              modeling the three-dimensional structure of proteins and then use these methods
              to model the structure of diverse members of the plant small-Hsp protein
              family.  This work will be performed in collaboration with Dr. Christine
              Slingsby, Birkbeck College, London.  POWRE support is essential to realize this
              unique career opportunity for enhanced training and international
              collaboration.
