Title       : Memory for Words in Noise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a0074721

Award Number: 0074721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aimee M. Surprenant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In our daily lives, we are constantly being bombarded by irrelevant auditory
              information in the form of machine sounds, background speech, and other
              disruptive noises.  The intensity and prevalence of this noise seems to have
              grown ever stronger as machines have become more important in our society.  At
              the same time, the majority of occupations have moved from relying mainly on
              physical ability to relying more on higher-level cognitive processing.  These
              two factors interact in ways that force us to consider the effect of increased
              noise on mental activity.  Attempting to quantify and predict the effects of
              noise in any form on our cognitive abilities has become a critical issue.  This
              project will examine the link between speech-processing abilities and
              individual differences in the ability to ignore irrelevant background
              sounds.
	
This project will consist of two major phases.  The first will be
              to assess individual differences in processing speech and non-speech sounds in
              different types of noise.  The second will use these measurements to relate the
              ease of identifying words in noise to the memory for those words.  The
              expectation is that if some individuals can process information more rapidly
              and with less effort than others, they can allocate those resources to
              rehearsing and elaborating upon the items in order to improve memory
              performance.  If each word is difficult to comprehend, it will take more effort
              to encode its meaning, resulting in poorer memory performance.  Thus, it is
              expected that speech-processing ability will predict the ability to remember
              items presented in noise.  In practical terms, then, we will be able to
              identify what types of noise are especially detrimental to memory performance
              and under what circumstances.  These results will be of interest to those
              designing work environments and can provide date relevant to efforts to
              ameliorate the negative consequences of noise.

This POWRE project will
              initiate a new line of research inquiry for Surprenant which, although related
              to her previous work, constitutes a significant departure while still being
              grounded in basic experimental research.  It should enhance her potential for
              advancement and leadership in her field.

