Title       : Mathematical Analysis of the Compositional Structure of Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0074276

Award Number: 0074276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1830000            (Estimated)
Investigator: David Mumford mumford@dam.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart A. Geman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Basilis Gidas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ulf Grenander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. McClure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator and his colleagues study mathematical, statistical, and
              computational questions motivated by the problem in computer vision of defining
              and computing "structural scene description," descriptions of the objects in a
              scene and their relations to each other.  The first goal is to obtain a
              theoretical understanding of the problem of inferring objects and their
              compositional structure, both in standard optical images and in laser range
              imagery and motion images.  The second goal is to test this understanding by
              developing effective algorithmsfor the statistical inference of this structure,
              algorithms that work with real data at reasonable speed on current computers. 
              The general approach is to formulate mathematical representations of patterns,
              typically compositional with a hierarchy of structures, to encode the
              variability of these structures in stochastic models, and to use the models to
              infer information about the image.  Standard stochastic models are rarely
              adequate, prompting the development of new classes of probability measures or
              completely new directions for traditional models.  Additionally, in the context
              of this application the team aims to develop mathematical, statistical, and
              computational ideas that are of broader use.  For example, compositional issues
              in vision are similar to ones in the grammars of language.  One aspect of the
              project studies this connection.

The investigator and his five colleagues
              continue their mathematical, statistical, and computational investigations of a
              range of problems motivated by image processing and computer vision.  The
              underlying question is simple enough: Here's an image, what is it an image of?
              Despite its simplicity, this is a hard question to answer.  The approach taken
              here is to decompose the image into different components in some hierarchical
              structure and to use statistical analysis to infer information about the image
              from the relationships of the components within the structure.  There are
              similarities with the grammatical structure of language, which the project
              explores.  Recognition of objects in an image is a fundamental problem for both
              computer systems and biological systems.  Advances are important for engineers
              developing computer vision applications, computer scientists seeking efficient
              algorithms in problems related to intelligent behavior of machines, and
              cognitive scientists studying human vision and language skills.  Results of the
              project are published on CD-ROM, allowing demonstration of the dynamic behavior
              of algorithms in ways impossible through traditional publication modes and
              offering new ways to exploit multi-media communications for both education and
              research purposes.

