Title       : Nanoscale Structure and Dynamics of Self-Organized Steps on Silicon Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a0074416

Award Number: 0074416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263835             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan P. Pelz pelz.2@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims for greater understanding of spontaneous formation,
              self-organization, and long-range pattern formation of steps on silicon
              surfaces. The approach includes: (1) Surface decomposition of diborane (B2H6)
              to directly add boron to the surface in a controlled manner, instead of using
              heavily boron-doped Si wafers. "Hot" scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) will
              be used to make real-time atomic-resolution measurements of B2H6 decomposition,
              boron incorporation (with and without an additional Si flux), and resulting
              atomic-scale step formation and/or surface roughening. (2) "Flattened" Si(001)
              substrates (with terraces up to 20 um wide) will be used to study long-range
              step organization phenomena so as to avoid complications imposed by "vicinal"
              steps. Flattened Si(001) substrates permit experiments to study directly the
              role of long-range relaxation effects in the step formation and organization
              process, and to determine the equilibrium shape of large-scale step
              "superstructures" that form on the terrace. (3) Low energy electron microscopy
              (LEEM) will be used for real-time studies of large-scale step formation as
              boron is added to the surface. A second line of research concerns large-scale
              organization of steps on Si(001) surfaces due to surface electromigration
              forces. Quantitative measurement and modeling studies of electromigration
              phenomena on Si(001) surfaces include several approaches. (1) "Dimpled" Si
              wafer substrates to directly study how electromigration phenomena depend on the
              angle between the local surface miscut and an applied current. (2) Detailed
              measurement and modeling of "crossing steps" on the Si(001) surface will be
              done to extract quantitative information about the "effective charge" (and its
              possible anisotropy) of surface silicon atoms. (3) LEEM measurements of surface
              electromigration phenomena will be conducted. Real-time measurements of
              crossing-step evolution will be used to directly test crossing-step models, and
              extract quantitative information about the important surface processes that
              produce surface electromigration phenomena. The research will make use of three
              existing ultra-high vacuum (UHV) STM facilities (a commercial
              variable-temperature STM system and two custom-built room-temperature STM
              systems), and an existing commercial atomic force microscopy (AFM) system.
              Collaborative studies at Arizona State University will use two separate UHV
              LEEM systems.
%%% 
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical
              area of materials science with high technological relevance. These studies will
              improve fundamental understanding of silicon surface processes, which are key
              to several issues in ultimate limits of silicon-based microelectronics
              miniaturization. Experimental tools are now available to allow atomic level
              observation of elementary surface processes which when better understood allow
              advances in fundamental science and technology. An important feature of the
              program is the integration of research and education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. 
*** 

