Title       : POWRE: Dark Matter Halos: Lensing Profiles and Merger Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0074728

Award Number: 0074728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne D. Cohn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1217,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0074728
Cohn

The structure in the universe evolves as the universe
              expands.  Small fluctuations present in the very early universe have grown
              under the influence of gravity and other forces to form all the stars,
              galaxies, superclusters, etc. that we see around us today.  Dr. Cohn will be
              investigating structure formation by concentrating on the properties of dark
              matter halos, that is, clustered dark matter.

Dr. Cohn will study profiles
              of dark matter by using data from observed strong gravitational lens systems in
              the case where the lens is a galaxy. In strong gravitational lensing, the mass
              of the galaxy has bent the light approaching us from a more distant source so
              much that we see multiple images of the source.  The positions and brightness
              of the multiple images of the source depend in part on how matter is
              distributed in the lensing galaxy, and thus these positions and fluxes can be
              analyzed to find the dark matter structure of the galaxy.  The collection of
              discovered lenses will be used to build up a statistical sample of mass
              profiles present in the universe at different eras and environments.  In
              addition, if the source varies with time, the images will vary as well. The
              time delay between the image variations can be used, together with the mass
              profile for the lensing galaxy, to calculate a fundamental cosmological
              parameter, the Hubble constant, which characterizes the rate of expansion of
              the universe today.

Dr. Cohn will also study mergers of dark matter halos on
              larger scales by using numerical simulations.  She will simulate the
              gravitational collapse, and thus the growth of initial small fluctuations, to
              model and study large structures of the size of galaxy groups and clusters. The
              focus of these simulations will be to characterize the merging properties of'
              the clustered dark matter and to quantify the amount and importance of merging
              in the evolution of these structures.

This project is funded by the Division
              of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.
***



