Title       : Terabit Lookups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0074004

Award Number: 0074004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Varghese varghese@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Network protocols lookup state using a number of data structures for
              functions such as IP lookups (e.g., tries), bridge lookups (e.g., hash tables),
              and packet filtering (e.g., Pathfinder).  Network lookups are a key bottleneck
              for Internet routers today.  As Internet link speeds move to 10 Gbps (OC-192)
              and 40 Gbps (OC-768), state lookups must complete in tens of nanoseconds.  The
              researcher  argues in this proposal that solutions to such next generation
              lookup problems must span a number of areas from algorithms to computer
              architecture.   The proposal is devoted to investigating such crosscutting
              issues that arise in the context of next generation network lookups.
    
              Current lookup technology that uses external DRAM (Dynamic RAM) cannot scale to
              this speeds; thus
Terabit lookups will require the use of on-chip or off-chip
              SRAM (Static RAM).  Such memory is limited by either expense or manufacturing
              process | e.g., on-chip SRAM of 16 Mbits is considered optimistic.  In this
              proposal, the researcher considers the issues involved in dealing with such
              state lookups at Terabit speeds using limited fast memory while providing
              provable guarantees.
     An important issue  considered in this proposal is
              SRAM memory utilization: if the lookup chip is to provide guarantees about the
              amount of state (e.g., number of IP prefixes) it can handle, the resarcher
              shows that the lookup chip must use a memory allocator which can guarantee a
              provable memory utilization ratio.  However, all conventional memory allocation
              algorithms (e.g., First Fit, Best Fit, Buddy System) only guarantee poor worst
              case utilizations:  for example, for requests of size 32 standard allocators
              can only guarantee a utilization ratio of 1/log2 32 = 20% because of possible
              fragmention.  The proposal introduces new problem-specific memory allocation
              schemes that can be tuned to provide worst-case memory utilization ratios close
              to 100%.  For example, a chip that does IP lookups using the researcher's new
              allocation schemes can guarantee to handle almost 5 times the number of
              prefixes that can be handled by a conventional allocator, and yet can allow
              insert/delete times of around 100 microseconds.  The researcher's
schemes use
              new algorithms; optimal versions of the researcher's schemes also require new
              SRAM memory designs that allow shifted access in addition to normal word
              access.
     The research also proposes to investigate other issues including
              the interaction of memory allocation with pipelining (i.e., dynamically
              allocating memory to stages), and the introduction of new lookup primitives
              that can support accounting and Quality of Service.  For example, the
              researcher wishes to investigate a novel paradigm for pipelining a trie based
              on depth rather than height which appears to have a more bounded use of memory.
               As a second example,the researcher wishes to investigate the possibility of
              doing prefix lookups that contain a cost field; such a lookup can be used to
              update a accumulated cost field per input link.  The proposal seeks to
              investigate these and other issues that arise when designing Terabit lookups,
              to search for new mechanisms, and implement, evaluate, and fine-tune the
              researcher's new ideas.

