Title       : Flow Control for Multimedia Streaming Over the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0074012

Award Number: 0074012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Injong Rhee rhee@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Transmitting multimedia over shared network paths calls for end-to-end flow
              control because of expected
growth of multimedia data transmitted over the
              Internet.  However, Internet and its access technologies are
diverse ranging
              over high-speed optical networks, satellite networks, cable, low-speed modem,
              and wireless
networks.  Flow control over diverse network environments is
              difficult because assumptions commonly made
for traditional networks, such as
              symmetry, do not hold.  Asymmetry in the bandwidth and delays of forward
and
              return paths over the range of 1600:1 to 3000:1 can be observed in most home
              access networks such
as cable or ADSL lines, and satellites.  Multicast also
              do not guarantee symmetry in forward multicast and
return unicast routes.  In
              these asymmetric networks, packet losses and delays occurring in return
              paths
severely degrade the performance of existing round trip based protocols,
              such as TCP, resulting in loss in
bandwidth utilization, fairness, and
              scalability.
     The objective of the proposed work is to develop, verify
              analytically and experimentally, and implement
a suite of end-to-end flow
              control protocols for real-time streaming applications.  The researchers will
              study both unicast and multicast flow control.  The developed protocols are
              evaluated based on fairness, TCP-friendliness, stability and scalability. 
              These properties must hold regardless of the types of networks, or
              specifically, whether networks are symmetric or asymmetric in bandwidth and
              delays.  The researchers consider only end-to-end transport-level flow control
              in which flow control decisions are made based on the traffic characteristics
              observed only at the end points.
     The researchers view that the
              performance problem of round-trip based flow control mainly originates from the
              tight coupling of forward and reverse path conditions into flow control of both
              forward (i.e., data) and reverse (i.e., feedback) path traffic.  This notion
              does not hold when the two paths exhibit severe asymmetry.  The researchers
              propose a complementary approach to the problem.   Their approach is to
              completely decouple the conditions of both paths (e.g., congestion and delays)
              from the end-to-end considerations of flow control, and to apply separate flow
              control for each path.  They rationalize this approach by noting that most
              multimedia transmissions are strictly one directional, and open-loop due to
              their real-time and loss-tolerant natures.  Thus, conditions on return paths
              should not affect the performance of multimedia transmission.
  To achieve
              TCP-friendliness with little use of return paths, the researchers propose a
              technique called TCP emulation at receivers (TEAR).  TEAR allows receivers to
              detect every TCP congestion signal, such as packet losses and timeouts, as if
              it happens in a TCP sender with the perfect reverse path (no delay and
              congestion on the return path).  Using the signal, receivers emulate TCP's flow
              control to estimate the throughput of TCP under the same operating conditions
              present in forward paths.  The advantages of TEAR are that it can estimate
TCP
              throughput at any environment (of forward paths) where TCP can run, and that it
              inherits the fairness
and stability of TCP while filtering out its undesirable
              traits.
     Estimated TCP throughput values at receivers are used to control
              the receiving rates of receivers in
unicast and multicast.  The following
              three major research agendas are proposed.
     1.  The researchers plan to
              develop unicast flow control techniques using TEAR.  A notion of bounded
              fairness to "uni-directional" TCP is proposed.  The goal is to develop a rate
              adjustment scheme that is provably stable and TCP-friendly under various
              network environments.
     2.  The researchers plan to develop flow control
              for receiver-driven layered multicast (RLM). RLMensures scalability and
              inter-receiver fairness by allowing receivers to determine their own receiving
              rates independently.  However, its stability and TCP friendliness have not been
              proven.  Using TEAR, the researchers will investigate ways to improve these
              properties under heterogeneous network environments.
     3.  For multimedia
              data transmission that is not amenable to layering, the researchers plan to
              develop flow control techniques for sender-driven single rate multicast.  They
              will  study the stable and fair flow control mechanisms for this type of flow
              control, and investigate tradeoffs among scalability, bandwidth
              utilization,
and responsiveness to emerging congestion.

