Title       : POWRE: Nonlinear Dynamics of Self-Propagating Polymerization Fronts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0074965

Award Number: 0074965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura K. Gross gross@math.uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will characterize fundamental propagation regimes in frontal
              polymerization.  A weakly nonlinear analysis will capture the development of
              unstable modes normal to the reaction front.  The
investigation will partition
              the parameter space into regions that correspond to steady, periodic, and
              non-periodic propagation.  Asymptotic results will guide numerical
              simulations.

Such pattern prediction is one of the most important keys to
              understanding a physical system.  The phenomenon under consideration occurs in
              a test tube initially filled with a well-mixed combination of a monomer and a
              thermally unstable initiator.  Increasing the temperature at one end of the
              tube causes chemical conversion to begin.  The released heat diffuses into the
              reactants, causing wave propagation via the usual thermal mechanism.  In
              free-radical polymerization, the reactions take place in a narrow zone
              that
advances into the monomer/initiator mix, leaving a polymer in its wake. 
              The behavior of the reaction front depends on the geometry of the system,
              properties of the material, and the reaction mechanisms.  In stable cases, the
              front flattens and settles into propagating at a uniform rate.  Exhaustive
              analytical techniques will reveal the conditions that produce the various forms
              of unstable propagation.  In particular, they will distinguish between
              regularly-repeating acceleration-deceleration cycles and erratic propagation. 
              The study
will also accurately describe the qualitative shapes of the
              interface between the polymerized and unreacted regions.  The details of
              various cases will be examined computationally.  The work, which makes one of
              the first forays into the nonlinear analysis of polymer processes, will lend
              insight into self-propagating free-radical polymerization fronts observed in
              experiments, paving the way for future manufacturing methods. 

This POWRE
              project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
              (OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
  
