Title       : Microstructural Analysis of Binary Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0074325

Award Number: 0074325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Sulsky sulsky@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yu-Lin Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Tin-Lead (Sn-Pb) solders are widely used as soldering
materials in
              semiconductor devices.  The as-solidified structure
can naturally change over
              time; however, the evolution can also
be driven by thermal or mechanical
              loads.  Changes in
microstructure, in particular, locally coarsened regions,
              have
been observed as precursors to the formation of cracks, and
ultimately
              of failure.  Time-dependent, microstructural changes,
coupled to mechanical
              straining and damage evolution, must be
considered for realistic mathematical
              models and numerical
simulations.  The investigator and her colleague study,
              through
mathematical modeling and numerical simulation, the fundamentals
of
              microstructure evolution and its influence on material failure
in Sn-Pb solder
              joints.  In the process, they develop the
mathematical model and numerical
              capability more generally to
treat the many coupled processes that influence
              the overall
strength and integrity of a binary alloy.
     Microelectronic
              components are generally attached to printed
circuit boards using solder.  The
              solder joint can serve as the
mechanical as well as the electrical connection.
               It has been
estimated that on the order of 10,000,000,000,000 solder
              joints
are produced each year.  Damage to solder joints is a primary
failure
              mechanism in electronic components.  Even on the shelf,
daily or yearly
              temperature cycles, physical handling, occasional
bumps, chemical reactions or
              radiation can cause damage.  Under
operating conditions, thermal fluctuations
              or mechanical
vibration can be even more severe.  For expensive devices,
              in
critical applications, improved joint integrity can have
enormously
              beneficial consequences, both economically and in
terms of reliability of
              components.  The modeling undertaken here
can play a crucial role in providing
              guidance for maintenance of
critical components because it is practically
              impossible to
examine microscopically individual, in-service joints
              for
potential failure.  The theoretical framework developed here will
also be
              readily applicable to analyzing self-assembling behavior
and degradation in
              some nano-scale materials and devices.
