Title       : POWRE: DYNAMIC FLOW CONTROL FOR URBAN FREIGHT MOVEMENT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0074864

Award Number: 0074864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice R. Daniel daniel@njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0317000   Urban Technology                        
Program Ref : 1038,1592,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0074864
Daniel
A POWRE award supports an investigation of the use of dynamic
              flow control as a mechanism for integrating management systems for freight
              movement with management systems for roadway operations. In the next twenty
              years, domestic and international marine trade is expected to more than double
              with most of this growth expected in marine containerized trade.  Many of the
              nation's leading ports are located in densely developed urban areas where the
              availability of additional space for piers, container storage, railroad tracks
              and roadways for trucks to handle increases in freight traffic is limited.  To
              handle this expected growth, the intermodal freight transportation system must
              be planned, built and operated in a way that emphasizes optimal utilization of
              existing resources.  The intermodal system should also be designed to ensure
              that connections between modes provide a smooth flow of goods through an
              integrated system.  Before these objectives can be achieved, tools are needed
              to represent intermodal transportation as an integrated system.  Dynamic flow
              control offers an approach for integrating the components of intermodal freight
              transportation into a system. 

The objective of the control problem is to
              design a controller that will optimize the flow of intermodal freight from the
              terminal to a distribution center.  This type of problem has its basis in
              classical automatic control theory and has been applied in many areas including
              rail and air traffic control.  Few applications of dynamic flow control have
              been made in the field of intermodal freight transportation. The goal of this
              procedure is to determine the set of inputs that, given the state of the system
              and disturbances within the system, will result in the objectives being
              fulfilled.  The system includes the components that make up the intermodal
              freight transportation network for receiving and delivering goods. The system
              will be limited to include intermodal components necessary for truck transport
              of goods from a shipper through an urban port facility and for distribution
              within an urban area.  The intermodal connections are linked within the system
              using information about each component of the intermodal system and the roadway
              system.  The inputs into the control problem include variables describing the
              volume of intermodal freight movement, the requirements or criteria of the
              truck pick-up and delivery service, port and terminal activity and roadway
              conditions.  The research will identify a preliminary control system for
              intermodal freight transportation, identify the data requirements for the
              control system, develop models describing the state of the freight management
              system and the roadway system, and finally evaluate the control system for an
              intermodal freight movement from the Port of New York and New Jersey to a
              destination in northern New Jersey and New York.

This research initiates a
              new line of investigation while allowing the researcher to achieve career goals
              and secure a visible and prominent role in the area of freight movement in
              northeastern United States. Recent developments within the researcher's home
              institution and state provide opportunities for the research to be utilized on
              a broad platform.  The development of an intermodal freight corridor in the
              researcher's home state, the establishment of an International Intermodal
              Transportation Corridor Center, and the initiation of a Logistics Engineering
              program at the researcher's home institution will provide opportunities to
              explore additional research and educational opportunities in the area of
              freight management and logistics.  As the PI has recently relocated to her
              present research institution, funding provided through this program will allow
              the researcher to broaden her focus area to include intermodal freight
              transportation as an area of investigation, while adapting her research to her
              home institution and to local and national interests.
***  

