Title       : FRG: A Mechanical Signature of the Polarization of Light: The Opto-Mechanical
               Effect in Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0074624

Award Number: 0074624
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $568898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Himanshu Jain hj00@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Drabold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Numerous applications of advanced photonics require conversion of an optical
              signal to mechanical signal.  Currently such signal transformation is
              accomplished only with the intermediate use of appropriate electronics at a
              significant cost and loss of signal quality.  The recent report of the
              opto-mechanical effect (OME) in a chalcogenide (AsSe) glass film predicts the
              possibility of faithfully transforming optical information into mechanical
              signal, bypassing the intervention of electronics.  The OME also shows
              potential use in nano-devices such as nano- actuators, nano-sensors,
              nano-switches etc.  Clearly, the discovery of OME has potential of starting a
              new area of materials science and make significant impact on technology. 
              However, at present even the defining parameters and the fundamental origin of
              OME are not known.  They are the subject of this Focused Research Group (FRG)
              proposal. It is built on the initial success of a Small Grant for Exploratory
              Research (SGER) provided by NSF less than a year ago for experiments at Lehigh,
              in collaboration with the Cambridge group that discovered the effect.  From the
              project, an atomistic understanding of OME by combining theoretical simulations
              with the experimental observations of light-induced changes in the electronic
              and physical structures of glass, and the direct observations of the effect as
              a function of various parameters will be obtained. Three model chalcogenide
              glass systems will be studied, with the intent of using the new data for
              developing superior compositions with stronger effect and faster kinetics.  The
              OME is a vector optical phenomenon (depending on the E vector), which is
              superimposed on scalar light-induced changes in the structure of glass.  Using
              an improvised setup, the PIs will establish the microscopic origin of the
              former by polarized x-rays from a synchrotron.  Naturally the understanding of
              scalar effects will be a valuable byproduct, which will help clarify various
              other light-induced phenomena in similar glasses, such as photo-darkening,
              photo-expansion, photo-melting, photo-plasticity, photo-crystallization, etc. 
              

This project will study a newly discovered phenomenon, the optomechnical
              effect, in glasses.  This new phenomenon has potential to radically improve the
              quality of telecommunications.  In addition, it has potential applications in
              extremely small devices.  The project combines complementary expertise of two
              experimental groups (H. Jain at Lehigh University and S.R. Elliott at Cambridge
              University in the United Kingdom) and one theory group (D.A. Drabold at Ohio
              University) as Principal Investigators. It will also provide to several
              students and postdocs an unusual opportunity for international,
              interdisciplinary materials research integrating experiments with theory.  The
              students will periodically meet and exchange places and conduct work under the 
              supervision of the three PIs.  This Focussed Research Group project is
              co-funded by the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials Research and the
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences.
***
