Title       : POWRE: Assessing Validity of Self-Reported Antisocial Behaviors and Delinquency
               Among a Sample of Filipino Youth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074843

Award Number: 0074843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila R. Maxwell maxwel22@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The growth of knowledge about crime and criminality has focused generally on
              Western societies, particularly the United States.  Theories and techniques
              used in these societies to understand violence, crime and criminality have
              seldom been assessed in non-Western settings.  In this POWRE project, a program
              of research and educational activities is presented to develop methods and
              research protocols that will help produce useful and valid information about
              antisocial behaviors and delinquency in Filipino society.  This project builds
              upon a pilot study that developed an instrument and tested the feasibility of
              conducting a self-report survey of grade school children in the Philippines. 
              The proposed project builds upon this study by: (a) conducting a follow-up
              survey of a sample of youth who responded to the pilot study; (b) conducting
              interviews of the youth's parents and teachers to validate self-reported
              behaviors; (c) conducting focus groups on selected teachers, parents, and
              community stakeholders (such as the police and baranggay officials) to provide
              cultural context and better understanding of survey results and inform future
              studies; and, (d) conducting educational seminars to promote the exchange of
              ideas and growth among project staff .  The seminars will also involve
              interested students, scholars, and community stakeholders.  This will provide
              an avenue for the investigator to disseminate current knowledge about
              delinquency theories and the empirical development of this field in Western
              societies, and also learn about the relevance of these theories in Filipino
              society through discussions with participants in the seminar.  At least one of
              these seminars will discuss results of the completed pilot study.
              

Re-interviewing a sample of youth from the pilot study allows a realistic
              assessment of workable tracking methods, attrition, and the feasibility of
              conducting a panel study of youth in the Philippines.  Because studies of
              delinquency in non-Western countries are few and far between and because
              methodologies employed in these studies have often been based on convenient
              techniques, the information that will be derived from the systematic follow-up
              of youth in this study provides relevant methodological groundwork that can be
              used in future studies of different samples in the same or different
              populations.  Likewise, testing the utility of using informants like teachers
              and parents to assess the veracity of self-reported antisocial/delinquent
              behaviors adds to the body of knowledge on how these techniques are received in
              different cultures and how they can be employed. 

The preparatory nature of
              the project is appropriate as a POWRE proposal and is consistent with previous
              projects funded through POWRE.  Results of this study will build a more
              definitive structure and information on how studies of a similar nature may be
              conducted in the Philippines, and generally in non-Western settings.  POWRE
              support will also augment the investigator's knowledge and skills to conduct
              research in settings outside of the United States and will provide her with the
              competence and competitiveness necessary to obtain external funding to conduct
              further studies on crime and criminality in non-Western settings.   



