Title       : POWRE: Quantum Dot Studies of the Two-Dimensional Superconductor-Insulator
               Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0074930

Award Number: 0074930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75407              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. Watson swatson@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the fabrication and properties study of quantum dot
              devices formed from GaAs/Al0.3Ga0.7As heterostructure substrates for in-situ
              deposition of thin film superconductors. Two geometries will be tested, one for
              capacitive coupling between the superconductor and two-dimensional electron
              gas/quantum dot, the other for direct coupling through a tunnel barrier.
              Initial experiments will focus on the role of dissipation in reducing phase
              fluctuations near the su-perconductor-insulator transition, particularly in
              films with different length scales of disorder. Traditional superconductivity
              measurements involve macroscopic probes that average over the properties of an
              entire sample. Mesoscale structures offer the unique ability to probe materials
              on length scales at which quantum effects dominate. Coupled
              superconductor-quantum dot structures will provide a powerful means of both
              analyzing the superconductor-insulator transition and altering and studying
              electron transport on mesoscopic length scales. 
%%% 
This is a research
              enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program. The POWRE grant creates an opportunity
              to initiate a significant research project that is not feasible to develop in
              its entirety at the PI's home institution, Middlebury College. Access to both
              state-of-the-art facilities at Harvard and researchers who are experts on
              mesoscopic physics and superconductivity will make possible the develop-ment
              and initial testing of devices that will form the basis of future experiments
              performed at Middlebury. This project will provide support for a pre-tenure
              leave year. During this time the PI will lay the foundations for a significant
              research program that will both lead to the advancement of knowledge and
              constitute the research component of student education. The research is
              ex-pected to contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
              level of special relevance to the behavior of superconducting materials, and to
              assist with the integration of research and education. The project is
              co-supported by the Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities).
***

