Title       : POWRE: Carbon-13 Heterogeneity in Devonian-Mississippian Marine Shales:
               Integration of Density-Gradient Centrifugation (DGC) and Organic Petrography
               into Isotopic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0074840

Award Number: 0074840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74678              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Rimmer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074840
Rimmer

Organic petrography allows the identification and
              quantification of organic components (macerals) in sedimentary rocks, and as
              such can indicate varying levels and types of terrestrial and marine inputs to
              basins.  Understanding the carbon isotopic composition of Devonian-and
              Mississippian-age organic components is key to understanding cyclicity in the
              organic-rich shales units of central Kentucky that show variations on the order
              of dm, one-to-two-meter, and larger scales.  Before arguments can be made to
              attribute variations in delta C-13 values to global changes in CO2, to changing
              redox conditions, or to variations in organic productivity levels, the impact
              of varying amounts and types of marine and terrestrial organic input must be
              evaluated.  The research will address these issues as they relate to Upper
              Devonian/Lower Mississippian organic-rich shales of the Appalachian Basin. 
              Consisting of Type II kerogen, these rocks contain a mixture of marine and
              terrestrial components (macerals), rather than purely marine organic matter. 
              Specifically, carbon isotope analysis will be combined with petrographic
              analysis of both whole-rock and density-gradient fractions of kerogen
              concentrates for carbon-rich and carbon-poor intervals of these shales.  Key to
              this work is the ability of density-gradient centrifugation to segregate
              kerogen into its component macerals.  Kerogen in these shales contains at least
              two marine components (alginite and bituminite) and two terrestrial components
              (vitrinite and inertinite).  The PI will identify amounts and variations in the
              type of macerals that exist in these rocks and their respective carbon isotopic
              compositions.  Such data will be used to further elucidate cyclical changes
              observed in these sediments.  This work also has important implications
              regarding the interpretation of long-term variations in the stable carbon
              isotope composition of organic matter in the Paleozoic, and inferences that may
              be made relative to CO2 in the atmosphere.  Funding at this time from the POWRE
              program will allow this investigator to reinvigorate her research program, and
              establish/re-establish research collaborations after an extended time in
              administration (7 years).  It also represents a natural progression and growth
              of the investigator's research into a new area (that of stable carbon
              isotopes).  The research will also make an important contribution in the field
              of stable carbon isotope research.

