Title       : SGER: Precision Wire Saw Machining of Ceramic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0074426

Award Number: 0074426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Shih ajshih@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) is to study the
              precision diamond wire saw machining of non-electrically conductive ceramic
              materials.  Wire saw machining technologies have been developed to slice large
              diameter Si or SiC ingots into thin wafers.  The thin, less than 0.2 mm in
              diameter, fixed-abrasive diamond wires and wire saw machines with rocking
              motion have recently been developed.  This new type of diamond wire has not
              only improved the material removal rate in wire saw machining but also expanded
              the types of work-material from just Si, SiC, zirconia, to other
              non-electrically conductive ceramic materials.  This project proposes to
              acquire a laboratory rocking-motion wire saw machine to study the mechanics of
              wire saw machining and to investigate effects of five major process parameters
              on wafer warp and thickness variation.  These parameters are:  (1) wire speed,
              (2) forward/backward wire motion, (3) coolant, (4) wire diameter and diameter
              variation, and (5) part infeed rate.  Two- and  four-axis contour wire sawing
              will also be explored in this project.  Similar to the wire EDM process for
              electrically conductive materials, the diamond wire saw machining could provide
              flexible and cost-effective methods to machine complicated shapes for
              non-electrically conductive materials.  Since the three targeted
              work-materials, Si, SiC, and zirconia, are all semi-transparent to the infrared
              signal, a through-the-workpiece temperature measurement using the infrared
              video camera will be experimented.

Success in this research project will
              lead to a better understanding of the fixed-abrasive diamond wire saw machining
              process.  Results of this research could also expand the use of wire saw
              machining processes to a wide-range of non-electrically conductive, advanced
              engineering materials and to generate more
complicated shapes.

