Title       : POWRE: A New Approach to Avian Communication: Olfactory Anatomy, Odor Chemistry
               and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a0074817

Award Number: 0074817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie C. Hagelin hagelin@sp.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Although birds are among the best-studied vertebrate group, extraordinarily
              little is known about their sense of smell.  In fact, chemical signals are
              known to modulate important aspects of behavior in every vertebrate group
              (reptiles, amphibians, fish, mammals) except birds.  The proposed research will
              examine the role of chemical communication in an Alaskan seabird group, known
              as the auklets.  Within this group, one species, the Crested Auklet, has an
              unusual "tangerine-like" odor on its feathers that appears to be tightly linked
              with mating behavior.  The study has three objectives: to examine in detail the
              nasal anatomy of auklet species, to study the biochemistry of Crested Auklet
              feathers, and to determine any behavioral response of Crested Auklets to their
              feather odor.  The aim of this research is to integrate anatomy, chemistry, and
              behavior in a model bird group, as a means of understanding the role of
              chemical communication in birds.

     The use of chemical communication has
              the potential to alter fundamental assumptions about bird behavior, as
              scientists have typically only considered signals that involve vision or
              hearing.  Since nasal microstructure and odor chemistry are completely
              unstudied in birds, the results of this research are also applicable to studies
              of sensory perception, adaptation, and biochemistry.  Such data will increase
              our knowledge of birds and will enable comparisons with other animal groups,
              such as mammals.  Finally, responses to odors appear to be involved in several
              important bird behaviors, such as courtship, chick rearing, and predator
              detection, which can influence reproductive success or mortality. Thus,
              information relating to odor response in birds is applicable to species
              conservation, management and situations involving animal husbandry.  This POWRE
              award will permit the PI to develop expertise in several techniques that will
              support this integrated multidisciplinary study.

