Title       : POWRE: Molecular Biological Techniques for Environmental Microbiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a0074827

Award Number: 0074827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72383              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly D. Goodwin kgoodwin@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The research goal of this POWRE award is to obtain the equipment and training
              necessary to apply molecular biological methods to research in the applicant's
              laboratory. These new skills and methodologies will complement, expand, and
              enhance research activities in environmental microbiology and will enable the
              applicant to explore new lines of research inquiry. Molecular biological
              methods will be applied to current research that investigates the
              biodegradation of ozone-depleting halomethanes and the biodegradation of
              carcinogenic polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). 16S rDNA gene analyses
              will be used to determine the phylogeny of halomethane- and PAH-degrading
              cultures. PCR will be used to amplify 16S rDNA and functional genes from total
              community DNA extracted from natural populations and enrichment cultures. Clone
              libraries will be constructed and clones will be analyzed using restriction
              fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). The PCR products will be grouped based on
              their RFLP patterns, and representative clones from each group will be
              sequenced and analyzed. In an iterative process, primer synthesis will be
              refined, as needed based on sequence results. The applicant will learn needed
              skills and in the process identify and characterize bacteria that mediate
              biodegradation of halomethanes and PAHs. Presently, there are no researchers at
              the University of Miami's Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science
              (UM/RSMAS) that apply molecular biological methods to environmental
              microbiology. However, a RSMAS colleague, Dr. Jack Fell, has graciously
              volunteered to oversee the applicant's training. Dr. Fell's laboratory uses
              molecular techniques to study yeast, but has the expertise to mentor the
              application of molecular techniques to bacterial studies. Dr. Goodwin plans to
              teach these methods to her students and thus provide them with experience that
              will advance their future careers. This opportunity will aid the scientific
              advancement of both the applicant and her students. Incorporating these methods
              into the applicant's laboratory will foster collaboration with other
              researchers, thus enhancing Dr. Goodwin's scientific prominence within her
              academic setting and field. 
