Title       : Cesium-Catalyzed Restructuring of Amorphous Nanoporous Carbon into Well-Ordered
               Fullerene-Like Nanodomains: A Soft Chemical Transition of a Solid from Disorder
               to Order
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0074649

Award Number: 0074649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry C. Foley hankfoley@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jingguang G. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: Cesium-Catalyzed Restructuring of Amorphous
              Nanoporous Carbon into Well-Ordered Fullerene-Like Nanodomains: A Soft Chemical
              Transition of a Solid from Disorder to Order
Proposal
              Number:	CTS-0074649
Principal Investigator: Henry Foley
Institution:
              Pennsylvania State University  

The goal of this proposal is to investigate
              a low temperature process for converting amorphous carbons into more ordered
              structures.  In this work the PIs will continue the investigation of their
              discovery that elemental cesium catalyzes the conversion of non-graphitizing
              porous carbon and carbon fibers to forms such as intercalated graphite and
              tubular, nested polyhedral structures.  One objective of the proposal is to
              understand the reaction through kinetic measurements and electronic structure
              calculations on model systems.  A second objective is to extend this process to
              other alkali metal catalysts and other forms of carbon.  A combination of ultra
              high vacuum studies and ex situ techniques is proposed; these studies may
              suggest other routes to carbon ordering.  If electron transport is responsible
              for the transformation, processing with low-energy electrons may provide a
              similar structural enhancement.  The near-edge x-ray absorption spectroscopy
              experiments are intended to provide the needed insights into the siting of
              cesium in the structures.  The materials to be studied, nanostructured carbons,
              offer potential applications in a wide range of areas.  A low temperature route
              to such materials would represent a major accomplishment of great potential
              significance.  A selective, controllable route to produce nanotubes might make
              their widespread application feasible.



