Title       : POWRE: Early Experience and Neurosteroid Response to Stress: A Behavioral
               Neuroscience Laboratory Enhancement Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0074627

Award Number: 0074627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Betty Zimmerberg Betty.Zimmerberg@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9125,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Why can some people respond quickly in stressful situations, calm down and think
              clearly, while others are immobilized with fear and anxiety?  Are early
              childhood experiences responsible for these individual differences in emotional
              and cognitive coping behaviors?  Although much is known about the physiological
              stress responses in the body, there is very little evidence about how the brain
              responds to stress.  And while it is evident that children who experience
              traumatic events have trouble learning and coping, there is very little
              information about compensatory mechanisms and the role of early experience in
              organizing these pathways.  Professor Zimmerberg proposes that a "stress
              compensatory" system may be mediated by the neurosteroid 3-alpha-hydroxy,
              5-alpha-pregnan-20-one (allopregnanolone), a progesterone metabolite
              synthesized in the brains of both males and females in response to stress.  She
              has established that this progesterone metabolite reduces fearful behavior in
              novel, stressful situations in both young and adult subjects.  Individual
              differences in the allopregnanolone-modulated stress response in neonates and
              adults were demonstrated to be influenced by both pre- and post-natal stress
              experiences, as well as by selective breeding.  This grant will elucidates one
              possible mechanism underlying the short and long-term consequences of early
              stress by studying neurosteroid/GABAa binding parameters in selected brain
              regions.
This research will lead to a better understanding of the neural
              mechanisms underlying our ability to dampen the physiological responses to
              fearful or overwhelming situations so we can adapt and develop more calm and
              cogent reactions.  In a society where stress leads too often to rage,
              understanding the basic biological responses to stress and their control will
              have broad benefits to educators, parents, and public policy makers.
The POWRE
              activities are organized around extended visits to two host institutions to
              allow Dr. Zimmerberg, who is stepping down from major administrative and
              curricular demands at a small undergraduate college, to upgrade her teaching
              and research at a critical mid-career stage.  At the Center for Behavioral
              Neuroscience at Emory University, she will gain mastery of new molecular and
              imaging approaches, which are advancing the study of behavior.  Second, a new
              international collaboration with the Laboratory of Experimental Neurobiology at
              the University of Cagliari will be established as part of this project.

