Title       : Electromechanical Wave Propagation in Large Electric Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0074098

Award Number: 0074098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Thorp thorp@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Seyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal deals with development of a macro-scale analytical tool for
              electromechanical wave propagation phenomena in electric networks. The proposal
              and the activity proposed are based on the assumption that their previous
              research on the wave propagation theory is valid and accepted for power system
              transient analysis. 

The problem addressed in this proposal is that of
              developing efficient models for the study of electromechanical wave propagation
              on very large scale, extensive networks.  This phenomenon is poorly understood,
              but could have significant harmful effects on the national power system in the
              future.  The PIs draw on their extensive relevant experience to outline a
              comprehensive novel approach to modeling and studying of the problem.  The
              proposal is to study the network as a continuum in which sources and sinks with
              their pertinent; physical characteristics are located at specific points. Tools
              developed in other fields, such as wave propagation in plasmas, are utilized,
              along with the availability of data from synchronized satellite-based
              simultaneous measurement of rotor angles over wide areas. Work on this project
              has been underway for several years, in which time techniques have been
              developed for obtaining the continuum model from real time system data.  The
              proposed methodology could turn out to be widely applicable and of significant
              usefulness as restructuring advances toward much more complex operation than
              has ever been envisioned in the past.Investigators possess necessary skills,
              facilities and expertise required to successfully perform the proposed research
              effort.

