Title       : POWRE: Rational Choice and Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0074593

Award Number: 0074593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy A. Thelen thelen@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The field of comparative politics, and political science more generally, has
              grown increasingly polarized around two competing approaches - historical
              institutionalism and rational choice.  These two approaches embrace different
              "foundational" assumptions and employ different methods.  Rational choice
              theorists have appropriated and applied methods drawn from economics, while
              historical institutionalists draw insights and strategies from sociology,
              especially historical sociology.  This POWRE award will allow the investigator
              to acquire competence in game theory and basic mathematical modeling in the
              social sciences.  The skills she seeks to acquire will complement her already
              strong foundation in the alternative, historical-institutional approach to
              political science. 

The investigator is interested in bringing these
              techniques to bear on the empirical problems around which her work is currently
              organized, as well as in engaging current methodological debates in her field
              on the basis of a foundation in different approaches.   One project is
              historical, and explores the origins of cross-national differences in
              vocational training systems.  The other has a more contemporary focus, and
              addresses the contemporary consequences of cross-national differences in labor
              institutions and politics.  Both of these studies involve precisely the kinds
              of problems (collective action dilemmas, for example) that have been central
              concerns for game theorists.  They thus provide an ideal context in which to
              blend two approaches - game theoretic and historical institutional - that are
              frequently viewed as alternatives in the literature.

In line with the goals
              of the POWRE program, this training will substantially advance the
              investigator's career.  In addition to the contributions to her own substantive
              research agenda, NSF funding to acquire greater competence in game theory and
              basic mathematical modeling for political science will enable her to move
              beyond engaging contemporary methodological debates primarily as a
              "representative" of the historical-institutional approach.  This training will
              put her in a good position to explore common ground and to assess the relative
              strengths of each approach, and in so doing, to probe the prospects for a more
              synthetic approach to comparative political science.

