Title       : Diophantine Approximation and Arithmetic of Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0074531

Award Number: 0074531
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wolfgang Schmidt Wolfgang.Schmidt@Colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Proposer intends to work on a number of diophantine questions,
              with
particular emphasis on mixed polynomial-exponential type equations
              in
several variables, and on Diophantine approximation in
              positive
characteristic.  For polynomial-exponential equations, the goal will
              be
to obtain bounds for the number of solutions, which are independent of
the
              coefficients of the equations.  As for approximation in fields of
power series
              of positive characteristic, the aim will be to exhibit new
classes of
              algebraic series with explicit continued fraction expansions,
and to obtain
              new information on "Roth exponents".  The Proposer
further plans to address
              the question (connected with a former conjecture
of Artin) of how many
              variables are needed to guarantee that a form of
degree  d  with p-adic
              coefficients has a nontrivial zero, and he is
interested in a certain question
              on polynomials with applications to
Sidon sequences.

With the advent of
              computers, and in modern cryptography, ``discrete''
mathematical questions, in
              particular questions involving integers, have
turned out to be of increasing
              importance.  The Proposer intends to
continue his work on "Diophantine
              equations", i.e., to study integer
solutions of equations.  Whereas most work
              up to now has been on
polynomial equations, the new project will also involve
              exponential
equations, involving terms with ``exponentially fast'' growth. 
              There
will be applications to linear recurrence sequences, of which the
              best
known is the Fibonacci sequence, which occurs, e.g., as data relating
              to
some plants. The approximation of more complicated numbers by the more
              simple
"rational numbers"  (i.e., ordinary fractions) is at the forefront
              of
much current work.  For instance, how well can the number  "pi" 
              be
approximated?  The Proposer intends to work on the analogous question,
              on
how well a more general function can be approximated by the
              simpler
rational functions.  Again of particular interest here is the
              discrete
(positive characteristic) case.
