Title       : Plant Secondary Metabolites as Mediators of Trophic Interactions in a Tropical
               Forest Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2001     
File        : a0074806

Award Number: 0074806
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Dyer ldyer@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074806
Dyer
Quantifying and comparing the impacts of plant resources and
              consumers on ecological communities has been difficult for terrestrial
              ecologists, but it is an important component of understanding how natural and
              managed ecosystems are structured and how they respond to perturbations. The
              ant-plant, Piper cenocladum, and its associated arthropods have been a useful
              system for examining the effects of top-down and bottom-up manipulations in a
              tropical rain forest. The proposed experiments will directly compare the
              importance of plant secondary metabolites (amides) in regulating herbivory
              versus the role of ants. The experiments will also address specific questions
              about how these secondary metabolites mediate interactions between the four
              trophic levels. Field and shade house experiments will be conducted to test
              several hypotheses. Predators and resources will also be manipulated and
              changes in plant chemistry, plant biomass, herbivore numbers, and biomass of
              upper trophic levels will be examined. Herbivore feeding experiments will be
              conducted to further examine the effects of amides on herbivores. This research
              is an important step towards gaining an clear understanding of the trophic
              cascades observed in this model system. It will test the "green desert" model,
              which suggests that plant secondary compounds are important in shaping
              communities, because most plants are not usable resources for herbivores. It
              will also shed light on the roles of resource availability and plant chemistry
              in modifying trophic cascades. The larger questions addressed by this research
              are relevant to current theories about resource availability and chemical
              defense, controversies about the relative importance of factors that regulate
              herbivore populations, and advances in studies of ant-plant mutualisms. The
              results will allow an improved assessment of current theory and better inform
              practical decisions in the areas of conservation biology and biological
              control.

