Title       : Phylogenetic Systematics of the Lobeliaceae and Cyphiaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a0074354

Award Number: 0074354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric B. Knox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074354
Knox
The Lobeliaceae are a medium-sized plant family comprising 31
              genera, with just under1,200 species distributed worldwide, and the Cyphiaceae
              sensu stricto comprise the genus Cyphia with 74 species in Africa. These
              families are classified in the order Campanulales, along with the Campanulaceae
              sensu stricto and four New World cyphioid genera.  Molecular and morphological
              data support the monophyly of the Lobeliaceae, with Cyphia identified as the
              most closely related genus.  The Lobeliaceae were monographed as part of Das
              Pflanzenreich, but this classification is largely artificial, in part because
              Lobelia constitutes the paraphyletic 'core genus' of the family, from which the
              segregate genera evolved.  This investigation is generating chloroplast DNA
              sequence data from the genes atpB, rbcL, and the intergenic spacer for 120
              representative species.  The resulting phylogenetic estimate is being used to
              (1) produce a
phylogenetically-based classification of these plants, (2)
              reconstruct the morphological evolution responsible for the origin of the
              segregate genera, and (3) reconstruct the major events in the biogeographic
              history of these plants.  The Campanulales are also of interest because of the
              large number of rearrangements that have occurred in their chloroplast DNA. 
              Previous work indicates that these rearrangements are not simply rare, random
              events.  A genetic element is present that causes the rearrangements, and there
              is evidence of high-level functional constraint in chloroplast DNA evolution
              that favors preservation of the ancestral genome organization.  This work uses
              (1) Southern blot analysis to produce detailed maps of the chloroplast DNA
              arrangements, (2) PCR-based confirmation of the rearrangements, and (3) DNA
              sequencing of the rearrangement regions to differentiate independent
              rearrangements that have occurred in a given region of the DNA molecule.  These
              rearrangements provide additional evidence of phylogenetic relationships, and
              these relationships simultaneously provide a framework for understanding
              chloroplast genome evolution, with broad implications for plant biology.  The
              results of this research are being compared with similar studies conducted by
              other investigators of the Campanulaceae and the New World cyphioids.


