Title       : RUI: Undergraduate Research in the Molecular Diversity of Hot Spring Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0074452

Award Number: 0074452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222953             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah M. Boomer boomers@wou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Oregon University
	      345 N Monmouth Avenue
	      Monmouth, OR  973611329    503/838-8174

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Dr. Sarah M. Boomer at Western Oregon University is establishing a "Red Layer"
              Microbial  Observatory (RLMO) in Yellowstone National Park, Wyoming.  This 
              observatory will enable undergraduate students to study several similar
              bacterial communities  ("mats") that thrive in alkaline hot springs.  All mats
              in this observatory contain an unusual red layer of yet-unidentified bacteria,
              usually beneath top layers of known green bacteria  (Cyanobacteria). 
              Preliminary data has demonstrated that some  of these red bacteria are unique
              but related to a known genus of ancient bacteria called Heliothrix.   A dozen
              distinct red layer mats have been identified to date.  A key goal of this
              research is to survey additional regions of Yellowstone during an extensive 
              summer undergraduate research program established by this grant.   While in the
              park, research teams will survey and  document new RLMO habitats using a
              variety of technologies  (global positioning systems, pH and temperature
              measuring  devices and digital cameras).  In the laboratory following these
              trips, undergraduates will use microscopy, biochemical analysis of red 
              pigments, and DNA sequence information to further characterize  these novel
              bacteria.   RLMO materials will also be used as the backbone project in Dr.
              Boomer's research-based  undergraduate course, Molecular Biology.   In both
              contexts,  undergraduates will isolate a specific identification gene (16S
              ribosomal RNA gene) from various bacterial samples, and determine the DNA
              sequences of  these genes using an automated DNA sequencer acquired through
              prior NSF  support.  Using computer programs and internet-based databases,
              students will use sequence information to infer how  red layer bacteria compare
              from site to site within the RLMO  and how they compare with other known
              bacteria.  Original  sequence data will also provide raw data for a new 
              undergraduate course in computational biology.  Many biology  majors at Western
              Oregon University are bound for careers  teaching science; thus, research
              students specifically interested  in education will have methods, materials,
              and credit-based opportunities to develop and deliver education outreach
              modules  and web-distributed curricula as part of this Yellowstone  RLMO.  

