Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2001   
File        : a0074387

Award Number: 0074387
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale A. Pelletier dale-pelletier@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D,Pelletier
	      Dept.Microbiology, U. of Iowa
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/358-6408

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology
              for 2000.

The research and training plan is in the area of Microbial
              Genetics and is entitled "Molecular Biology of Anaerobic Ethylbenzene
              Oxidation".  The goal of this research is to advance the understanding of the
              processes involved in the microbial metabolism of aromatic hydrocarbons under
              anaerobic conditions.  Recent biochemical investigation of anaerobic
              ethylbenzene degradation with the denitrifying bacterium Azoarcus sp. strain
              EB1 has led to a proposed pathway for ethylbenzene mineralization.  DNA
              microarray analysis and 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis experiments are used
              to identify genes differentially expressed during anaerobic growth of Azoarcus.
               These experiments will lead to identification and functional analysis of genes
              involved in ethylbenzene mineralization, with special consideration of the gene
              associated with ethylbenzene dehydrogenase (a novel enzyme found within
              Azoarcus which catalyzes the removal of a hydride from an aromatic hydrocarbon,
              initiating anaerobic ethylbenzene oxidation).  The genetic tools developed
              here, in addition to furthering knowledge of hydrocarbon metabolism, will also
              be helpful in identifying environmental factors involved in regulation of
              ethylbenzene degradation and will help to maximize the potential use of these
              organisms for bioremediation applications.


