Title       : POWRE: Studies in Nanoscale Magnetism: Biomimetic Processes and Nanocomposite
               Materials Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a0074537

Award Number: 0074537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgia Papaefthymiou-Davis georgia.papaefthymioudavis@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    215/645-4500

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses two areas of research relevant to nanoscale magnetism: 1.
              A variety of iron-oxide phases sequestered within apoferritin cages will be
              studied. The iron storage protein ferritin catalyzes the reversible oxidation
              of Fe 2+ to Fe 3+ and the hydrolytic polymerization of the latter into an iron
              mineral core of ca. 7-nm diam. The growing core surface exhibits self-catalytic
              behavior, accelerating the oxidation and polymerization reactions. A
              ferroxidase center on the protein shell facilitates oxidation at the initial
              stages of iron binding. Core growth will be arrested at the initial stages of
              iron nucleation in order to examine the transition from molecular to particle
              behavior of the growing core and onset of surface catalytic activity. The
              electronic and magnetic properties will be studied in order to elucidate the
              molecular/solid boundary and the switch from ferroxidase center to core surface
              catalytic activity. Magnetoferritins, of interest in biomimetic materials
              development and bio-technological/pharmaceutical applications, will also be
              studied. 2. Microphase separation of diblock and/or triblock copolymers into
              spherical, cylin-drical, lamellar and core/shell architectures affords the
              spatial and electronic confinement of magnetic nanostructures of tailored size
              and shape. Core/shell magnetic nanoparticles within tri-block copolymer
              nanodomains could achieve improved coercivities, leading to next generation
              high-density magnetic storage media. Magnetic and electronic properties of iron
              oxide and core/shell nanostructured morphologies within block copolymers will
              be characterized. Short-range magnetic order, internal spin structure, spin
              reversal mechanisms, coercivities and finite-particle-size effects will be
              studied over a wide range of length and time scales, temperature and external
              magnetic field strength. Magnetization measurements, Mossbauer, Ferromagnetic
              Reso-nance and UV-Vis absorption studies will be used. Correlation with
              materials properties, synthe-sis and processing parameters will guide synthetic
              strategies to advanced materials development.
%%% 
This is a research
              enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program. The career related objective of this
              project is the initiation of an integrated research and education activity in
              experimental condensed matter physics at Villanova University (VU). The PI is
              resuming her career goals in research and educa-tion after an interruption in
              her career, due to the closing of the Francis Bitter National Magnet Laboratory
              at MIT. Family responsibilities precluded relocation at an earlier time. Her
              success in establishing an active research program, with the participation of
              undergraduate science majors, is crucial in turning an appointment from
              non-tenure to tenure track. POWRE funding, at this critical juncture, is
              expected to have a definitive impact on her career advancement as a re-searcher
              and educator. The proposed integrated activity will advance fundamental
              knowledge in the behavior of magnetic nanolattices, elucidate biomineralization
              in ferritin, facilitate the syn-thesis of advanced nanocomposite materials,
              enhance the infrastructure for research and educa-tion at VU and promote the
              scientific leadership and career objectives of the PI who is, presently, the
              only female faculty member in physics at VU. The research is expected to
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of special
              relevance to the behavior of mag-netic materials, and to assist with the
              integration of research and education. The project is co-supported by the
              Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities).
***

