Title       : A Newton-Galerkin Algorithm for Variational Investigations. Focus: Nonlinear
               Elliptic BVP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0074326

Award Number: 0074326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Neuberger John.Neuberger@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

The proposed research primarily concerns finding, describing, and
              approximating solutions to semilinear elliptic zero-Dirichlet boundary value
              problems.  While the Principal Investigator's first priority has been to prove
              existence and nodal structure theorems, his current efforts center on
              computational investigations.  The PI will advance the numerical techniques
              used in the study of nonlinear differential equations in general and elliptic
              boundary value problems in particular.  The PI's experiments support
              conjectures and reveal underlying structure as well as provide approximations. 
              Secondary objectives include involving his students in the implementation of
              software solutions and refinement of algorithms.  Lastly, the PI will prove
              convergence results relating to steepest descent, Newton's method, and
              Galerkin-type approximations.  That these results may lead to analytical
              existence and nodal structure theorems is an additional source of motivation to
              the PI.  The techniques to be used rely on the variational method, whereby
              solutions to the PDE are characterized as critical points of an associated
              nonlinear functional.  The PI is currently in the process of decomposing
              function space into Newton flow-invariant manifolds and basins of attraction. 
              These subsets of function space will be important to both numerical and
              analytical investigations.

The proposed research is relevant to important
              areas of mathematics and science.  Almost any scientific area concerns rates of
              change, hence differential equations.  Many of these areas rely on the class of
              differential equations known as elliptic, and most of the difficult and
              physically significant problems are nonlinear.  The PI's work is on the
              boundary of the computational and the analytical.  An exciting new use of
              computational mathematics is in the investigation of nonlinear functional
              analysis.  The PI has new techniques in nonlinear functional analysis for
              studying the underlying structure of this class of problem and believes that
              the techniques may generalize to an even wider class.  Thus, funding this line
              of inquiry will benefit a large area of mathematics, soften or solve some long
              standing open problems in nonlinear elliptic differential equations, and be of
              use to many physical scientists.

