Title       : POWRE: Attention and Coordination Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074442

Award Number: 0074442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74974              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geraldine L. Pellecchia pellecchi@mail.hartford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Hartford
	      200 Bloomfield Avenue
	      West Hartford, CT  06117    860/768-4635

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Many common movement patterns such as walking, running, and jumping require
              rhythmic coordination of the arms and legs.  In carrying out our daily routine,
              we often become involved in concurrent cognitive and motor activities, such as
              talking while walking.  When engaging in conversation while walking, it appears
              that the pace of walking slows, sometimes to the point of stopping, as the
              conversation becomes conceptually more complex.  What happens to the
              performance of rhythmic movement patterns when attention is taken up by a task
              that requires mental effort?  Recent research suggests that movement becomes
              less coordinated when one is engaged in a concurrent cognitive activity.  Many
              questions about the precise relationship between cognitive activity and
              movement coordination remain:  When performing dual tasks (i.e., concurrent
              cognitive and motor activities), does attending to the cognitive task adversely
              affect performance of movement coordination?  Does engagement in cognitive
              activity have a greater impact on coordination when movement speed is increased
              and limbs differ in physical characteristics?  Does a movement pattern become
              structurally more complex when an individual is engaged in a concurrent
              cognitive activity?  This research will investigate these and related questions
              about the influences of cognitive activity on movement coordination.  Results
              will provide information that is foundational to understanding the formation
              and persistence of human movement patterns.  This new knowledge should
              contribute to the development of methods for improving performance of sport
              skills, safety in industrial settings, and functional outcomes in
              rehabilitation.

This POWRE grant will provide Pellecchia the opportunity to
              develop a new movement science laboratory, learn contemporary methods of
              analyzing human movement, and conduct research that will advance an integrative
              theory of human attention and movement coordination.  In addition, this award
              will assist her to mentor students in the application of motor control theory
              and research methods.

