Title       : Theory of Charge and Spin Dynamics in Electron Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0074959

Award Number: 0074959
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giovanni Vignale vignaleg@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports theoretical research in condensed matter physics.  The
              time-dependent density functional theory (TDFT) of charge-density excitations
              in electronic systems is by now a well developed tool, whose predictions are
              routinely compared to experimental measurements.  However, the theory is still
              relatively underdeveloped with regard to its ability to describe (i) impurity
              effects and (ii) spin and coupled spin-charge dynamics in fully or partly
              spin-polarized electron liquids.  The primary goal of this research is to
              develop the TDFT of spin dynamics and impurity effects to a level of
              sophistication comparable to what has been reached by ordinary TDFT.  In
              essence, this means developing accurate approximations for the spin- and
              frequency-dependent exchange-correlation (xc) fields in the presence of
              impurity scattering.  In order to properly include retardation and relaxation
              effects it is necessary to go beyond the adiabatic local spin-density
              approximation, and this can be done using the spin-current density as the basic
              variable.  A key role in this approach is played by the spin-dependent
              visco-elastic spectra of the spin-polarized electron gas with a uniform
              distribution of impurities.  These quantities will be calculated within the
              framework of the Kubo-Mori formalism.  In the macroscopic limit the theory
              should yield generalized hydrodynamics (Navier-Stokes) equations for charge and
              spin currents.  This theory should complement and extend the recently proposed
              adiabatic spin dynamics.

The calculation of the visco-elastic spectra of a
              two-dimensional electron liquid at high magnetic field (such that all the
              electrons are in the lowest Landau level) poses a fascinating problem.  It has
              been recently shown that the charge dynamics of incompressible fractional
              quantum Hall states are well described by an effective elasticity theory.  This
              theory needs to be extended in two directions: first, energy dissipation must
              be included, since it is essential to correctly describe the charge dynamics of
              compressible states; second, the spin of the electron must be taken into
              account.  The objective is to develop an effective visco-elastic theory to
              unify the treatment of spin and charge density excitations in the lowest Landau
              level.  The theory will be applied to the calculation of the collective
              excitations of quantum Hall ferromagnets at fractional filling factors, the
              dynamics of topological spin textures, and the dispersion of spin edge
              waves.

Recent theoretical work has highlighted the need to go beyond the
              local density approximation (LDA) in density-functional calculations of the
              dielectric response of crystalline insulators.  In this context an effort will
              be made to express the correction to LDA as an explicit functional of the
              macroscopic polarization.  This polarization density functional theory, if
              successful, will allow first-principles calculations of dielectric properties
              to be carried out with relative ease.
%%% 
This grant supports theoretical
              research in condensed matter physics.  The research will extend the theory of
              interacting electrons to include the effects of impurities and electron spin. 
              In particular, the properties of interacting electrons in very high magnetic
              fields - the quantum Hall state - will be studied.  The research contributes to
              fundamental understanding in condensed matter physics.
*** 

