Title       : POWRE: A Gender Lens on Rowan University's College of Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a0074857

Award Number: 0074857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harriet Hartman Hartman@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moshe Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 1592      PROF OPPOR FOR WOMEN IN RSCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Concern about the underrepresentation of women in engineering and other
              sciences has received national attention.  This underrepresentation reflects a
              gender gap in educational preparation and opportunities, and results in an
              underpresentation of women in one field of lucrative and rewarding occupations.
               The new College of Engineering at Rowan University incorporates a number of
              innovative features in its program, which have been noted as favorable to the
              encouragement and retention of female students and their ensuing career
              commitment and success.  The proposed research will assess the extent to which
              female engineering students at Rowan are satisfied with their program,
              committed to completing an engineering degree and career, are confident in
              their abilities to achieve their engineering goals, and are academically
              successful.  The project is designed to have a beginning-of-the-year survey and
              an end-of-the-year survey, to assess the changes over the academic year.  
   
               In the beginning-of-the-year survey, students will be asked about their
              preentry characteristics and training, engineering aspirations and plans, and
              self-confidence about achieving their engineering goals.  In the
              end-of-the-year survey, students will be asked to assess various aspects of the
              Rowan program in terms of their satisfaction with them, the extent of their
              participation in extra-curricular activities, their current engineering goals
              and level of self-confidence to achieve them.  Objective data will provide
              information on their academic performance prior to entry, at the end of the
              first semester, and at the end of the second semester.  Focus group interviews
              will give a more in-depth probe into female engineering students' experiences,
              problems and concerns.

