Title       : POWRE: Ethnic Banking and Community Development: Chinese Banking and Ethnoburb
               in Los Angeles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074754

Award Number: 0074754
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74869              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Li wei.li@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will begin a series of inquiries into the roles played by
              minority-owned banks during the transformation of American suburbs from
              predominantly white middle class to multiracial communities.  The research will
              first document the development and structure of the Chinese banks in the Los
              Angeles area.  Second, it will examine how these banks have facilitated the
              development of ethnic communities, especially in terms of altering commercial
              infrastructure and residential landscapes in the eastern suburban San Gabriel
              Valley.  Third, it will explore the transnational ties and the roles of Chinese
              banks in the globalization process.  Planned activities include a joint event,
              involving representatives from academia, the banking sector, community, and
              government.  This roundtable discussion will address research results, banking
              experiences locally and across national boundaries, the dialogue among bankers,
              community leaders, and public officials in terms of community needs, banking
              regulatory issues, and public policies.  The project aims to contribute to our
              comprehension of the changing dynamics in American suburbs, in order to foster
              mutual understanding between minority banks and mainstream society, and to
              provide policy suggestions concerning banking and community development.  On
              the theoretical level, the work will examine the trajectory and structure of a
              particular minority-banking sector from a geographical perspective, and to
              contribute to the "Geography of Money and Finance."  On the methodological
              front, the project will utilize multiple data sources and multi-faceted
              analyses, while combining quantitative and qualitative methods.  It will test
              the validity of bank data collection for geographical research and the utility
              of qualitative research in banking analysis, notably interview and
              participatory methods.  The analyses of publicly available data sources such as
              FDIC and HMDA, on the other hand, will yield a replicable method that can be
              applied to the study of other groups and localities.  Also it will broaden the
              impacts through interdisciplinary connections, cross-university and
              multinational collaborations, and academic, banking, community, and public
              sector cooperation.  There may be implications for changes in banking
              regulation and public policy within the study area in particular and within
              multiethnic urban America in general.  The project will have a number of
              outcomes.  It will begin with papers delivered at academic conferences at
              regional, national, and international levels, followed by research articles
              submitted to scholarly journals, both geography and interdisciplinary,
              chapter(s) in an edited volume on ethnic banking in Southern California, and a
              research report made available for all interested parties.  Finally, there will
              be an opinion article targeted at the general public and a videotape clip to be
              circulated to both Chinese and mainstream mass media, in order to draw
              attention to the issues of minority banks and community development.  This
              POWRE project will allow Li to initiate a fresh line of inquiry and to
              re-establish the foundation of her research following a career interruption.  A
              section of the research program will be truly exploratory in nature,
              particularly regarding the unconventional data sources used.  This research
              will lay the groundwork for future comparative studies of the ethnoburb
              phenomenon from a financial-dynamics perspective and contribute to a career
              goal of developing a conceptual framework of understanding and examining
              changing American suburbs.
