Title       : POWRE: Multiresolution Maximization of Mutual Information for Remote-Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a0074929

Award Number: 0074929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene Cole-Rhodes acrhodes@eng.morgan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morgan State University
	      1700 East Cold Spring Lane
	      Baltimore, MD  21251    443/885-3200

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074929
Cole-Rhodes

This project will address the problem of registering
              images produced by remote sensing satellite missions.  Large amounts of data
              are generated by these systems from multiple-time observations of the same
              features, or from many sensors mounted on the platform which may simultaneously
              observe the same features.  The data produced may be in different spectral
              ranges and/or at different spatial resolutions.  All this data must be
              integrated in order to provide a better understanding of earth and space
              phenomena, and image registration is the first step in this process.

Image
              registration is the process which determines that transformation which provides
              the best match between a reference image and an input image.  The goal is to
              define fast, accurate methods for the automatic registration of multisensor
              remotely sensed data.  The optimal match can be determined using some
              similarity measure, such as correlation or the Hausdorff distance between two
              images.  This project will apply a different similarity measure from
              Information theory, called Mutual Information, to the registration of
              remote-sensing images. It will investigate whether mutual information can be
              successfully applied to cross-register images produced by different
              remote-sensing sensors.

The most basic method of finding the optimal
              transforma-tion, is by an exhaustive search over the space of allowable
              transformations.  This method is computationally expensive and not very
              efficient.  The project will investigate other search strategies based on the
              use of mutual information, while also attempting to speed up the search
              procedure by the use of a multiresolution strategy.  This strategy will be
              based on the wavelet decomposition, since this has already been successfully
              applied to automate the image registration process for remote sensing
              data.

This project invites a new direction of research for the Principal
              investigator, and it is directly integrated into the developing graduate
              program in the School of Engineering at Morgan State University.
***

