Title       : Trace Fossils, Ichnofabrics and Problematic Sedimentary Structures at the
               Proterozoic-Cambrian Transition: Implications for the Early Evolution of
               Animals and their Habitats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0074021

Award Number: 0074021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Droser droser@ucrac1.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Trace Fossils, Ichnofabrics, and Problematic Sedimentary Structures at
              the
Proterozoic-Cambrian Transition: Implications for the Early Evolution
              of
Animals and Their Habitats

Mary Droser
EAR-0074021

The Cambrian
              radiation was the most significant event in the history of complex animals.
              Critical to this understanding this event is the record of the burrows, tracks
              and trails made by soft-bodied animals and preserved in the fossil record;
              these are known as trace fossils.  Additionally, animals mix or churn the
              sediment and produce a mottled fabric known as ichnofabric.  The importance of
              the ichnological record is exemplified by the fact that the
              Precambrian-Cambrian boundary is defined on the basis of trace fossils
              (Narbonne et al., 1987). This research project will be the first detailed
              systematic field analysis of the correlation of changes in ichnofabrics,
              discrete trace fossils and mat-related sedimentary structures across the
              Precambrian-Cambrian boundary.  For the proposed project PI has selected four
              sections located in Newfoundland, Namibia, South Australia and western United
              States. These sections provide a complete range of
shallow-water siliciclastic
              facies. Examination of terminal Proterozoic trace fossils has applications to
              questions of the appearance of bilaterian animals.   In addition, the rise in
              bioturbation (sediment mixing) at the terminal Proterozoic-Cambrian boundary
              interval profoundly and irreversibly changed the benthic habitat. One
              consequence was the reduction in microbial binding of siliciclastic sediments,
              which seem to have occurred in fully marine settings. These microbial mats may
              have been responsible for the unusual style of preservation of the soft-bodied
              Ediacara-type faunas. It is also likely that unusual sedimentary structures owe
              their formation and preservation to these mats. To date there has been no
              detailed examination of the changes in ichnofabric and discrete trace fossils
              to constrain the notion of the disappearance of a  'taphonomic window'

