Title       : POWRE: Institutions of Corruption or the Corruption of Institutions? Fraud in
               the European Union
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0074977

Award Number: 0074977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69822              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn M. Warner CAROLYN.WARNER@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This is a research project on corruption and fraud in the European Union. It
              is designed to lay the groundwork for a substantial comparative study involving
              collaboration with several European scholars and institutions.  It develops
              hypotheses from three analytical approaches, the first stressing individual
              agency and incentives, the second institutional structures, the third cultural
              influences.  The research question is whether fraud and corruption in
              international organizations are deliberately tolerated by rent-seeking
              governments and their key constituencies, or whether the phenomena are the
              result of national or regional cultural practices "exported" to the larger
              international arena.  The project involves 10 months of research at the
              European University Institute in Florence, Italy, two months of preparatory and
              completion work in the United States,  interviews with officials,
              businesspersons, civil servants and politicians in four EU locations: Brussels,
              Paris, Rome and Berlin.

The project's goals and importance are
              methodological, analytical and empirical: why do fraud and corruption occur?
              How can we measure them? Which theoretical approaches are most useful in
              explaining the phenomena, and what of their  general validity?  Although the
              study of corruption and fraud is not a new field in the social sciences, it has
              yet to be subjected to rigorous methods of analysis; indeed, nearly all
              previous research has been anecdotal and country-specific. One key difficulty
              involved in answering questions about fraud and corruption is that, largely due
              to the nature of the subject being investigated, we do not have useful
              methodological instruments to assess levels of fraud and corruption and to
              evaluate the independent variables.  A major purpose of this study is to create
              a survey instrument  for elite level interviews within some EU states as well
              as the latter's internal organs specifically created to deal with fraud and
              corruption. Another goal is to develop and identify indicators which will
              facilitate the measurement of fraud and corruption in a variety of program and
              economic sector contexts, and which can be used cross-nationally.  The
              information gained from the interviews and the reports of the agencies will be
              used to develop a set of cross-national indicators and measurement instruments
              to guide the longer-range, systematic research program.  This study will also
              help to determine whether international organizations undermine their own goals
              by promoting or allowing fraud and corruption, in the process lowering the
              organizations' economic efficiencies, raising barriers to trade, and eventually
              discrediting further attempts at multinational cooperation.  

The goals of
              this project are relevant to the POWRE Program since the investigator will need
              to acquire some new skills, develop new methodologies, and undertake some
              exploratory investigations in several national and international institutional
              frameworks and systems.  It is expected that the research will lead to several
              research efforts of a collaborative nature - between different institutions and
              cross-nationally.  The POWRE grant will enable the investigator to develop an
              important new area of research, and make productive use of her post-tenure
              sabbatical leave through an original research program, thus strengthening her
              contribution to the field of political science and scientific knowledge.  The
              grant is also important for increasing her capacity to serve as a mentor and
              advisor to junior women faculty and women graduate students.

