Title       : POWRE: The Structural and Energetic Basis of Transcriptional Control in the E.
               coli pap Operon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0074674

Award Number: 0074674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy C. Horton nhorton@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0074674
Horton
An integrated biochemical and X-ray crystallographic analysis
              will be used to determine the structural and energetic basis for
              transcriptional activation in the E.coli pap operon.  The pap operon consists
              of genes encoding the proteins of the pili appendages of bacteria.  Previous
              work has led to a model for regulation known as the phase variation control
              mechanism, in which the methylation state of two GATC sequences determines the
              binding sites for the dimeric leucine-responsive regulatory protein. 
              Methylation of upstream GATC-I results in Lrp binding to promoter-proximal
              sites, steric blockage of RNA polymerase and transcriptional repression.  If
              GATC-I becomes umethylated Lrp dimers translocate to upstream sites mediated by
              the coregulator protein PapI and GATC-II is methylated and transcription is
              activated.  The experiments in this grant will provide a structural and
              quantitative foundation to evaluate and further explore this phase variation
              model.  Thermodynamic dissociation constants will be measured by gel shift
              analysis for Lrp binding to wild-type and selected mutant sites, and the
              consequences of GATC methylation and Pap I binding will be explored.  Xray
              crystallography will determine the high resolution atomic structure of
              unliganded Lrp, Lrp-DNA complexes, and ternary Lrp-PapI-DNA complexes.   These
              biochemical and Xray crystallographic data will be analyzed and used to develop
              models for the structure of the DNA control region.   This is a POWRE award
              which will allow the PI, who is currently a research associate, to establish
              and independent research project.
