Title       : POWRE: Controllable Stress and the Thyroid Axis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0074626

Award Number: 0074626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana Helmreich dlhelm@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the projects described in this POWRE award grant application is to
              determine if dissimilar acute psychological stressors differentially regulate
              the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis (HPT) of rats.  The stress paradigm
              that is proposed is the controllable/uncontrollable stress paradigm; a pair of
              rats is subjected to an identical physical stressor, but the two rats differ in
              the psychological aspect of being able to escape from or control the stressor. 
              Both animals receive the identical physical stressor but differ in the
              psychological aspect of coping.  This experimental paradigm is a powerful tool
              for determining the pertinent characteristics of a stressor that eventuate
              specific consequences.  Currently, little direct evidence suggests that the HPT
              may be affected by acute psychological stress, and if so, if it is
              differentially regulated by controllable vs. uncontrollable stress.  However,
              there is indirect evidence suggesting that thyroid hormone levels and the
              activity of the HPT axis may be decreased in animals subjected to
              uncontrollable, but not controllable, stress.  Using adult male rats, the
              proposed experiments will characterize circulating thyroid hormone levels
              during and after controllable/uncontrollable stress through collection of blood
              samples and subsequent radioimmunoassay.   Circulating levels of thyrotropin
              (TSH), via radioimmunoassay, will also be determined. In situ hybridization
              techniques will also be used to assess any potential changes in hypothalamic
              thyrotropin-releasing-hormone (TRH) mRNA levels.
The analysis of preliminary
              data documenting the activity of the HPT during acute psychological stress will
              reveal if exploring the role of thyroid hormones in the development of stress
              related pathologies, both physiological and behavioral, is a worthwhile
              pursuit.  Also, these results may lead to a model system for determining the
              neural circuits that direct the activity of the hypothalamus, and if they are
              differently activated by different categories of stressors.
These experiments
              are appropriate for the POWRE funding mechanism for multiple reasons. The
              principal investigator (PI) recently relocated to Middlebury College for family
              reasons and plans to embark on her independent research career.  This latter
              effort involves initiating a new area of investigation, but the PI does not
              have funds available for collection of vital pilot data.  Therefore, funding is
              requested for research supplies and salary support. If awarded the POWRE grant,
              the PI will be able to collect pilot data, which are necessary for future
              competition for traditional funding sources.  The POWRE grant is especially
              useful for the applicant because she is currently employed in a
              non-traditional, non-tenure track position, which again makes competing for
              traditional funding mechanisms difficult.  Therefore, successful completion of
              the experiments described in the POWRE application will assist the PI in
              launching her independent research career and aid in procuring future funding
              through more traditional support mechanisms.  Salary support for research
              activities is vital to allow the PI to focus on her research strengths without
              the distractions of earning a salary by other means.  Additionally, receipt of
              the grant and pursuit of the research projects will provide the PI an identity
              within a supportive, professional community in which the PI possesses
              professional credentials, but lacks identity and concomitant networking
              abilities because of her non-traditional employment status.

