Title       : Scale Dependence in Water Balance Sensitivity to Soil Moisture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0074045

Award Number: 0074045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guido D. Salvucci gdsalvuc@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074045
Salvucci

Many questions in hydrology have as a common theme the
              inter-relation of water fluxes and storage at large scales.  The issue arises
              for simple reasons: Transport processes may be reasonably well understood and
              predictable at small scales, but the scales at which transports become most
              relevant (either as resources/hazards or with respect to atmosphere
              interaction) are much larger.  At large scales critical parameters (soil,
              vegetation, and topography) and forcings (radiation, precipitation, wind) are
              spatially heterogeneous, and transport mechanisms are not only vertical, but
              lateral (e.g., groundwater redistribution, boundary layer advection).  Thus
              even the simplest question, i.e. "what controls the partitioning of
              precipitation into evapotranspiration, runoff, drainage and storage change",
              becomes difficult to answer at large scale.  Here we propose a new and simple
              approach for using direct measurement to address the related question: how does
              the sensitivity of water balance to soil moisture change with scale?

The
              novelty of the proposed approach is the use of monthly precipitation (P)
              measurements as a surrogate measure of total outflow from the root zone
              (evapotranspiration (ET), drainage (D), and runoff (R)).  The basis of the
              method is that the changes in root zone moisture storage (S) over an interval,
              which make up the difference P-ET-D-R, are themselves uncorrelated with the
              mean storage over that interval.  This lack of correlation is a direct result
              of the statistical stationary of root zone moisture.  The utility of this
              property is that all of the covariance of ET, D and R with S can be estimated
              by measuring the covariance of P with S (or by calculating the precipitation
              rate conditionally averaged at given moisture levels, and taking derivatives). 
              The stationarity condition thus imparts on conditionally averaged precipitation
              utility as a diagnostic measure of the sensitivity of combined evaporation and
              drainage/runoff fluxes to soil moisture.  Because this simple methodology is
              based only on mass balance and conditional averaging, it can be applied at any
              area scale through simple aggregation of P and S data, and thus can be used to
              directly estimate both the form and the scale-dependence of moisture-water
              balance sensitivity.  As such it can be used to quantify how variability in
              moisture due to lateral surface and groundwater redistribution processes and
              land cover/soil/meteorological forcing heterogeneity influence the large-scale
              sensitivity of water balance to soil moisture.

