Title       : POWRE: Women's Social Networks and Fertility in Cameroon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a0074789

Award Number: 0074789
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela L. Feldman-Savelsberg pfeldman@carleton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1390,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The end of the Cold War has been accompanied by economic reversals and ongoing
              political crises in sub-Saharan Africa.  At the same time, fertility has
              decreased while urban populations have increased.  This expanding urban
              population survives the hardship of economic and political crisis through
              mutual aid and social control provided by voluntary ethnic (home-town)
              associations.  This project will address the relationship among these three
              features of urban Cameroonian society focusing on women's reproductive health
              among Cameroon's most populous ethnic group, the Bamileke.  It will investigate
              how the material and political threats facing urban Bamileke migrants in
              Yaounde affect women's fertility decisions.  In particular, it will examine the
              effect of Bamileke women's social networks (fellow association members,
              friends, neighbors, and kin) on how they assess and use contraceptives, on the
              timing and spacing of births, and on whether and when they seek traditional or
              modern, public or private obstetric and gynecological care.  This project will
              have two major components.  The first will provide Feldman-Savelsberg with
              training in anthropological demography.  The second will support the
              internationally-collaborative field-research segment of the project, to be
              undertaken in Yaounde, Cameroon.

This project will help us understand the
              puzzle of fertility change in Africa and the effect of post-Cold War social
              change on world population.  It will also address the puzzle of why ethnic
              conflict might increase in urban Africa during a time of the development of a
              more open, democratic society.  In addition, it will contribute to the
              understanding of one aspect of the role of urban "home-town" associations in
              the development of civil society in Africa.  Finally, this project will
              potentially enhance women's health care by placing women's reproductive
              health-care beliefs and behaviors with the context of their social network
              relationships. 

Because the work will take place in Africa and will involve
              African faculty and graduate students, this project will foster U.S.-African
              partnerships.  It will also provide the basis for development of new courses on
              social network analysis and anthropological demography.

This POWRE project
              will provide a unique combination of training, research, and international
              collaboration at a crucial juncture in Feldman-Savelsberg's career development.
               It will support a shift in her research agenda (from rural to urban Africa,
              and from infertility to a broader range of reproductive decisions) and provide
              the opportunity for interdisciplinary training to support this new research
              agenda. 

