Title       : POWRE: Applying Systems Theory to Economic Approaches to Environmental Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0074736

Award Number: 0074736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marisa J. Mazzotta mazzotta@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              .

This project will address the question: What would a shift from
              reductionist approaches to approaches based on systems theory imply for
              economic theories and methods as applied to environmental/ecological problems? 
              This question will be addressed by: (1) comparing and contrasting the roots of
              systems theory and methods with those of neoclassical economic theory and
              methods, specifically as applied to environmental problems; (2) researching
              applications of systems theory in other disciplines to identify methods and
              approaches that might inform economic approaches to environmental policy and
              ecosystem management; (3) developing conceptual models that integrate systems
              concepts and theory into economic approaches to environmental problems; and (4)
              exploring the implications and requirements of a shift in economic theories and
              methods of approaching ecosystem management towards systems theory based
              approaches. The broad goal of this research is to contribute to the development
              of "transdisciplinary" approaches to ecosystem management and environmental
              policy decisions, by exploring how the discipline of economics might evolve,
              and ways to link economics and other disciplines. 

Environmental and
              ecological problems are systemic in nature, dependent on complex interactions
              between systems and parts of systems, particularly the interactions between the
              economic and social systems and the natural system. Traditional disciplinary
              approaches are effective and appropriate for analyzing parts of these systems.
              However, individual disciplinary approaches do not address the essential
              relationships that make a system unique, and thus cannot adequately address
              environmental issues in a way that will foster long run sustainability. Systems
              theory, which is designed to address the multiple aspects of a system, as well
              as the relationships that define it, may provide a framework for more effective
              transdisciplinary approaches.  The results of this research will contribute to
              improving the ability of economic approaches to address the relationships that
              are crucial to defining systems, and to improving the ability of economic
              approaches to better consider the different aspects of people's environmental
              values. This research will also contribute to newly dominant ecosystem
              approaches to environmental management, by exploring ways that researchers
              might help decision makers more effectively carry out these programs, and
              making economics more relevant to the policy process. 

The POWRE grant will
              allow the PI to advance her research program by providing the opportunity to
              learn more about approaches from other disciplines, and explore whether and how
              they can inform and be combined with economic approaches. It will enable her to
              do the scholarly research necessary to take her work to the next level of
              application by allowing her to conduct exploratory, fundamental research that
              will lead to implementation in future projects. It will advance her career by
              allowing her to contribute to broadening the scope of economics, position
              herself to take advantage of increasing opportunities for interdisciplinary and
              ecosystems-focused research; and participate in and contribute significantly to
              research initiatives that are currently being developed at the University of
              Rhode Island.

