Title       : POWRE: Relaxation Study of a Trigonal Network Glass
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0074714

Award Number: 0074714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janna K. Maranas jmaranas@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is a molecular dynamics simulation study of the structure and
              relaxation of vitreous boron oxide, which belongs to the general class of
              network glasses, and specifically consists of trigonally coordinated boron
              atoms. The long term goal of the research is to establish a relation between
              short range order (dimensionality or coordination) of network glasses and
              physical properties relevant to the glass transition. The basis of the proposal
              is the relaxation behavior of a material with three-fold coordination. A rapid
              decrease in relaxation rates and the onset of com-plex dynamics such as
              non-exponential relaxation is one of the universal signatures of entrance to
              the glassy state. Materials with four-fold (silica glass) and two-fold (linear
              polymers) coordi-nation have been more extensively studied than three-fold
              coordinated materials such as B2O3. The intermediate range order of B2O3 is
              also of interest. Experiments have revealed the existence of six member boroxol
              rings, but confirmation with simulation studies has met only limited suc-cess.
              The work will proceed in two phases: characterizing the structure of B2O3 and
              studying re-laxation. A promising model that includes many body polarization
              effects is being adapted to study B2O3 since the polarization effects it
              describes have been shown necessary for a realistic model of boron oxide. This
              model will be used to investigate the structure of boron oxide, spe-cifically
              the question of boroxol rings. Full characterization of the relaxation of B2O3
              will follow. 
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made under the
              Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education (POWRE) program.
              The exploratory research activity proposed defines a new area of interest for
              the PI. The project will allow the PI to apply her expertise in the area of
              molecular simulation to problems in glass science. The research is expected to
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of special
              relevance to the behavior of glassy materials. The project is co-supported by
              the Division of Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities). 
***

