Title       : Random Matrices in Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0074277

Award Number: 0074277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio Verdu verdu@ee.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 4096,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Despite very strong economic incentives to approach the information theoretic
              limits of wireless channels, the state-of-the-art (typified by second
              generation cellular wireless)remains far from an efficient utilization of
              spectrum and power resources.  Wireless channels are known to be particularly
              challenging from the standpoint of analysis of fundamental limits.  Fading,
              multiuser interference, and the space-distributed nature of wireless pose
              considerable difficulties. Relevant simple canonical models and
              the
appreciation of the right mathematical tools are only emerging  recently. 
              The focus of this work is the investigation and application of a rich body of
              mathematical results that  play a pivotal role in the analysis of wireless
              communication channels of contemporary interest.  Random matrices are
              ubiquitous in the study of wireless systems.  For example,  fading makes
              channel coefficients random and time-varying, spreading waveforms in
              nonorthogonal code-division multiple access systems  are accurately modeled as
              being randomly selected, multiantenna transmitters/receivers in scattering
              environments give rise to channels described by random matrices.

Both coded
              (Shannon capacity) and uncoded (bit-error-rate) performance turn out to be
              determined (in most cases) by the eigenvalues of certain random matrices. 
              Frequently,  those matrices are quite large as their dimensions grow linearly
              with parameters such as the number of users and signaling degrees of
              freedom.
Many information theoretic problems for which numerical simulation is
              the only alternative
with finite size matrices find  elegant deterministic
              solutions in the infinite-size limit.
This project is a systematic study of
              the spectrum of random matrices arising in single- and multiuser communication
              and information theory.  Its results should influence the choice of both
              multiaccess techniques 
and receiver designs, as well as guide the development
              of asymptotic random matrix theory with
technologically relevant problems.  

