Title       : Phase Transformations in Ultra-fast Laser Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0074597

Award Number: 0074597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas P. Grigoropoulos cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Greif  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PHASE TRANSFORMATIONS IN ULTRA-FAST LASER PROCESSING

Abstract


The main
              objective of the research is to examine the mechanisms of ultra-fast laser
              processing of materials. Investigations of the energy transfer, melting,
              desorption and ablation upon femtosecond laser irradiation will be carried out.
              Experiments will be conducted to study the femtosecond laser processing of
              materials including composites, thin films, micro- and nano-structures.
              Ultra-fast imaging, time-resolved pump-probe reflection, transmission,
              absorption, scattering, deflection and interferometry measurements will be
              applied to probe the laser interaction with the irradiated material. The energy
              distributions of the released particles will be captured by time-of-flight mass
              spectrometry and spectroscopic analysis of the femtosecond laser-induced
              plasma. The laser interaction with the target materials will be modeled
              theoretically and computationally.

Ultra-short pulsed laser radiation will
              be utilized for precision machining, surface engineering, processing and
              synthesis of advanced materials and nanoparticles. Understanding the associated
              phase transformations is the central research issue in this work. These
              extremely rapid phenomena will be interrogated by on-line optical diagnostics
              and analyzed theoretically.


