Title       : Exploring Polymer Dynamics in Solutions and Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0074178

Award Number: 0074178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shi-Qing Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Systematic work will be carried out to elucidate how the component dynamics of A
              and B in a miscible A/B blend depend differently on temperature and
              composition, i.e., to uncover how friction factors associated with A and B each
              vary with the temperature and composition, and to determine whether A and B
              experience glass transition at significantly different temperatures.  The
              concept of polymer plasticization is yet to proven as the origin of the
              negative intrinsic viscosity observed in solutions where the polymer component
              has a significantly different temperatures.  It remains a fundamental question
              whether dynamics of polymer A in a solution or blend depend are completely
              determined by inter-chain (extrinsic) interactions or are further influenced by
              intra-chain (intrinsic) interaction so that they are from those of B and
              whether A undergoes the glass transition at a different temperature from that
              where B experiences its glass transition..  A novel Solution Rheology Approach
              (SRA) will be applied to probe these topics.  To depict the separate component
              dynamics operative in miscible blends (e.g., made of species A and B),
              corresponding "object" and "mirror" solutions (e.g., made of polymeric A in
              oligomeric B and polymeric B in oligomeric A) will be investigated respectively
              to resolve the component dynamics of A and B.  The protocol studying solution
              dynamics to gain explicit information about the component dynamics of
              corresponding blends represents a new attractive approach to the subject, to
              which few experimental techniques have been successfully and effectively
              applied.  This SRA has the advantage of being able to determine the component
              dynamics with minimal concentration fluctuations as well as to probe component
              dynamics in immiscible blends.
%%%
The objective of the proposed research is
              to achieve new understanding of polymer dynamics in solutions and blends that
              are pertinent to rheology and processing of polymeric materials.  The subject
              of the proposed work is at the heart of polymer science and engineering and is
              a very active area of polymer materials research.  One central question is how
              to predict the overall viscoelasticity and individual component dynamics of a
              molecularly mixed polymer blend knowing the glass transition and viscoelastic
              properties of each component.

