Title       : POWRE: Political Corruption in Postwar Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0074860

Award Number: 0074860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam Golden golden@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1372,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to assemble and analyze an annual database
              covering Italy's 32 electoral districts examining possible correlates of
              political corruption, covering the period from 1948 to 1994.  Political
              corruption is operationalized as requests by magistrates to parliament to lift
              the parliamentary immunity of a member of the Chamber of Deputies in order to
              proceed with legal prosecution on charges of malfeasance.  The data collected
              will include sociological, demographic, economic and political characteristics
              of electoral districts in order to study the characteristics of districts prone
              to more or less corruption. 

Italy is an especially good case to investigate
              since the country had the highest levels of political corruption of any wealthy
              democratic nation in the postwar era.  The persistent and extreme nature of
              political corruption there generates unique data available and potentially
              permits systematic causal analysis.  A cross-sectional (subnational)
              time-series analysis of political corruption in postwar Italy can ascertain
              whether the determinants of political corruption in democratic settings are
              largely economic (occurring in pockets of persistent underdevelopment in an
              otherwise largely developed economy, for instance), cultural (occurring
              initially in those parts of the country marked by weak political cultures and
              low levels of social capital), or institutional (occurring because of specific
              features of the electoral system acting in combination with  competitive
              dynamics of the party system), as well as how such factors may interact. 
              

The investigator's productivity has recently suffered temporary
              interruption due a combination of family responsibilities and medical problems.
               The research proposed involves a major shift in intellectual direction, one
              that will propel the investigator into a more central and visible area of her
              discipline.  Such a shift requires unusual research resources, and especially
              an interval of reduced teaching in order to devote adequate time to research.
              



