Title       : Promoting Understanding and Knowledge Acquisition through Effective
               Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0074710

Award Number: 0074710
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Dietz                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela M. O'Donnell angelao@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1592,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The specific goals of the projects are to: 1) document a relationship between
              the quality of interaction in a group and the quality of outcomes from group
              interaction, and 2) to determine if the quality of interaction can be
              influenced by intervening in the preparatory activities of a group by planning,
              or by intervening in the activities of group members engaged in discussion. The
              target content for this project is the human circulatory system. This material
              provides an opportunity to explore students' learning of a complex system. The
              project involves an examination of middle school students working in
              collaborative groups to come to an understanding of the circulatory system.
              Collaborative groups will first learn about the circulatory system of the
              proboscis worm. They will subsequently work together to determine how the human
              circulatory system is different from that of this worm. The project will
              examine the effects of two strategies for providing cognitive support to the
              collaborative group with the goal of promoting high levels of discourse. One
              strategy involves students planning how to go about making a complex comparison
              by listing ideas and organizing and grouping those ideas. A second strategy
              involves having students generating sets of comprehension and elaboration
              questions that they then use in making the comparison. Outcomes assessed will
              include the quality of discourse and the quality of explanations and reasoning
              provided by groups. The research can contribute to an understanding of how
              children piece together a theory about how systems work. The data to be
              collected here will provide insight into how students reason by analogy and by
              comparison. The results will also contribute to theories about how to scaffold
              learning in the classroom. Students may be unable to implement the more
              complicated "planning' strategy, suggesting that particular approaches to
              prompting metacognition may be too difficult. It is also conceivable that the
              planner may focus more quickly on key issues in the comparisons they make. The
              data collected here will provide a window on some aspects of the
              transferability of metacognitive prompting. From a practical standpoint, clear
              data on how to support students' reasoning and explanations will be available.
              This information will be helpful to teachers as they attempt to have students
              engage in higher levels of reasoning and thinking. 
