Title       : POWRE: Linking Impedance Microstructure to Seismic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0074330

Award Number: 0074330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Manika Prasad manika.prasad@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074330
Prasad

Tectonics and dynamics of accretionary prisms in subduction
              zones, earthquake source mechanics and faulting processes, kerogen maturation
              and oil migration during maturation of organic rich shales, and nucleation and
              crystallization processes are some major questions in geophysics today.  The
              composition, state of materials, and interactions between the constituents in
              such areas are important to understand the driving forces and to facilitate
              their prediction.  Since direct observations, for example in boreholes, are not
              always feasible, seismic information is often our only source of information. 
              To make inversions from seismic to rock materials properties more reliable, our
              focus should be on characterizing the dependencies between seismic and rock
              physical properties.  This study is aimed at providing the geoscience community
              with a method to quantify microstructure and rock properties in terms of
              elastic impedance.  Microstructural characterizations made with Acoustic
              Mapping (AM) are based on quantifiable impedance variations.  These
              quantitative measurements will allow us to directly relate impedance
              microstructure to seismic wave propagation in rocks.  Main impact areas of the
              study will be to develop a new method to express microstructure in terms of
              elastic impedance, measure, possibly for the first time, elastic properties of
              clay minerals and elastic impedance changes associated with cementation and
              crystallization, and understand and model the correlation between seismic and
              rock physics properties.  The eighteen-month project is divided into two parts.
               Research in the first part will be to calibrate the acoustic imaging
              techniques with earth science relevant materials.  Although seismic properties
              and acoustic mapping of rocks have a common working principal, potential
              applications of AM to rock physics remain to be exploited.  Currently, AM is
              used almost entirely for non-destructive evaluation of defects in man-made and
              in biomedical materials.  The second part will be devoted t analyzing
              representative samples and comparing impedance microstructures with seismic
              signatures.  This project will allow the investigator to develop acoustic
              mapping techniques.  Professionally, it will broaden her analyses and modeling
              skills and enhance prospects for progress, for example towards a faculty or
              senior research position.  The project is a joint collaboration between German
              (Dr. Burkhard, Prof. Arnold) and US research scientists (Dr. Meike, Dr. Thomas)
              that will allow the PI to define a long-term project.  Research associates at
              Stanford University are not granted PI status.  This proposal gives the PI an
              opportunity to apply for research funds to develop a project in an area of
              tremendous potential.

