Title       : POWRE: Direct Impact Accretion in Interacting Binary Star Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a0074586

Award Number: 0074586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74963              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mercedes T. Richards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1215,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0074586
Richards

Direct impact accretion in stars occurs in the class of
              interacting binary star systems known as the Algol-type binary stars.  These
              systems contain a type B-A main sequence star and a cool type F-K giant star or
              subgiant companion that fills its Roche lobe.  In the short-period Algol stars,
              the gas flow from the cool component makes contact with the surface of the
              companion in a direct impact.  This impact does not occur in the long-period
              Algols because they are wider and the radius of the mass gainer is relatively
              small when compared to the separation of the stars in the binary.  The
              accretion structures produced by the direct impact range from a hot spot on the
              surface of the star to nearly stable accretion disks called accretion annuli. 
              Data using Doppler tomogram observations of these binaries show evidence of
              Hydrogen-alpha accretion along the predicted gravitational path of the mass
              transfer stream.  Such distinct images are unique among the entire class of
              interacting binaries because the Algols are in the slow phase of mass transfer
              and hence provide an opportunity to capture the process of mass transfer in
              action.  Some short-period Algols have stable accretion structures while others
              are quite variable and they change within an orbital cycle from a stream-like
              distribution to one which resembles a classical accretion disk.  Dr. Richards
              has studied these accretion structures by means of Hydrogen-alpha (H-alpha)
              wavelength and ultraviolet spectroscopy observations, Doppler tomography, and
              hydrodynamic simulations.  Recently, Dr. Richards completed a major study of
              the H-alpha spectroscopic morphologies of 18 Algol-type star systems.  Dr.
              Richards will take academic leave from the University of Virginia to go to the
              Institute of Advanced Studies for a sabbatical visit.  Dr. Richards will be
              able to work on enhancing the results from the previous research, during the
              sabbatical period, by using data from similar studies of ultraviolet spectra
              and the comparison of Doppler tomograms generated at both optical and
              ultraviolet wavelengths.


This project is funded by the Division of
              Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.
***


