Title       : POWRE: Molecular Characterization of Sgnal-Transduction Mechanisms in Moth
               Olfaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0074591

Award Number: 0074591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Smita Mohanty smohanty@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9107,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An understanding of the molecular details of pheromone perception is essential
              to understand many fundamental principles of chemosensation.  Most
              invertebrates rely on olfaction as the principal sensory modality, so their
              olfactory systems have developed to a level of extreme sensitivity and
              specificity that enables them to identify minute concentrations of behaviorally
              relevant compounds.  Thus, exploring the signal-transduction mechanisms of
              invertebrates will not only help unravel many fundamental principles but also
              contribute to understanding the more-complex process of olfaction in higher
              organisms.

To gain thorough knowledge of ligand-protein interactions
              involved in perception of behavioral chemicals, Dr. Mohanty will attempt a
              detailed structural characterization of the interactions of pheromone with
              pheromone-binding protein (PBP).  PBP is the first protein that a pheromone
              encounters when it enters moth antennae.  To better understand the binding
              motif of this protein and the structural features that serve as recognition
              elements of a ligand, Dr. Mohanty has initiated this structural study of
              PBP-pheromone complex using high-resolution nuclear-magnetic-resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy.

This POWRE award will not only support significant advances in
              our understanding of pheromone binding, it will also facilitate Dr. Mohanty's
              career advancement by allowing her to obtain training and experience in novel
              NMR and molecular-biology techniques and to apply them to her research on the
              signal-transduction process in moth olfaction.  In doing so, she will pursue a
              mutually beneficial research collaboration with other leading scientists in
              both structural biology and olfaction, and she will become a full-fledged,
              active participant in the newly established structural-biology program at the
              State University of New York at Stony Brook.
