Title       : POWRE: Strontium Isotopes to Gauge Climatic vs. Tectonic Effects on Carbonate
               Sedimentation in Continental Basins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0074647

Award Number: 0074647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74513              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth H. Gierlowski-Kordesch gierlows@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074647
Gierlowski-Kordesch

Sr isotopes are a powerful tool in determining
              provenance (source area) for understanding sedimentation patterns within a
              basin; this information is important for reconstructing past history as well as
              resource exploration.  Applied in large part to the marine realm, the
              usefulness of Sr isotopes in solving continental geologic problems has not been
              totally utilized by the geologic community.  Because the Sr signal within
              basinal sediments can be dominated by the carbonate rocks in the source area
              (with no significant change in hydrology/climate), the application of this
              technique to nonmarine carbonates might be used to solve many geologic
              problems.  A topic usually addressed in continental research is the
              differentiation of the main controlling factors in sedimentation: climate vs.
              tectonics.  This has proven quite difficult to do because of the lack of time
              resolution across continental sequences within a basin development suggests
              that tectonics is more important than climate in controlling sediment
              architecture in basins.  To test this theory, Sr isotopes from nonmarine
              carbonate rocks can be used to determine their origin.  There are seven
              possible mechanisms to produce primary nonmarine carbonate sediments.  The
              identification of carbonates formed from the overland transport of material
              through bedload, suspended load, and dissolved load (clastic carbonates) is
              crucial to assessing a link between a sediment and its source area.  Layers of
              carbonate within siliciclastic sequences have long been identified as "arid
              climatic events".  Large quantities of carbonates, however, can be deposited in
              any climate as long as the source area for the basin contains calcium-bearing
              rocks, especially carbonates.  The occurrence of carbonate beds in a rock
              sequence may instead be linked to tectonic changes.  In addition, the textures
              of a clastic carbonate rock are indicative of the type of climate in which it
              is deposited.  Comparing the textures and stable isotopes of nonmarine
              carbonates within a sequence, one can determine whether climatic change
              affected deposition across a sequence.  If not, then one could test through Sr
              isotopic signatures whether the rocks are indeed directly sourced from the
              drainage basin through comparison with the Sr signal of the source rocks.  The
              appearance of a carbonate bed in a sequence might indicate a change in the
              source area, not in climate; the effects of climate vs. tectonics could then be
              differentiated.  In order to test and refine this technique, a modern example
              would be sampled rigorously before application to an ancient example.  The
              modern example is Kelly Lake in British Columbia - a lake containing a
              carbonate bench and associated with a river, which directly drains from a
              source area containing Permian limestones.  The ancient example involves
              nonmarine carbonates found in the northern Appalachian basin within the
              Conemaugh and Monongahela Group of the Pennsylvanian, components of the
              so-called "cyclothems", with the source area postulated to be the
              Cambro-Ordovician carbonates if Virginia.  If successful, this technique may
              change the perception and use of nonmarine carbonates in the sedimentary
              record.

