Title       : POWRE: Towards Functional Model Cells: Incorporating Internal Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0074845

Award Number: 0074845
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74963              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine D. Keating keating@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The goal of this work is to synthesize cytomimetic assemblies with internal
              complexity approaching that of their biological counterparts.  Although
              scientists from many disciplines have attempted to create synthetic replicas of
              living cells, only the very simplest of cell structures and functions have been
              mimicked in vitro. To date, most model cells have been liposomes. These can be
              excellent models of the plasma membrane, but they lack intracellular
              organization. Living cells exhibit internal ordering which can be divided into
              two broad categories based on the presence or absence of a surrounding membrane
              separating the structure from the cytosol. The exploratory work supported by
              this POWRE award is aimed at generating experimental systems in which each of
              these classes of intracellular organization is modeled.  It is not difficult to
              create giant vesicles having smaller internal vesicles - in fact, it can be
              hard not to, when attempting to synthesize large unilamellar vesicles. This
              work will move beyond previous studies by designing model organelles (inner
              vesicles) which differ in composition from the model plasma membrane (outer
              vesicle). This will be a significant step towards approximating the level of
              sophistication found in living cells.  Internal vesicles will be incorporated
              within giant unilamellar vesicles (GUVs) by including small vesicles in the
              aqueous phase during swelling of giant unilamellar vesicles. Alternately,
              preformed vesicles will be encapsulated within large liposomes by
              microinjection. Encapsulation of "organelles" will be verified (and in some
              cases followed) by video-enhanced optical microscopy. Transfer of molecules
              between "organelles" and the outer "cell" will be followed by fluorescence
              microscopy and flow cytometry.  A second approach to model the internal
              structure of cells is via macromolecular crowding. Macromolecular crowding has
              been postulated to control the association of intracellular components through
              phase segregation, which occurs more readily in the presence of high
              concentrations of noninteracting macromolecules due to volume exclusion. The
              effects of "crowding" on the contents of single GUVs will be investigated first
              with colloidal particles (e.g. latex microspheres and metal nanorods or virus
              particles), and then with biological macromolecules (e.g. albumin and tubulin
              or actin). High concentrations of volume excluders will be encapsulated within
              GUVs to generate static crowding conditions and initiate phase segregation of
              anisotropic molecules or particles. To control the "crowding" pressure during
              an experiment, GUV volume will be altered, e.g. via control of external
              osmolarity. Organization of internal particles and macromolecules will be
              followed primarily by quantitative polarized light microscopy. The process of
              phase-separation into ordered phases will be tracked by monitoring changes
              (increases) in birefringence.  Other methods for observation of internal
              ordering that will be used include reflected light microscopy (for >200 nm
              metallic nanorods), fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), and
              transmission electron microscopy (TEM). This POWRE award will allow Dr. Keating
              to perform preliminary studies to establish the feasibility of these approaches
              and to begin to make observations.  The longer term development of this project
              will, if fully successful, lead to a change in the way scientists think about
              cell models, and will greatly advance understanding of molecular self-assembly
              in living cells, and will establish this research as an independent line of
              investigation for Dr. Keating.

