Title       : POWRE: The Evolution of Elliptical Galaxies: New Clues from Neutral Gas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0074709

Award Number: 0074709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75038              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Young lyoung@prairie.nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,1217,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-007409
Young
In recent years it has become clear that elliptical galaxies
              are not dead, gas-free galaxies as they were once thought to be. Many of them
              contain neutral gas, which raises the interesting possibility that they may be
              forming stars. A complete understanding of elliptical galaxy evolution depends
              on knowing the origin and the fate of this neutral gas and the star formation
              rate in elliptical galaxies.  High resolution images made from observations of
              the carbon monoxide (CO) and hydrogen (HI) emission lines from nine elliptical
              galaxies will be made with the Berkeley, Illinois, and Maryland (BIMA) and
              Owens Valley Radio Observatory (OVRO) millimeter wavelength radio telescope
              interferometers and with the Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescope. The
              analysis of the data on the neutral gas distribution and kinematics will give
              vital clues to its origin and its fate.  For example, the analysis of the data
              will show whether the gas was acquired in a violent merger, whether the gas is
              forming stars, is feeding an active galactic nucleus, or is being destroyed by
              some other process. The knowledge about the gas distribution and kinematics
              will also help explain the origin of the radio-FIR correlation in elliptical
              galaxies and will reveal the effects of a galaxy's environment on its neutral
              gas.

The answers to these questions are not known because there are very few
              elliptical galaxies with good data on the distribution of their molecular and
              atomic gas.  The results from this project will more than double the number of
              elliptical galaxies with good CO and HI emission line maps.  The sample
              galaxies have a wide range of properties (including environment, morphology,
              luminosity. and strength of nuclear continuum source), that will help to
              disentangle the many processes affecting elliptical galaxies. The result from
              the project will be a unique synthesis of information that will help to give a
              better global picture of elliptical galaxies and their interstellar media. The
              project's results on the star formation rates in individual elliptical galaxies
              will be combined with the statistical work of Cotton & London (1998) to give
              the first quantitative picture of star formation in elliptical galaxies.  The
              results of this project will also he used to refine the theoretical models of
              elliptical galaxy evolution. Finally, by showing how elliptical galaxies are
              evolving today, the project will help to draw the connections between high
              redshift and low redshift galaxies.

This project is funded by the Division
              of Astronomical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.
***


