Title       : POWRE: Signal Transduction Pathways in Axon Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a0074938

Award Number: 0074938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sonal Jhaveri sonal@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              "Signal transduction" refers to the steps involved in transmitting a signal that
              is initiated by the binding of a growth factor at the cell surface, and is
              relayed to the nucleus (to alter gene expression), to the cytoskeleton (to
              alter cell shape and motility) or to the cytoplasm (to control the amount of
              specific mRNA in the cell).  The study of signal transduction is important
              because it reveals mechanisms via which extrinsic signals can influence the
              phenotype of the cell.

It has recently been documented that the purine
              nucleoside inosine induces unprecedented levels of axonal sprouting in the
              mature rat brain after injury.  In light of this finding, Dr. Jhaveri will
              explore the molecular mechanism via which inosine is able to regulate axon
              growth.  These experiments will be carried out in cell culture using PC12
              cells.  In particular, Dr. Jhaveri will  study the role of a specific kinase
              (N-kinase) that is an important intermediary in the signal-transduction pathway
              that leads from inosine signaling to process outgrowth.  The experiments fit
              into an ongoing research program in the laboratory of Dr. Larry Benowitz,  at
              the Children's Hospital, Boston.  Dr. Benowitz and his colleague Dr. Nina Irwin
              have both agreed to give Dr. Jhaveri the requisite training for undertaking
              these studies.  In the course of this work, Dr. Jhaveri will become familiar
              with techniques for protein isolation, designing primers, PCR, cDNA library
              screening, analysis of protein phosphorylation, generation of mutations, and
              cell transfection.

This is a critical juncture in Dr. Jhaveri's career.  The
              POWRE award will allow her to gain some training in molecular biology; lack of
              such training has repeatedly been a perceived weakness in her research program.
               Dr. Jhaveri hopes, in the near future, to apply for a tenure-track faculty
              position with an independent laboratory, and the training she will gain will
              greatly facilitate such an upward career move.
