Title       : Costs and Benefits of Anti-Herbivore Defenses in Aspen
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0074427

Award Number: 0074427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott L. Collins                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $352959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Lindroth lindroth@entomology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074427
Lindroth
Plant defense against herbivory involves two principal
              traits: resistance and tolerance. A fundamental premise of plant defense
              theories is that such traits are costly, hence the existence of significant
              genetic variation in defense characteristics within plant populations.
              Demonstration of putative costs f defense however, has proved to be
              surprisingly difficult. Evidence supporting the notion of costs is equivocal
              and vanishingly small with respect to woody plant species. Over the last 15
              years, research on quaking aspen has revealed (1) striking variation in
              susceptibility to outbreak insects, (2) equally striking genotypic variation in
              levels of phenolic glycosides, (3) phenolic glycosides reduce performance of
              aspen-feeding insects, (4) strong, environmentally-dependent trade-offs between
              growth and phenolic glycoside concentrations in aspen genotypes, and (5)
              preliminary evidence of genotypic variation in tolerance. The purpose of this
              research is to further investigate the costs and benefits of defense in the
              evolutionary ecology of aspen-insect interactions. One objective is to
              ascertain whether aspen resistance traits afford protection in experimental and
              natural settings. Levels of defoliation sustained by aspen genotypes are
              predicted to vary in inverse relation to phenolic glycoside concentrations. The
              experiment will be conducted in a common garden using clonally propagated aspen
              trees growing in nutrient-poor and nutrient-rich soil. Defoliation will be
              effected by addition of forest tent caterpillars. A second objective is to
              evaluate the independent and interactive roles of resistance and tolerance as
              defensive adaptations against herbivory. Aspen genotypes are predicted to
              exhibit costs of resistance and tolerance, and to exhibit negative genetic
              trade-offs between resistance and tolerance. This will be conducted in a common
              garden, with clonally propagated trees growing in nutrient-poor and
              nutrient-rich soils. This work is significant in that it will improve
              understanding of the evolution and ecology of plant defense against herbivores,
              and of factors constraining the evolution of defense systems. It constitutes
              the first in-depth, simultaneous evaluation of costs and benefits of chemical
              defense and tolerance in a woody plant. And, it involves species with expansive
              geographic ranges and pivotal ecological importance in early successional
              forests of North America.

