Title       : POWRE: Echocardiographic Analysis of Developing Mouse and Chicken Hearts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0074882

Award Number: 0074882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michiko Watanabe mxw13@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0074882
Watanabe

The outflow tract (OFT) is a critical portion of the
              developing and mature heart that connects the ventricles to the great vessels. 
              This structure first appears as a simple tubular structure and undergoes
              septation, shortening, and rotation within days.  Dr. Watanabe has shown that
              the OFT myocardium of the chicken embryo exhibits a high level of programmed
              cell death at a time when this tubular structure is shortening.  She has have
              recently found that inducing higher or lower than normal levels of apoptosis
              specifically in that tissue results in cardiac defects.  These results suggest 
              that a regulated level of apoptosis of the OFT cardiomyocytes is critical to
              the proper alignment of the vessels to the ventricular chambers. The objectives
              are:  (1) Determine whether programmed cell death occurs in the mouse outflow
              tract myocardium during critical stages in cardiogenesis.  If positive, it
              would support apoptosis as an evolutionarily conserved cellular mechanism for
              sculpting the OFT myocardium. Standard histological techniques will be used as
              well as an assay for apoptosis (TUNEL) detecting DNA fragments.  (2) Describe
              the function of the mouse heart using echocardiographic parameters (e.g. peak
              outflow velocity) as it undergoes a transition from a single to double
              circuited heart and compare to the OFT morphology.  This would serve as the
              baseline for analyses of mutant mice to be carried out in the future. 

The
              applicant has been using the chicken embryo to investigate cardiogenesis, more
              specifically,  the mechanisms by which  the cardiac conduction system and the
              cardiac outflow tract develop.  The utilization of the mouse model would
              complement and expand the current investigations as would introduction of a new
              functional assay, echocardiography.  The funding provided by this POWRE grant
              would allow the applicant to learn (1) the anatomy of mouse heart at the
              critical stages of cardiogenesis and (2) application of echocardiography to the
              study of small animals.










						






