Title       : POWRE: A Population Approach to Modeling Contaminant Bioaccumulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0074934

Award Number: 0074934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen H. Watanabe watanabe@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,1592,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0074934  Watanabe  The objective of this research project is to evaluate the
              feasibility of a Bayesian approach to understanding and quantifying the impact
              of population variability on the biological fate of environmental contaminants.
               In past studies of contaminant bioaccumulation, emphasis has been placed on
              the average concentration expected for a population of organisms, using average
              biological and environmental input values to model the process, and the
              goodness-of-fit is determined based on the average measured concentrations.  In
              this study a Markov chain Monte Carlo technique will be used in conjunction
              with a food-web bioaccumulation model of hydrophobic organic contaminants
              (HOCs).  Organism lipid fractions are important in the study of HOC
              bioaccumulation, yet there is relatively little data published with respect to
              these input parameters in aquatic organisms.  This project investigates the
              impact that lipid fraction variability has on the bioaccumulation of HOCs in an
              aquatic food web.  
A spotted gar food-web bioaccumulation model will be used
              to demonstrate this approach.  In support of the modeling effort, data will be
              gathered on lipid fractions in crayfish and concentrations of several
              polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in sediment, water and crayfish tissue.  Field
              sampling and sample analysis will involve collaborations between researchers at
              Xavier University and Tulane University.  Successful completion of this project
              will contribute to the scientific knowledge base on the naturally occurring
              variability in crayfish lipid fractions.  Future studies of contaminant
              bioacumulation will benefit by being able to include prior knowledge of input
              parameter variability in estimates of organism concentrations.  Broader impacts
              include development of an active collaboration between Tulane and Xavier
              researchers through which the participation of members from underrepresented
              groups in science and engineering can be increased, improved understanding of
              the biological fate of HOCs in crayfish and its dependence on organism lipid
              fraction and improved methods for estimation of ecological risk, thereby
              providing a stronger foundation for environmental decision making. ***

