Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Solids with Strong Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0074571

Award Number: 0074571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Collin L. Broholm broholm@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project explores dynamical properties of solids with strong fluctuations of
              their magnetic, electronic or structural properties. Impurity bound states in
              spin systems will be examined through magnetic neutron scattering. The
              experiments use impurities to reveal local dynamic correlations in the host and
              will also advance our understand of impurities in strongly fluctuating systems.
              Transverse lattice vibrations can cause solids to contract with increasing
              temperature. Lattice dynamics in materials with negative thermal expansion will
              be examined through inelastic neu-tron scattering. Frustrated interactions in
              magnets can suppress ordering and give rise to fluctuating phases with strong
              local constraints. Neutron scattering will be used to establish the spin
              Hamiltonian in crystalline model systems and provide detailed information about
              dynamic correlations. Experiments will be performed to examine strong magnetic
              fluctuations in metals. The experiments will probe the crossover from spin wave
              to electron hole pair excitations in anti-ferromagnetically ordered heavy
              fermion systems and explore the role of geometrical frustration in these
              systems. The educational goal of the project is to create awareness of the
              neutron scattering technique and produce innovative and competent
              experimentalists physicists that can contribute to and take advantage of the
              nations largest scientific project in the next decade: The Spallation Neutron
              Source.
%%%
While solids appear static on macroscopic length scales, they are
              dynamic on the nanometer scale. Understanding such motion is important,
              especially as technology pushes to smaller dimensions. This project examines
              fluctuations in solids on the nanometer length scale and pico second time scale
              using inelastic neutron scattering. The focus is on materials where
              fluctuations play an important role In certain materials with magnetic atoms,
              quan-tum fluctuations completely suppress any macroscopic magnetic response.
              Impurities can however induce magnetism in these systems just as impurities
              increase the electric conduc-tivity of semiconductors. Experiments will be
              carried out to understand magnetism close to impurities in these systems. Most
              solids expand on heating as the amplitude of atomic motion increases. However
              in some materials, atomic motion leads to contracti6n. Experiments will be
              carried out to determine what type of atomic motion leads to contraction
              Competing interactions can lead to strong fluctuations in magnets. These
              fluctuating magnets are poorly understood and will be examined through magnetic
              neutron scattering. Finally experiments will be carried out to probe magnetic
              fluctuations in metals that lead to anomalous metallic properties and
              superconductivity. The educational goal of the project is to create awareness
              about the neutron scattering technique and produce innovative and competent
              scientists that can contribute to and take advantage of the nations largest
              scientific project in the next decade. The Spallation Neutron
              Source.



























