Title       : POWRE: The Cognitive and Neural Architectures of Word Meaning: A Combined
               Functional Imaging and Electrophysiology Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0074634

Award Number: 0074634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara Y. Swaab swaab@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will investigate the nature and organization of semantic (meaning)
              representations.  Specifically, the research will employ physiological
              approaches to test whether the brain's organization of conceptual knowledge
              supports models that propose multiple semantic systems.  The approach will
              combine functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and event-related
              potentials (ERPs) to investigate the cognitive-neural organization of semantic
              knowledge representations and to test the role of the right hemisphere in
              lexical-semantic processing.  In this regard, the research will address two
              main questions.  The first is whether specific and separable brain regions (and
              therefore perhaps cognitive architectures) are involved in the processing of
              verbal-based and image-based representations of words.  The second is whether
              specific and separable brain regions are involved in the processing of close
              semantic relations versus more distant semantic relations between
              words.

Swaab's career goals are to develop an active, extramurally-funded
              research program in language and brain in an academic environment that includes
              teaching and training at the undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral levels. 
              This POWRE award will allow her to obtain training and to develop expertise in
              the use of modern brain-imaging tools for pursuing the cognitive mechanisms and
              brain organization that underlie normal language processes. She already has
              expertise in the use of ERPs to study language comprehension processes and
              semantic representations both in neurologically normal persons and in
              brain-damaged patients with and without aphasia.  Because these tools are
              rapidly becoming essential to studies of normal human language, Swaab will
              obtain training and experience in the use of fMRI to study the neural
              instantiation of models that propose non-unitary semantic knowledge
              representations. Importantly, this award will allow her to integrate fMRI and
              ERP in language research.  This integration of neuroimaging and
              electrophysiological methods is a recent development in cognitive research and
              will elucidate both the time course and the functional anatomy of brain systems
              involved in language. At present, few laboratories have the tools and
              specialized knowledge to integrate electrophysiology and neuroimaging in the
              study of human language.  Hence, this POWRE award will provide Swaab with a
              significant opportunity to take her work to the cutting edge of the cognitive
              neuroscience of language.

