Title       : Design of Translucent Optical WDM Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0074121

Award Number: 0074121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Byravamurthy Ramamurthy byrav@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The unprecedented growth in the number of networked users and the emergence
              of high-bandwidth end-user applications impose new challenges in the design of
              architectures for next-generation computer networks.  Optical networks,
              employing Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM), transcend the bandwidth
              limitations of electronic networks by utilizing the enormous capacity of the
              optical fiber.  Though this technology looks extremely promising, large-scale
              deployment of such optical networks in the future depends on a rapid
              convergence of communication network requirements and physical network
              realities.  The focus of the  proposed research in optical networks is to
              facilitate this process, by tackling several system-level challenges while
              acknowledging the limitations of existing devices.                             
                                                             Wavelength Division Multiplexing
              of numerous multi-gigabit/sec channels is being deployed right now on existing
              and new fiber infrastructure in respones to explosive growth in both local and
              long-haul digital traffic.  WDM deployment is surging because capacity may be
              economically provisioned by activating additional wavelength channels on
              existing fiber plant.  However, as the fiber capacity grows, increasing strain
              is placed on the capacity of costly electronic switches at network nodes and
              access points.  A reconfigurable transparent optical network seeks to provide a
              low-cost alternative by ensuring that the signal leaves the optical domain only
              at the source and destination, thereby avoiding unnecessary opto-electronic
              conversion.                                                                    
                                                                                     There
              are, however, fundamental limits imposed by physical-layer impairments that
              limit the length of end-to-end connections in transparent optical networks. 
              Connections that span several nodes and large distances may acumulate severe
              impairments imposed by fundametal physical constraints such as fiber dispersion
              and nonlinearties, spontaneous emission noise, and device imperfections such as
              crosstalk.  Since the physics of point-to-point communications performance is
              well understood experimentally and theoretically, it has been argued that
              nation-scale networks will avoid physical-layer impairments by deploying
              point-to-point WDM with electronic regeneration at each node.  Such a network
              is called an opaque optical network.  Unlike the case of point-to-point links
              and physical-layer optical devices, the analysis and simulation of complex
              all-optical or hybrid optical-electronic networks is still in its infancy and
              well-tested tools are only now being developed.                                
                                                                                        The
              goals of this project are to propose, evaluate and study designs for the
              next-generation high-bandwidth WDM-based optical networks, which are compatible
              with the physical-layer characteristics of optical devices.  In particular, the
              researcher plans to investigate the following research topics:                 
                   Sparse Regeneration and Translucent Optical Networks:  There has been a
              great deal of discussion regarding transparency vs. opacity in (national-scale)
              optical wavelength devision multiplexed (WDM) networks [11].  In [22], the
              researcher introduced the notion of a translucent optical network - a network
              which supports selective regeneration of optical signals within the network. 
              The researcher's study showed that, for medium-scale networks translucency can
              help to improve the overall network performance.  For larger-scale networks,
              where impairments introduced by fiber nonlinearities and dispersion cannot be
              ignored, the researcher anticipates that a higher degree of opacity may be
              needed to combat signal degradations, but this is an open problem for further
              research.  The researcher also plans to investigate the effect of a few signal
              regenerators at select locations in a nation-wide WDM network.                 
                                         Routing and Wavelength Assignment with Power
              Considerations:  Routing and wavelength assignment (RWA) is an important
              problem that arises in wavelength division multiplexed (WDM) optical networks. 
              Previous studies have solved many variations of this problem under the
              assumption of perfect conditions regarding the power of a signal.  The
              researcher propose to investigate this problem while allowing for degradation
              of routed signals by components such as taps, multiplexers, switching elements,
              fiber links, etc.  The researcher plans to include novel amplifier and other
              device models to characterize the performance of the networks.
