Title       : POWRE: Power Systems Stability in a Deregulated Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a0074280

Award Number: 0074280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55366              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fereshteh Fatehi fatehi@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0074280
Fatehi

In the electric utility industry, a significant change is
              occurring with the move towards deregulation and an increase in competition. 
              This development in the industry will have a profound impact on the way power
              transmission systems are designed.

One of the most significant effects of
              this change is that the transmission systems are being much more heavily used
              to transfer electric energy from one region of the country to another.  The
              motivating reason for the increased usage is purely economic, i.e., large
              wholesale energy buyers are able to satisfy their electric energy needs by
              purchasing less expensive energy from geographically distant regions and
              subsequently using the transmission system to move it to the place of
              consumption.  In this way, marketplace pressure is allowed to drive down the
              price of electric energy.  This will result in electric transmission systems
              being significantly more stressed as larger quantities of energy are
              transported over much longer distances.  Consequently, the future of the
              electric power industry requires a mechanism that allows for a competitive
              environment while ensuring that power system operating conditions are
              secure.

The goals of the proposed project are: 1) To study the total
              transfer capability and transient stability limit of western North American
              power system using large-scale simulation models 2) To investigate application
              of Flexible AC Transmission Systems (FACT) devices to enhance the power
              transfer capability and transient stability limits of the power systems. 3) To
              develop robust control strategies to improve maximum loadability of the
              transmission lines in a high order model of western North American power
              system.

The results of this research are expected to be of substantial value
              in the development of power systems in future and in providing more economic
              and secure electricity in the deregulated environment.  The funding of this
              project will result in an increase in the number of competent professional
              women with advanced knowledge of power systems and control theory.
***

