Title       : Collaborative Research: Geometric and Analytic Properties of Discrete Groups--A
               Focused Research Group on the Novikov Conjecture and the Baum-Connes Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2000    
File        : a0074062

Award Number: 0074062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Higson higson@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

 The Novikov conjecture is one of the fundamental unsolved problems
              of manifold theory. 
Its history is a fascinating journey through a remarkably
              varied mathematical landscape. 
The conjecture has provoked vigorous exchanges
              of ideas between widely separated subjects, 
and (like other famous unsolved
              problems) it has generated lively new mathematics of its 
own. The Baum Connes
              conjecture transports the fundamental aspects of the Novikov 
conjecture to
              operator algebra theory, and makes new contacts with representation
              theory,
spin geometry and other areas.
 Very recently, striking progress has
              been made on the both conjectures. Methods and ideas 
involving dimension
              theory, amenable actions of groups, Banach space geometry and combinatorics
              have played essential roles. An unusually exciting opportunity has arisen
              to
spark interaction among some quite widely separated fields. Some of the
              core questions are so 
basic that one can even expect important exchanges at
              the student level. The issues are so 
broad that the ordinary mathematical
              scheme of small, two or three person, collaborative 
efforts will not give the
              most rapid and efficient progress. 
The key objectives of the proposed program
              are as follows: 
 Marshall forces from topology, analysis and from several
              less apparent areas for a general 
attack on the Novikov and Baum Connes
              conjectures. 
 Create a rapid and effcient means of providing the essential
              tools for continuing research 
in this broad area. 
 Broaden the
              communication and cooperation between US and foreign mathematicians 
through a
              coordinated program of visits. 
 Offer effective training opportunities for
              graduate students, giving them exposure to an 
unusual breadth of mathematical
              ideas and expertise. 


