Title       : Formal and Computational Studies in Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0074311

Award Number: 0074311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Kouri kouri@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Don Kouri of the University of Houston is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program for formal and computational studies focusing
              on the time-independent wave packet reactant-product decoupling (TIW-RPD)
              approach to reactive scattering and on the exploration of the use of
              distributed approximating functionals (DAFs).  TIW-RPD methods will be used to
              develop and test approximations for enlarging the range of reactive systems for
              which reliable cross sections can be computed.  DAFs will be explored for use
              in multi-resolution analysis with likely applications in digital signal
              processing.  Development and applications of an algorithm for constructing
              sufficiently accurate quantum potentials to enable the direct solution of the
              Bohmian dynamics equations will be pursued, with the goal of enabling the
              method to be applied to three-dimensional reactive atom-diatom scattering
              calculations. 

The development and application of new mathematical and
              computational methods for formulating and solving fundamental quantum
              mechanical equations is relevant to molecular collision dynamics, and
              consequently to all chemical reactions.  Research in such a highly specialized
              area can lead to more general impacts.  For example, data compression arises in
              all areas of science, engineering, and medicine.  It is especially important in
              chemical problems such as reducing the amount of data needed to fit potential
              energy surfaces, and reducing the number of grid points needed to solve
              differential equations.  Tools developed for treating reactive scattering are
              now showing promise for medical and geophysical imaging, and digitization in
              communications.
