Title       : POWRE: Nanoscale Silicate Shells - Physical and Chemical Properties.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0074932

Award Number: 0074932
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74947              (Estimated)
Investigator: Agnes E. Ostafin aostafin@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0074932
Ostafin, Agnes E.
U. of Notre Dame

In this project,
              the physical and chemical properties of nanometer-sized
hollow shells of
              silicate will be studied to provide proper foundation for their future
              applications in science and industry. These materials can be used to
              encapsulate a variety of molecules, and have real potential in a variety of
              applications including: development of artificial retinas, development of super
              high definition luminescent displays, building blocks for micro-scale
              electronic devices, chemical sensors, to encapsulate enzymes for use in harsh
              environments, and to study the
behavior of a single molecule in a fluid
              environment. 

The realization of these applications depends on the ability
              to adequately manipulate shell synthesis and to understand the physical and
              chemical properties of the shell interior. At the conclusion of this project,
              the following aspects of silicate nano-shells will be better understood: 1) the
              control of the size and thickness of the shells 2) the shell's permeability to
              ions and molecules and 3) some important microscopic properties of the shell
              interior, such as micro-viscosity, solvent order and pH. This knowledge will be
              applied in the future to develop a general model for microscopic control of
              chemical reactions in a broad range of nano-scale systems.

The POWRE Award
              would come at an opportune time for the PI because of a recent move from a
              chemistry department in which the fundamental nature of physical and chemical
              processes are the primary concerns to a chemical engineering department in
              which applications are considered also important. The PI has already built
              experience in nano-scale particles and is in need of an opportunity to develop
              them into practical areas. The research will take place in the context of an
              emerging program in nano-scale and biological materials engineering in the
              Chemical Engineering Department at the University of Notre Dame. The POWRE
              award will enable the PI's full participation in existing and to-be-
developed
              nano-scale bioengineering research initiatives that include the
establishment
              of a new Materials Research Center at the University of Notre Dame. At the end
              of this project, the PI will be able to establish a strong and vital program in
              the engineering of nano-scale silicate shells for practical applications.

