Title       : Growth and Characterization of Nanostructured Carbon Film Field Emitters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0074636

Award Number: 0074636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose M. Perez jperez@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to grow and characterize nanostructured carbon films
              consisting of carbon nanotube and amorphous carbon films. Films will be grown
              by CVD (chemical vapor deposition). Structural and electronic properties will
              be studied as a function of growth conditions using atomic resolution
              ultra-high vacuum (UHV) scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), Raman
              spectroscopy, Auger spectroscopy, ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy and
              x-ray photoemission spectroscopy. The turn-on field for field emission (FE),
              emission site density, electron energy distribution, and stability and lifetime
              of the FE current will also be measured. Effects of residual gases on FE
              properties will be studied in detail. For carbon nanotube and amorphous carbon
              films, growth conditions resulting in optimum tube and asperity density,
              respectively, will be assessed for FPD applications. Such films have potential
              techno-logical applications as cold cathode electron emitters in flat panel
              displays (FPDs), miniature micro-wave sources, highly collimated electron
              sources and vacuum microelectronics. Using UHV STM, the effects of adsorbates
              on the structural and electronic properties of the caps of individual carbon
              nano-tubes will be studied. UHV STM will also be used to study structural and
              electronic properties of ad-sorbates that induce negative electron affinity in
              diamond such as hydrogen, Ti and Cs. The FE proper-ties of carbon nanotube and
              amorphous carbon films will be compared with those of diamond films and
              diamond-coated Mo microtips to determine the best material for FE applications.
              
%%%
The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
              materials science with high technologi-cal relevance. Advanced characterization
              techniques allow greater understanding and control of ele-mentary processes
              which will allow advances in fundamental materials science and technology. The
              basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to
              contribute to flat panel dis-play, and related applications of electronic and
              photonic materials.  An important feature of the pro-gram is the integration of
              research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant area.
***

