Title       : POWRE: Interactions Among Hox10 Paralogous Genes During Nervous System
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0074819

Award Number: 0074819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74814              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Carpenter ecarpenter@mednet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,9125,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on three genes, Hoxa10, Hoxc10, and Hoxd10, and examines
              their combined activity in the development of the nervous system.  These three
              genes, which encode transcription regulators, are expressed at lumbar levels in
              the developing embryo and are thought to provide regional identity to the
              spinal cord and surrounding tissues.  Because these genes are expressed in
              similar patterns and appear to regulate similar processes, they may interact
              directly with each other or may act in concert to regulate common downstream
              target genes.  Using knockout mice, the current studies will address
              interactions between the three genes by characterizing alterations in spinal
              cord development at the cellular and molecular level.  At the cellular level,
              spinal cord motor neurons will be examined for changes in identity and
              projection in double mutant animals.  Observations in single mutant animals
              suggest that the development of this population of cells is regulated by
              several different Hox genes; combinatorial interactions between Hox genes may
              produce more dramatic alterations in motor neuron development.  Molecular
              interactions will be identified using quantitative RT-PCR and downstream
              targets of gene activity will be identified using microarray assay screening. 
              These studies will demonstrate that three Hox genes act in combination to
              regulate the cellular and molecular identity of the developing nervous
              system.

Normal development of the spinal cord requires that the correct
              cells be produced in the proper place at the proper time in order to ensure the
              integrated functioning of the nervous system.  Alterations in cell production
              can produce diseases such as spinal muscular atrophy or lethal congenital
              contracture syndrome.  The studies to be conducted will examine how several
              genes may interact with each other to produce the unique cellular and molecular
              structure of the developing lumbar spinal cord.

It is anticipated that this
              POWRE award will allow Dr. Carpenter's research to move forward more rapidly
              after a prolonged period of administrative responsibility and will permit the
              introduction of microarray technology into her laboratory.
