Title       : POWRE: Bumble Bees and Impatiens: A Mutualism Gone Awry?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0074739

Award Number: 0074739
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74975              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen J. Young hjyoung@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nectar robbers are animals that take nectar from flowers without contacting the
              sexual parts of the flower; they rob the flowers of nectar without pollinating
              them.  In this sense, they are considered cheaters of the pollination system. 
              In most cases of nectar robbing, a different kind of animal robs than
              pollinates: bee robbers taking nectar from hummingbird-pollinated flowers, for
              instance.  In the case of Impatiens (jewelweed), the same species of bumble
              bees are both robbing and pollinating.  Even more surprising, some of the same
              individuals are both robbing and pollinating.  This observation flies in the
              face of currently accepted ideas of mutualism between plants and their
              pollinators.  The proposed research will determine how bees make behavioral
              decisions as they forage among jewelweed flowers.  Does nectar level in flowers
              determine which behavior they will perform?  Does previous visitor history of
              the flower affect their behavior?  How does age and experience of the bees
              influence their behaviors?  Intensive observations of marked bees will reveal
              individual behavior patterns.   Manipulating the nectar level of flowers will
              allow the testing of the strength of the relationship between reward level and
              behavior.

It has traditionally been thought that the relationship between
              plants and their pollinators is a prime example of mutualism: a tight
              relationship in which both members benefit.  The behaviors of bumble bees at
              flowers of jewelweed suggest that this mutualism may not be as strong, or more
              subject to exploitation, than previously thought.  This research will help us
              understand what is apparently a unique system of cheating and benefiting, one
              that currently defies the simple categories of mutualism or antagonism.

