Title       : Rates of Holocene Relative Sea-Level Rise and Differential Crustal Movements in
               the Mississippi Delta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0074065

Award Number: 0074065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Torbjorn E. Tornqvist tor@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

Rates of Holocene Relative Sea-level Rise and Differential Crustal Movements
              in the Mississippi Delta

Torbjorn Tornqvist

EAR 0074065

Accelerated
              sea level rise due to global warming is expected to become a huge problem in
              the Mississippi Delta, where dramatic loss of coastal wetlands at rates of ~100
              km2 per year is already taking place.  To facilitate future wetland management
              strategies, a proper understanding of natural rates of sea-level rise and its
              spatial variability due to differential tectonic subsidence rates is
              indispensable.  Recent studies in other major deltaic plains have shown that
              spatially nonuniform crustal movements can be considerable.  Presently
              available sea-level data from the Mississippi Delta do not resolve differential
              tectonic subsidence rates, whereas most Holocene relative sea-level curves for
              the Gulf Coast exhibit a conspicuous, but commonly mutually conflicting,
              'stair-step' pattern of alternating sea-level stillstands and rapid rises.  The
              scale of these phenomena is an order of magnitude larger that the subtle (<1
              m), supposedly climate-related sea-level fluctuations that have been inferred
              elsewhere, and they are difficult to reconcile with widely accepted global
              sea-level data.  Furthermore, recent work on the Texas Gulf Coast has proposed
              a middle Holocene sea-level highstand of >2 m above present sea level.
This
              study will collect new sea-level indicators from the eastern and western
              margins of the Mississippi Delta for the last ~7000 years, using techniques
              that have so far not been applied to the Gulf Coast.  The approach is based on
              the use of basal peats that overlie a compaction-free Pleistocene basement and
              can be related to mean sea level.  Ecologically indicative plant macrofossils
              that can be related to mean sea level will be selected from basal-peat samples
              and 14C dated by accelerator mass spectrometry.  In addition, stable carbon
              isotope ratios will be measured to preferentially select samples indicative of
              brackish or saline conditions.
The premier outcome of this project will
              constitute new relative sea-level curves for the Mississippi Delta that will
              (1) assess the vertical resolution of basal peats as sea-level indicators and
              their potential for reconstructing subtle, climate-related sea-level rise; (2)
              test the validity of the inferred 'stair-step' pattern of Holocene sea-level
              rise; (3) determine the occurrence and magnitude of differential tectonic
              subsidence rates; and (4) establish whether a middle Holocene sea-level
              highstand is likely to have occurred on the Gulf Coast (if so, represented in
              this subsiding area by a distinct reduction in the rate of sea-level rise). 
              The results will be important for future projections of coastal wetland loss in
              the Mississippi Delta.


