Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowships in Microbial Biology for FY 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2001   
File        : a0074383

Award Number: 0074383
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah S. Millikan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : D,Millikan
	      2407 Sonoma St.
	      Honolulu, HI  96822    808/942-1929

NSF Program : 1603      Postdoc Rsch Fllwshp Micro Bio
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology
              for 2000.

The research and training plan is in the area of Ecological and
              Evolutionary Physiology and is entitled "Motility-related Symbiotic
              Determinants in Vibro fischeri".  The interaction between microbe and host is a
              dynamic process that requires phenotypic changes by both partners and likely
              the coordinated regulation of specific genes for the success of this
              association.  The symbiotic interaction between the luminous bacterium Vibrio
              fischeri and the bobtail squid Euprymna scolopes is a model system for
              investigating the role of bacterial motility in the colonization of animal
              tissue.  While V. fischeri cells present in seawater must be motile to migrate
              to the initial site of colonization in the juvenile squid, a role for motility
              in the colonization of specific locations within the animal has not been
              investigated.  This research 1. Experimentally identifies colonization
              stage-specific regulation of motility genes and 2. Explores, via two
              approaches, the ability of V. fischeri to coordinately regulate motility genes
              with other colonization factors.  The first approach is to examine symbiotic
              capacity of V. fischeri mutants that exhibit an altered motility phenotype,
              while the second approach is to experimentally investigate the role of the
              bacterium's polar flagellum, which is thought to play a role in gene regulation
              within the bacteria.  The results of the proposed work will likely serve as a
              model that provides an improved understanding of the role of motility and
              co-regulated symbiotic factors in bacterial host interactions.

