Title       : POWRE: Extend Geographic Representation to Support Knowledge Discovery in
               Geographic Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0074620

Award Number: 0074620
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74874              (Estimated)
Investigator: May Yuan myuan@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1592,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE project will provide the resources needed to study representations of
              dynamic geographic processes and methods of geospatial knowledge discovery
              about patterns and behaviors of these processes in Geographic Information
              Systems (GIS). The study will address three key research questions: (1) What
              kinds of information are useful to understand geographic processes? (2) How
              should geographic processes be represented so that needed information can be
              computed from GIS databases? and (3) How can exploratory and analytical tools
              be designed with the proposed geographic representation to facilitate knowledge
              discovery in GIS?

Research on representation for dynamic geographic
              processes is urgently needed and can have a significant impact on methodologies
              for all sciences that use geospatial data to understand the dynamics of
              physical and human systems. As GIS development gradually merges into mainstream
              information technology (IT), innovative GIS research that emphasizes the
              computational fundamentals of geographic information representation and
              analysis requires advanced knowledge and skills in a melange of GIS, IT, and a
              chosen application domain. To meet such a multidisciplinary challenge, the
              POWRE study will start a new line of research that applies data mining and
              knowledge discovery methods in GIS to unveil spatial patterns of weather
              behaviors from meteorological and climatological data. The research framework
              to be developed in the study will be readily applicable to GIS knowledge
              discovery in other application domains.

The POWRE award will give the PI,
              recently granted academic tenure, a unique opportunity to develop a major
              research program in geographic representation and knowledge discovery in GIS at
              this juncture in her career. This ultimately will contribute to a greater
              integration of GIS and IT technologies to enhance the usefulness of volumetric
              scientific data that are costly acquired at a phenomenal rate. 

