Title       : POWRE: Role of Temperature and Morphology in the Nucleation of Misfit
               Dislocations in Heteroepitaxial Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  2000      
File        : a0074538

Award Number: 0074538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahadevan Khantha khantha@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to enhance understanding of defects in
              heteroepitaxial semiconductor thin films. A fundamental issue in heteroepitaxy
              is the relaxation of the elastic strain induced by lattice mismatch with
              increasing thickness of the epitaxial film. Strain relaxation occurs either by
              nucleation of misfit dislocations or by morphological transformations of the
              surface, or a combi-nation of both. There remains a wide gap in understanding
              how temperature and surface mor-phology affect the nucleation of misfit
              dislocations in epitaxial films. Closing this gap is the cen-tral focus of the
              proposed research. A new 'temperature-dependent' mechanism for the nucleation
              of misfit dislocations in heteroepitaxial films is proposed. It leads to a
              cooperative nucleation of many misfit dislocations in a planar epitaxial film
              of a given thickness above a certain tempera-ture without any energy barrier.
              The proposed research focuses on how the process of misfit dis-location
              nucleation is influenced by changes in morphology. The analytical approach
              being pur-sued enables prediction of strain relaxation as a function of
              temperature, growth rate, misfit and morphology.
%%% 
This is a research
              enhancement grant made under the Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program. The investigator is at a critical stage
              of her career making a transition from a Research Specialist to the position of
              a Research Associate Professor. The POWRE award will enable the PI to begin a
              new area of research with promising ramifica-tions in technology. A duration of
              eighteen months will provide an opportunity to investigate and test the
              applicability of a novel approach advanced for understanding an outstanding
              issue in het-eroepitaxy. The research is expected to contribute basic materials
              science knowledge at a funda-mental level of special relevance to the behavior
              of electronic materials. The project is co-supported by the Division of
              Materials Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities).
              
***

