Title       : POWRE: A Fundamental Study of Microstructual Evolution in Titanium Alloy
               Friction Stir Welds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0074267

Award Number: 0074267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74499              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Juhas juhas.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project is aimed at greater understanding of fundamental mechanisms of high
              temperature deformation and microstructural evolution in titanium alloy
              friction stir welds. Two alloys have been selected, pure(CP) titanium and
              Ti-6Al-4V, a + b alloy. CP titanium, used for its corrosion resistance
              especially in the chemical process industry, was chosen for its good
              formability. Ti-6Al-4V is widely used in a variety of aerospace and marine
              applications in welded and unwelded conditions. In addition to "normal" welds,
              interrupted welds, where the tool is retracted before reaching the end of the
              two plates to be joined, will also be evaluated. In this way, the
              micro-structures of the thermomechanically-affected and heat-affected zones
              will be compared with material just ahead of the weld. These in turn will be
              compared with microstructures of the stir zone (the actual dynamically
              recrystallized weld) and the base material. Samples will be obtained for
              metallographic examination in both the transverse and longitudinal directions
              to reveal each distinct microstructural zone and serve as a map for the
              eventual location of TEM foils. A dual beam (electron beam + ion beam) Focused
              Ion Beam (FIB) will be used to remove TEM foils at precisely designated
              locations within the welds. This will greatly improve the chances of obtain-ing
              a foil with the desired microstructural information. Diffraction contrast
              techniques will be used on a Philips CM 200 and CM 300 Field Emission Gun TEMs
              to determine the details of the deformation processes, i.e., the development of
              deformation substructure (e.g., sub-grains and sub-bands), the occurrence of
              dynamic recovery and recrystallization, annealing effects, and phase
              transformations. Scanning electron microscopy will be performed on a Philips
              XL-30 FEG instrument using Orientation Imaging Microscopy to reveal possible
              microtexture that may be residual from the base material. The results of these
              microstructural studies will be used to complement process optimization and
              mechanical property data.
%%% 
This is a research enhancement grant made
              under the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and Education
              (POWRE) program. The PI plans to realign her career after a four-year hiatus in
              an administrative capacity. Prior to working as Aerospace Team Leader at Edison
              Welding Institute and Associate Director for the Center for the Accelerated
              Maturation of Mate-rials (CAMM) at the Ohio State University, she led an active
              technical career for 15 years. The research is expected to contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of special relevance to the
              behavior of metals. The project is co-supported by the Division of Mate-rials
              Research, and the MPS OMA(Office of Multidisciplinary Activities). 
***

