Title       : RUI - Magnetic Symmetry and Symmetry Analysis of Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0074550

Award Number: 0074550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129528             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Litvin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant for Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI).  The
              understanding and prediction of the physical properties of domain structures
              which arise in a ferroic phase transition are based on an analysis of the
              properties and interrelationships of the associated crystallographic
              symmetries.  To provide a basis for the classification of domain pairs and
              domain twins, the PI has derived and tabulated both the magnetic and
              non-magnetic subperiodic groups.  This work will be continued and extended with
              a new tabulation of the magnetic space groups and a determination of the
              relationship between the magnetic space groups and magnetic subperiodic groups
              which is fundamental for the analysis of the relationship between domain
              structures and their domain walls.

Also to be derived will be all of the
              magnetic twin laws, groups that express the symmetry relationships between two
              simultaneously observed magnetic domain states (domain pair) and  are used to
              determine physical properties that can distinguish between the observed
              magnetic domains.  The PI will also determine a classification of magnetic
              domain pairs where all domain pairs in a single class can be distinguished by
              the same set of physical property tensors, and determine in which ferroic phase
              transition such magnetic domain pairs arise.  In the context of domain
              engineering the PI will classify sets of domain states, determining their
              symmetry and predicting their physical properties.

Undergraduate students
              will participate in these research projects.
%%%
This is a grant for research
              at an undergraduate institution (RUI) which involves the participation of
              undergraduate students.  The focus of the research is on tabulating and
              applying group theory to problems involving phase transitions in
              ferroelectrics. 
***


