Title       : Bioactive Hydroxyapatite Whisker Composite Ceramic Bone Substitutes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0074439

Award Number: 0074439
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367256             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa J. Baumann mbaumann@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura R. McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0074439
Crimp

The objective of this research project is to create a novel,
              synthetic, biocompatible osteogenic bone substitute having mechanical
              properties similar to cortical bone.  Every year in the U.S. alone,
              approximately 100,000 bone grafts are performed.  Applications for bone
              substitutes include massive bone loss from neoplasia, comminuted fracture
              repair, spinal surgery, and  fracture treatment in the elderly.  The model bone
              substitute is 1) osteogenic (direct bone formation via transplanted live bone
              cells called osteoblasts), 2) osteoinductive (the ability to recruit bone
              forming cells), 3) osteoconductive (the scaffold supports bone in-growth), 4)
              mechanically stable (able to carry the load of the natural bone) and 5) readily
              available.  Both the limited supply and diminished properties of autografts and
              allografts have led researchers on a quest for an optimum synthetic bone
              substitute.  Because the mineral content of bone has a composition and crystal
              structure closely matching hydroxyapatite (HA), it is natural to first turn to
              bioceramics such as HA-based materials for bone implants.  While dense
              bioceramics do not exhibit osteogenic or osteoinductive properties, HA is
              osteoconductive.  When using HA, the surgeon is faced with a trade-off between
              the mechanical strength provided by dense ceramics, and the biological
              incorporation (bone in-growth) provided by porous ceramics.  The lack of
              mechanical strength in combination with the ability to support bone in-growth
              has prevented HA, or any other bioceramic, from receiving wide spread
              acceptance as a cancellous or a cortical bone substitute.  The research project
              uses Professor Crimp's background in ceramic processing to create a strong, yet
              porous HA-based bone substitute where osteogenic and osteoinductive properties
              are added by in vitro culture of these synthetic bone scaffolds with
              osteoblasts following protocols developed by the co-PI, Professor McCabe.  HA
              whisker reinforced porous HA and biphasic calcium phosphate (BCP) ceramics will
              be fabricated using a modified foaming technique. BCP is a mixture of HA and
              beta-tri-calcium phosphate and is currently receiving attention as a potential
              bone substitute material. Of fundamental significance is the  understanding of
              the linkages between bioceramic processing and the in vivo behavior by looking
              at osteoblast adhesion in vitro.

This research project will concentrate on
              tailoring the processing protocol for whisker reinforced ceramic materials for
              use as bone replacements to yield improvements in strength, at a fixed porosity
              level matching that of human cortical bone, while maintaining the inherent
              biocompatibility of the implant materials.  These implants will be the only
              viable synthetic alternative (because of improved mechanical and osteogenic
              properties) to currently available graft materials for repair of damaged
              cortical bone tissue. 

