Title       : Theory and Applications of Multigrid and Domain Decomposition Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2001       
File        : a0074246

Award Number: 0074246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne C. Brenner brenner@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               There are three areas of research in the project ``Theory and Applications
 of
              Multigrid and Domain Decomposition Methods''.  The first area concerns
 the
              additive multigrid convergence theory, which is effective in analyzing 
 the
              asymptotic behavior of the contraction numbers of multigrid algorithms
 with
              respect to the number of smoothing steps for boundary value problems 
 with
              less than full elliptic  regularity.  The seminal result obtained by 
 the PI
              for V-cycle algorithm with Richardson relaxation as the smoother will 
 be
              extended to general smoothers, nonconforming finite elements,  the mixed 

              formulation and the F-cycle algorithm.  The second area involves multigrid 

              methods for stress intensity factors and singular solutions.  These are 

              methods that can take advantage of the form of the solution of the boundary 

              value problem in the regions where it does not have full elliptic regularity.
              
 Using this approach, usual quasi-optimal convergence rates have been
              obtained 
 for simple finite elements on simple grids for boundary value
              problems on 
 two-dimensional domains with reentrant corners or cracks.  The
              technically 
 more challenging interface problems and three dimensional
              problems will be 
 investigated in this project.  The third area is the
              analysis of the Finite 
 Element Tearing and Interconnecting (FETI) method, a
              nonoverlapping domain 
 decomposition method in which the (pseudo) inverse of
              the Schur complement 
 matrix has to be preconditioned.  The goal of this part
              of the project is to   
 carry out an  analysis of the FETI method and some of
              its variants within the
 framework of additive Schwarz preconditioners, and to
              investigate
 new mechanisms for the global communication among the subdomains.
              

 The methods analyzed in this project are efficient algorithms for the 

              numerical solution of partial differential equations.  Such equations
 are
              extremely important in science and engineering since they are the
 governing
              equations for most physical phenomena. Part of the research 
 involves the
              fast computation of stress intensity factors, which are 
 essential indicators
              in fracture mechanics.  The FETI method to be
 studied in this project has
              already been implemented for large scale 
 engineering problems using parallel
              supercomputers with up to a thousand 
 processors.  The advances resulting
              from this project will therefore 
 have an impact on many areas of science and
              technology, such as aerospace  
 engineering, fracture prediction and fluid
              flow problems.


