Title       : POWRE: Effects of Oklahoma's Wheat Crop on the Prestorm Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0074852

Award Number: 0074852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72448              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renee A. McPherson renee@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1525,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The amount, type and condition of vegetation strongly influence the fluxes of
              energy and moisture in the atmospheric boundary layer.  The partitioning of
              incoming energy into latent and sensible heat flux is determined, in part, by
              the amount of evapotranspiration from plants. Although surface evaporation over
              bare, moist soil greatly enhances the latent heat flux, the effect is more
              pronounced over vegetation, where roots can access moisture through an extended
              soil depth.  On the mesoscale, the resulting differences in latent heating over
              vegetation and dry, bare soil can generate a sea breeze-like circulation.

A
              host of past studies has highlighted the impacts of mesoscale vegetative
              regions on atmospheric conditions; however, these studies are limited in their
              real-world applicability.  Past observational studies have focused on specific
              events, relatively short time periods, or small regions.  Past numerical
              studies have produced highly idealized simulations or have lacked an extended
              set of regional observations for model initialization and verification.  In all
              cases, the authors acknowledge these shortcomings and note that they result
              from a lack of long-term, mesoscale observations across a large area.  The
              research under this award will attempt to fill this gap in adequate
              measurements by employing Oklahoma Mesonet surface data, including measurements
              from newly installed sensors to measure the surface energy budget and soil
              moisture, in both observational and numerical experiments.

Oklahoma's winter
              wheat crop provides an ideal real-world environment to examine mesoscale
              vegetative influences on the atmosphere.  The following hypotheses will be
              examined in this study: 1 ) The spatially averaged diurnal cycle of surface
              latent and sensible heat fluxes measured within Oklahoma's winter wheat belt is
              distinctly different from that measured adjacent to the crop both during the
              growing season and within a month after the wheat harvest in June. (2) On
              certain days during and within one month after the growing season, the
              horizontal gradient of sensible heat flux is larger than 100 W m-2 per 30 km
              across the crop and its adjacent region: hence, the gradient is large enough to
              establish a mesoscale circulation.  (3) The surface moisture field is
              significantly affected by the evolution of Oklahoma's winter wheat crop.  (4)
              Advection of surface moisture resulting from Oklahoma's growing winter wheat
              crop can influence the prestorm environment outside the boundaries of
              Oklahoma.

The experiments will be divided in two parts:  (1) observational
              evidence and (2) numerical modeling.  The goals of the observational study are
              to document evidence that (a) horizontal gradients in surface fluxes across
              Oklahoma's wheat belt are sufficient to produce
mesoscale circulations and (b)
              surface moisture is significantly impacted by the winter wheat crop both during
              its growth phase and within one month after harvest.  The goals of the
              numerical study are: (a) to assess the impacts of the measured horizontal
              gradients in surface fluxes and moisture on the wheat field's local
              environment, (b) to quantify the effects of mature and harvested cropland on
              the planetary boundary layer (PBL) by comparing these simulation results with
              those of a control run without cropland, and (c) to determine how far
              downstream the wheat field influences near-surface moisture.

Results from
              this study will extend the current state of knowledge in the atmospheric
              sciences by providing evidence of the extent to which a mesoscale crop belt can
              impact its environment. Because low-level moisture, PBL development, and
              atmospheric instability directly influence convection, the results also will
              offer evidence of the anthropogenic modification of the prestorm environment by
              large crop regions.  It is expected that improved knowledge of the impact of
              the wheat crop on the prestorm environment will aid forecasters during spring
              and early summer.

