Title       : POWRE: Emotional Granularity: A Cognitive Neuroscience Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0074688

Award Number: 0074688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Feldman Barrett barretli@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This POWRE award will allow Feldman Barrett to integrate cognitive science and
              neuroscience perspectives into her current research on emotion generation.  She
              has developed a theory that emotional responses are formed when complex emotion
              knowledge is applied to elementary feelings of pleasure or displeasure.  This
              application may be either automatic, requiring little attention, or deliberate,
              requiring effort, when generating a discrete emotional response. As a result,
              individuals vary in the specificity in their current emotional state, called
              emotional granularity.  Low granularity involves little or no distinction
              between emotions typically assumed to be separate and specific (e.g., anger,
              sadness, fear, etc.), whereas high granularity involves fine grained
              distinctions.  This award will afford her the opportunity to formulate a theory
              of functional emotional architecture that will directly address how feelings of
              pleasure or displeasure combine with emotion representations to produce
              emotional states.  The award will give her the opportunity to develop
              familiarity with contemporary literature and methods in cognitive science and
              neuroscience.  She will endeavor to connect observed differences in emotional
              granularity with available evidence about neuroanatomical models of the brain
              and thereby to formulate a theory of a functional emotional architecture that
              directly addresses how automatic and deliberative processes produce emotional
              states.  Moreover, she will initiate a program of study addressing how working
              memory is linked to the deliberate use of emotion knowledge when emotional
              responses are generated. 
 
The work has the potential to change in a
              fundamental way the research questions that psychologists ask when studying
              emotion.  It may move the field away from the notion that emotions are a small
              set of discrete, universal states that are essentially defined by distinct
              autonomic or behavioral patterns, and towards a view that emotions, like memory
              and attention, are emergent phenomena generated by the complex interplay of
              multiple systems.  In addition, it will pave the way for future research on the
              adaptive consequences of emotional granularity and contribute to the
              construction of training programs (in therapy or in skill-building programs)
              designed to improve emotional adjustment (which will, in turn, improve
              interpersonal adjustment and vocational performance). 

This POWRE award,
              thus, will enable Feldman Barrett to develop new methodological skills, pursue
              collaborations with cognitive neuroscientists specializing in neuroimaging
              technology, and thereby broaden the theoretical and empirical base of her
              research program.

