Title       : Moving Mesh Methods for Numerical Solution of Time Dependent Partial
               Differential Equations in Two and Three Spatial Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0074240

Award Number: 0074240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weizhang Huang huang@math.ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator continues to develop adaptive moving mesh methods
for the
              numerical solution of time dependent, multi-dimensional
partial differential
              equations. The research work will be focused
on a new moving mesh method, the
              moving mesh partial differential
equation approach proposed by the
              investigator and his collaborators.
The approach has been implemented in one
              and two dimensions for
generating non-singular structured and unstructured
              adaptive meshes
and successfully applied to a number of problems.
              Moreover,
the approach has led to a unifying framework describing
              previous
methods, providing a new theoretical underpinning, and
              building
reliable new methods. The objectives of the proposal are to
further
              improve the efficiency and robustness of the two dimensional
method, to apply
              it to practical problems, and to implement
the three dimensional
              method.

This project is concerned with the development of new
              computational
methods which are essential to enhance the ability of scientists
              and
engineers to solve large scale computational problems that are crucial
to
              our economy, environment, and security. The research is focused on
development
              of adaptive numerical techniques or mesh adaptation methods,
where the special
              moving features of the particular problem being solved
are adapted to. Mesh
              adaptation has recently played an indispensable role
in the numerical
              simulation of many large-scale problems arising from
science, engineering, and
              industry, such as those involving shock
waves, boundary layers, ignition
              propagation fronts, and multi-material
interface. These problems have a
              distinct common feature, that is, their
solution changes significantly only in
              a small portion of the physical
domain and the resolution of the solution in
              this portion dominates
the quality of the whole simulation. Standard
              (non-adaptive) techniques
often fail to solve these problems because they
              spend effort evenly on
the entire domain and thus require formidable resources
              of computer
CPU time and memory to obtain a reasonable degree of
              resolution.
On the other hand, adaptive mesh methods gain significant
              economies
by paying most attention to the small portion of the physical
              domain
where the solution changes most. The moving mesh method under study
is
              a natural type of adaptive mesh methods which are designed to
capture the
              moving features of the physical solution.  The method
is suitable for parallel
              computing and has proven to be an indispensable
tool for use in the simulation
              of many industrial manufacturing problems.
As an important part of the
              proposed research project, two specific
applications will be focused on. The
              first will be the numerical
simulation of chemical transport in groundwater
              aquifers.
Groundwater supplies much of the water use in the United
States.
              The wide spread degradation of groundwater quality from
chemical contamination
              has recently prompted extensive research for
simulating and predicting
              chemical behaviors in the subsurface.
The application of the moving mesh
              methods will provide accurate,
efficient, and robust numerical algorithms for
              simulating chemical
transport in groundwater and therefore for effectively
              protecting
and managing the groundwater resources. The other application will
              be
on the analysis of dynamic stall of airfoil for better understanding
the
              physical mechanisms which cause the unsteady flow
behavior in the
              high-angle-of-attack flight condition found common
with modern fighter and
              civil transport aircrafts.

