Title       : High-Order Embedded Interface Methods for Wave-Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0074257

Award Number: 0074257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan S. Hesthaven Jan.Hesthaven@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to develop a new family of stable high-order finite
difference
              methods suitable for the solution of wave problems
involving many interfaces
              and significant geometric complexity.
These complications are addressed by
              embedding the computational
problem into a Cartesian grid and formulating
              methods such that
the position of the material interfaces as well as the
              physical
properties of the solution across the interface is accounted
              for
properly to the order of the scheme. Staggered grid as well
              as
non-staggered grid methods will be explored with the emphasis on
the
              development of a rigorous mathematical foundation for these
schemes to ensure
              robustness and uniform stability for all grid 
sizes and embedded geometries.
              Appealing properties of embedding
methods such as the ability to model moving
              interfaces and the
introduction of virtual interfaces to enhance parallel
              performance
will be exploited to model a variety of wave problems
              in
electromagnetics, acoustics, seismology, and elasticity.

The increasing
              interest in the accurate and efficient solution
of wave-dominated problems,
              e.g. problems in acoustic and 
electromagnetics, over very long periods of
              time has spawned an 
interest in the formulation of high-order accurate
              computational
methods for such problems. In this effort we propose to
              develop
a new class of computational techniques, specifically aimed at
the
              reliable and robust modeling of problems of a realistic
size and complexity,
              e.g., the modeling of the propagation of
electromagnetic and acoustic noise
              and its environmental impact, and
the modeling of underground waves of
              interest to the oil industry.
The proposed methods are unique in maintaining a
              very simple 
computational structure without sacrificing the accuracy,
              hence
overcoming a number of well known difficulties associated with
existing
              methods which require some kind of automated generation of
the computational
              grid on which the solution is computed.
These proposed developments will
              enable the modeling of
very complex and realistic scenarios and will, in
              combination 
with high-performance computing facilities for which the
methods
              are well suited, allow for the modeling and analysis
of complex wave dominated
              problems in a variety of areas of interest
to engineers and scientists.

