Title       : Large-Scale and Parallel Matrix Computations in Linear Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1992  
File        : a9212629

Award Number: 9212629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Biswa Nath Datta dattab@math.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   This interdisciplinary project will be devoted to the study               
              of effective numerical methods for large-scale solutions and                   
              parallel computations of several fundamental linear algebra                    
              problems arising in the design and analysis of linear control                  
              systems. Specific attention will be paid to the development and                
              implementation of computationally viable algorithms for: feedback              
              stabilization of the large second-order model; computing the                   
              frequency response and the H-infinity norm of a large and sparse               
              matrix; and parallel and high performance computing of important               
              matrix equations such as the Lyapunov, Sylvester, and Riccati and              
              the eigenvalue assignment problems. Some numerical analysis                    
              aspects such as conditioning of the problems and stability of the              
              algorithms will be considered, as well. The use of                             
              state-of-the-art techniques in matrix computations such as the                 
              GMRES and QMR algorithms, Rank Revealing QR factorizations,                    
              condition estimations schemes such as SPICE, ICE, ACE, etc., and               
              the associated software packages (e.g. LAPACK) will be                         
              emphasized.  The algorithms to be developed in this project and                
              their implementations on vector supercomputer and massive                      
              parallel architectures will permit fast, accurate, and reliable                
              solutions of large-scale control problems arising in practical                 
              situations such as the design of large space structures, control               
              of power systems, and for other problems that otherwise could not              
              be handled in a reasonable time, if at all. The proposed research              
              will thus address some of the critical needs for research in the               
              area of large-scale and parallel computations in control theory                
              outlined in the recent panel report "Future Directions in Control              
              Theory: A Mathematical Perspective". The project is timely and                 
              benefit both applied mathematicians and control theorists and                  
              engineers.
