Title       : Labors and Laborers of the Loom: The Impact of Mechanization on Handloom Weavers
               and Weaving 1780-1840
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9212925

Award Number: 9212925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37842              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail F. Mohanty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              "Outwork," the practice of industries to employ laborers,                      
              frequently women and even children, work on products at home,                  
              remains an issue among factory workers today.  Outwork is greatly              
              affected by changing technology.  At times, technology negatively              
              affects the ability of workers to practice their craft at home; at             
              other times it enhances it.  Dr. Mohanty is studying the US textile            
              industry and the ways in which new machines upset the weaving                  
              processes, the ways weavers worked, and the things weavers wove.               
              She has collected data on a large group of two different kinds of              
              weavers in Rhode Island:  men engaged in the traditional practice              
              of the craft and women engaged in outwork brought into existence by            
              changes in spinning technology.  By comparing these two groups, Dr.            
              Mohanty is providing new insights into the complex ways in which               
              mechanization alters labor patterns.  Her study also links how                 
              specific changes in loom technology causes shifts in the different             
              types of fabrics hand weavers use in order to profit in the                    
              marketplace.  She finds that, contrary to popular impression, the              
              first phases of mechanization actually increased opportunities for             
              outworkers who reacted differently to technical change than did                
              traditional craft weavers.  This study promises significant                    
              contributions to our understanding of the interaction of technology            
              and the way we work during periods of rapid technological advance.
