Title       : The Scientific Study of Explosives and Munitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9212385

Award Number: 9212385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seymour H. Mauskopf shmaus@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              At the end of his administration, President Eisenhower, himself                
              having risen to the highest rank in the US military, a "general of             
              the Armies," warned about the dangers of the "military-industrial              
              complex."  A major portion of this complex is the government                   
              finance of research and development of new weapons of war.  Yet                
              this phenomenon is not new:  governments began serious support of              
              the scientific study of weapons of war in the late 18th century.               
              The "father of the chemical revolution," Antoine Lavoisier, served             
              France as the administrator of research on gunpowder.  Indeed,                 
              France was the locus of the most sustained tradition of scientific             
              involvement in the development of munitions and explosives up until            
              the rise of the great superpowers of the 20th century, the US and              
              the USSR.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Dr. Mauskopf is examining the development of scientifically based              
              munitions and explosives, concentrating on but not limiting himself            
              to work in France.  On the basis of his prior investigations, he               
              has found useful an heuristic patterning involving a research focus            
              of material (i.e. chemical research) versus a dynamic focus in                 
              physics research.  There is also a pattern of research locus of                
              laboratory versus field studies of the effectiveness of various                
              munitions and explosives.  The material focus has to do with such              
              challenges as the production and purification of the constituents              
              of the munitions, etc.  The dynamic focus had more to do with                  
              physical aspects of explosion and to aspects including such                    
              parameters of explosion as temperature, pressure, rate of burn and             
              work performed and the relation of the actual physical                         
              characteristics of the munitions to their mode of explosion.                   
              Laboratory versus field locus distinguishes between those                      
              investigations conducted in scaled down laboratory conditions from             
              those carried out under conditions approximating military use.  Dr.            
              Mauskopf hypothesizes that there was a progressive amalgamation of             
              all four components (chemical vs. physical, lab vs. field research)            
              as research moved to the 20th century.                                         
                                                                                             
              The history of the scientific study of munitions and explosives has            
              hardly been studied before.  This study will not only rectify this             
              inattention, but will also address issues pertinent to the                     
              historical relationship between science, technology and industry;              
              the relationship between scientific research and military                      
              considerations; and the relationship of science to political and               
              commercial incentives and patronage.
