Title       : Development of a Parallel Reaction Path Package (ROW)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9212619

Award Number: 9212619
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael McGrath                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim K. Baldridge   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Atomics
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92118    /   -

NSF Program : 4066      PART FOR ADVANCED COMP INFRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,9222,
Abstract    :
              9212619  Baldridge    This is a Research Opportunities for Women (ROW) award to
              Dr. Kim  Baldridge at the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC).  
              Computational chemistry is an area constantly in demand of  faster, more
              efficient tools to model chemical reactions.  This  is of growing importance as
              more and more researchers meld  experiment with theory in order to elucidate
              more fully  information concerning complex reactions.  The study of reaction 
              mechanisms and the prediction of rate constants by semi-empirical  and ab
              initio methods is limited by the computational effort  needed to calculate
              reactive potential energy surfaces(PESs).   The advances made in the
              calculation of energy gradients and  higher order derivatives of potential
              surfaces however, have been  an important factor in reducing this effort, in
              particular by  allowing efficient calculation of the potential along a minimum 
              energy reaction path(MEP).  This raises the question of the  accuracy with
              which the MEP for a reaction must be calculated in  order to obtain a reaction
              path representation well enough  converged to calculate accurate thermal rate
              constants.  The  answer highly depends on the size of the molecular system and
              the  complexity of the chemical reaction.  Dr. Baldridge's proposal  addresses
              these problems at the algorithmic level and, via  parallelization, at the
              hardware level.  She proposes to build on  work already undertaken in order to
              complete the redevelopment of  a much needed computational chemistry package
              (MOPAC) for the  parallel computing environment.  MOPAC is a widely used semi- 
              empirical quantum chemistry code for the study of chemical  reactions.
