Title       : Dissertation Research: Importance of Genetic Factors on Fecundity and Survival
               of Small Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1993 
File        : a9212583

Award Number: 9212583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred W. Allendorf darwin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Mitchell-Olds  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dara Newman  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The importance of genetic factors to the short-term survival of                
              natural populations is not known.  Small populations lose genetic              
              variation due to genetic drift (random loss) more quickly than                 
              large populations, and may experience inbreeding depression.                   
              However, the relationship between inbreeding, genetic variation,               
              and population survival is unclear.  The first part of this                    
              proposal research project will examine the importance of genetic               
              variation on the immediate survival of small populations.  The PIs             
              will test whether populations founded with greater initial genetic             
              variation are more likely to persist, as measured by smaller                   
              fluctuations in population size and larger mean size, than                     
              populations founded with lower amounts of genetic variation.                   
              Secondly, the PIs propose to examine the effectiveness of migration            
              in reducing the potentially detrimental effects of inbreeding and              
              genetic drift.  The effect of different levels of migration on                 
              population fecundity will be assessed.  Information regarding the              
              minimum rates of migration needed to balance the detrimental                   
              effects of inbreeding and drift is necessary for prescribing                   
              management procedures on isolated, small populations of rare                   
              species.
