Title       : GEM: An S3-3 Satellite Test of Models of Boundary Layer Driven Field -Aligned
               Currents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9212497

Award Number: 9212497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Timothy E. Eastman                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia A. Cattell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              It is proposed that the National Science Foundation support a GEM              
              study designed to test models for the source of the field-aligned              
              currents flowing into the auroral ionosphere.  Utilizing data                  
              from the magnetometer, electric field probes and particle                      
              detectors on the S3-3 satellite, the predictions of the Siscoe-                
              Sonnerup-Lotko (SSL) model for day-side field-aligned currents                 
              will be tested.  A preliminary study utilizing existing data                   
              bases is proposed for the first year.  In the second and third                 
              years, software will be developed to anlyze the remainder of                   
              available auroral zones passes which will then be added to the                 
              data base.  This data base will provide more statistically                     
              significant tests of SSL and other models of field-aligned                     
              current generation.  Testing of models of boundary layer sources               
              of field-aligned currents is critical to the objectives of the                 
              GEM Boundary Layer Campaign.  Inputs from a study of this type                 
              will be required to develop more sophisticated and realistic                   
              models.  Magnetotail sources of currents will also be examined,                
              for example by comparing the magnitude of nightside Region 1                   
              currents to the tail lobe magnetic field for various                           
              interplanetary magnetic field conditions.  Findings will provide               
              preliminary constraints on models of coupling and field-aligned                
              current generation to be developed as part of the upcoming GEM                 
              Campaign on Substorms.
