Title       : The Visual Language of Astronomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1992      
File        : a9212929

Award Number: 9212929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6605               (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Van Helden helden@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Communication is an essential process in the development of                    
              science.  Without communication of results, it is impossible for               
              science to advance, for positions to be challenged, etc.  The                  
              "scientific paper" has been the traditional means of communication,            
              but to say this leaves out the content.  In fact, each scientific              
              specialty is unique in the development of its own system of                    
              communication.  Mathematicians may communicate using numbers and               
              symbols; anatomists may communicate by using drawings (rather than             
              photographs) of organs and their parts.  Recently, communications              
              have changed in molecular biology.  With the advent of genome                  
              sequencing projects, a whole electronic network has been                       
              established to communicate long strings (sequences) of letters                 
              constituting the letters of DNA sequences.  The current network                
              allows only letter after letter to be listed.  With the development            
              of faster computers, etc., these communications should be sent out             
              in a two dimensional format where the position of sequences of DNA             
              can be shown in relationship to each other.                                    
                                                                                             
              One of the most important issues of the social study of science and            
              technology is how these communications conventions develop.  How is            
              it that molecular biologists agree that a particular sequence of               
              letters is meaningful?  How is it that physicists accept electrical            
              displays in a cloud chamber as communication proving the existence,            
              say, of a quark?  It is this process that Dr. Van Helden is                    
              examining. He is looking at a critical time in the development of              
              a new language of communication in one of the most ancient of                  
              sciences:  astronomy.  Before the advent of the telescope,                     
              astronomy was a science communicated by words, mathematical                    
              symbols, and diagrams, but not by naturalistic representations of              
              the heavenly body.  The telescope, however, revealed celestial                 
              phenomena that were often impossible fully to describe in words,               
              and therefore astronomers had to learn to communicate information              
              by means of pictures drawn by the observer and reproduced as                   
              accurately as possible.  Dr. Van Helden is studying the process by             
              which these pictures were first developed and how this visual                  
              language gradually came to be accepted.  He hopes to show how a                
              fully articulated visual language, including the many essential                
              conventions, was developed and became standard in the astronomical             
              community.  In order to complete this project, Dr. Van Helden is               
              examining original manuscripts with their illustrations contained              
              in libraries in London, Leiden, Paris, and Florence.
