Title       : Chapman Conference on the Lower Thermosphere and Upper Mesosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1992   
File        : a9212215

Award Number: 9212215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22097              (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Frederick Spilhaus fspilhaus@agu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Geophysical Union
	      2000 Florida Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200091231    202/462-6900

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   Research in the area of upper mesospheric and lower                       
              thermospheric physics and chemistry has experienced a revival of               
              interest over the past decade. The importance of this region has               
              become increasingly apparent through modelling studies while                   
              advances in observational techniques have allowed an increase in               
              our empirical understanding. This is the region of the Earth's                 
              atmosphere about which the least is known, owing to the difficulty             
              of making detailed measurements of the important parameters.                   
              Furthermore, current research has pointed towards the possibility              
              of rapid anthropogenic change in the region. This Chapman                      
              Conference will provide an opportunity for the international                   
              community of aeronomers and atmospheric scientists to engage in                
              focused discussion of progress in studies of the lower thermosphere            
              and upper mesosphere in a variety of areas using modelling as well             
              as empirical approaches.                                                       
                   These discussions will be particularly timely, in view of the             
              efforts currently underway under the auspices of the Coupling                  
              Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) initiative.             
              This initiative,  which is an authorized component of the Solar                
              Terrestrial Energy Program (STEP), encompasses several activities              
              which address various questions regarding the physics and chemistry            
              of the upper mesosphere and lower thermosphere, including the Lower            
              Thermospheric Coupling Study (LTCS or MLTCS), Coupling and Dynamics            
              of Equatorial Regions (CADER), ARIA, and AIDA. In addition to Cedar            
              activities, the NASA TIMED (Thermosphere-Ionosphere-Mesosphere                 
              Energetics and Dynamics) Mission, planned for the mid-1990's, is               
              invigorating researchers toward the development of improved                    
              observational techniques.
