Title       : The Fate of Cognitive Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9212264

Award Number: 9212264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark Glymour CGO9@anddrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of Professor Glymour's study is the application of formal            
              methods developed by statisticians, computer scientists,                       
              mathematical psychologists and philosophers of science (including              
              the PI and his former student, Dr. Kevin Kelly) to aspects of                  
              cognitive psychology.  Specifically, Professor Glymour is                      
              investigating the contexts in which contemporary cognitive                     
              psychology may not turn into a successful research program because             
              the questions cognitive psychologists seek to address are radically            
              underdetermined by the kind of evidence available to them.  In                 
              undertaking this study of contemporary cognitive psychology,                   
              Professor Glymour uses  Sigmund Freud's scientific efforts until               
              the turn of the century as a kind of methodological model.  He                 
              argues that Freud's theoretical and methodological approaches in               
              the 1890s are in important respects those of many contemporary                 
              cognitive psychologists.  He further suggests that Freud's                     
              scientific enterprise did not turn into a successful research                  
              program for the same reasons that he sees problems with                        
              contemporary cognitive science:  the questions are underdetermined             
              by the evidence.  Finally, he wants to argue that it is just those             
              points that contemporary cognitive psychology share with Freud's               
              theory, i.e. similar goals and methodological limitations, that                
              lead to this problem in contemporary science.  The aim of this                 
              study is not to argue that contemporary cognitive psychology ought             
              not to be done or ought not to be supported.  The aim is to                    
              emphasize the importance of articulating alternatives and giving               
              frank consideration to how much or how little an experiment or an              
              entire research program can do to distinguish among these                      
              alternatives.
