Title       : NSF Workshop on HPCC: Vision, Natural Language and Speech Processing and
               Artificial Intelligence, Washington, D.C., February 21-22, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1992  
File        : a9212592

Award Number: 9212592
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35395              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin W. Wah b-wah@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9215,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is concerned with a workshop on High Performance                 
              Computing and Communications (HPCC) for Grand Challenge                        
              Applications - Vision, Natural Language and  Speech Processing,                
              and Artificial Intelligence.  This workshop will bring together                
              22 invited experts from academia and industry, with the goal of                
              identifying near-term and long term problems in supporting these               
              grand challenge application problems.  Many traditional results                
              in these grand challenge applications involving vision, natural                
              language and speech processing, and artificial intelligence were               
              developed without the availability of HPCC systems.  On the other              
              hand, computer architects design HPCC systems without considering              
              requirements in vision, natural language and speech processing,                
              and artificial intelligence applications.  In this workshop, key               
              issues and potential approaches/research directions for the next               
              five to ten years will be identified, with the goal of answering               
              the following problems: (1) What are grand challenge applications              
              in vision, natural language and speech processing, and artificial              
              intelligence that can be benefited by the availability of HPCC                 
              systems?   (2) How should HPCC systems be designed so they can                 
              support grand challenge applications in these areas?  The                      
              interdisciplinary HPCC initiative has created a needed for                     
              infrastructure development and program planning.  The proposed                 
              meeting will bring together about 22 experts in the fields with                
              representatives of NSF to discuss current research issues and                  
              formulate interdisciplinary research frameworks.  The goal of the              
              meeting is to produce a report describing those issues and                     
              frameworks which will then be disseminated to the research                     
              community.
