Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: Molecular Genetic Studies of Sulfur-Oxidizing
               Chemoautotrophic Bacterial Symbionts in theHydrothermal Vents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1994  
File        : a9212664

Award Number: 9212664
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bridget E. Laue   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Sulfur-oxidizing chemoautotrophic bacteria have been shown to                  
              occupy a symbiotic niche in the trophosome tissue of the                       
              vestimentiferan tube worm Riftia pachyptila, found at deep-sea                 
              hydrothermal vent sites.  The endosymbionts are contained within               
              host bacteriocytes, where they are supplied with nutrient                      
              substrates by the host. The tube worm absorbs these nutrients from             
              the seawater, through its highly vascularized plume and transfers              
              them by the blood hemoglobin to the symbionts.  H2S, released in               
              the hydrothermal vent fluid, and O2 from ambient seawater, are used            
              in the sulfide-oxidation reactions, generating ATP to fuel CO2                 
              fixation, which is the basis of the animal's nutrition.  The                   
              symbiont-containing tissue contains high activities of the sulfur-             
              oxidizing enzymes ATP sulfurylase and APS reductase, and the                   
              Calvin-Benson cycle enzyme, RuBPC/O.  Numerous other examples of               
              similar symbiotic relationships between bacteria and marine                    
              invertebrates have been reported from vents, deep-water seeps and              
              near shore sediments, but the enzyme data are rarely clear cut                 
              enough to implicate specific sulfur oxidation pathways as they are             
              for the Riftia paradigm.  Many questions remain concerning various             
              symbiont's interactions with their hosts. In virtually all cases it            
              is not known whether symbionts are transferred to progeny via eggs             
              (or sperm) or whether each generation of larvae acquires symbionts             
              de novo from the environment. In no case has a free-living form of             
              a symbiont been identified in a water sample. If de novo                       
              acquisition does occur: 1. Can multiple host species be colonized              
              by a single symbiont species?  and 2. Does the host cause changes              
              in symbiont morphology, and does it somehow control the expression             
              of pertinent genes, such as those involved in sulfur oxidation?                
                                                                                             
              Extensive characterization of these various symbionts has not been             
              possible because they have remained unculturable.  The goal of this            
              project is to overcome this obstacle by the use of a molecular                 
              genetic approach. An immediate goal is to clone and sequence the               
              bacterial specific genes for ATP sulfurylase, APS reductase and                
              RuBPC/O from a R.pachyptila genomic lambda library.  From the                  
              nucleotide sequences the research will derive information about                
              gene regulation, which may lead to a better understanding of                   
              interactions with the host.  The genes can be used as probes in                
              diverse symbioses to identify unculturable bacterial symbionts as              
              sulfur-oxidizing chemoautotrophs, and to demonstrate their capacity            
              for specific sulfur-based catabolic pathways. Likewise they can be             
              used to identify a free-living bacterium as the R.pachyptila                   
              symbiont.  These genes will also be used as probes in a restriction            
              length polymorphism analysis of symbiont evolutionary relationships            
              in R.pachyptila and Tevnia jerichonana.  Preliminary studies                   
              suggest that while the hosts represent different animal classes,               
              their symbionts, are of the same species.  Finally, a strategy is              
              outlined for using these probes to determine whether these                     
              symbionts are obtained de novo by each generation, or are                      
              transferred from parent to offspring.
