Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: Genetic Population Structure and Gene Flow in
               Deep-Sea Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1994   
File        : a9212994

Award Number: 9212994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. France   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Kocher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,9125,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9212994  France    The deep sea is the largest environment of Earth and is known
              to be  highly diverse in its invertebrate fauna.  Although considerable  effort
              has been devoted to measuring the patterns of species  diversity, the
              evolutionary forces which have generated the deep-  sea fauna remain poorly
              studied. In order to estimate gene flow and  the potential for population
              differentiation and speciation,  studies of the genetic patterns of geographic
              variation are  required. Yet only a handful of such studies have been done in
              the  deep sea. One of the major obstacles to quantifying genetic  population
              structure in deep-sea species has been the difficulty of  obtaining sufficient
              quantities of appropriately preserved tissue  for genetic studies. Most of the
              deep-sea benthos is comprised of  small, sparsely distributed organisms which
              are recovered dead or  moribund during typical sampling; these specimens have
              been  inadequate for the standard techniques of allozyme electrophoresis.  
              However, with the advent of new molecular biological techniques  which make
              possible the characterization of DNA sequences from  ancient, dried, and
              alcohol-preserved tissues, studies of the  population genetics of deep-sea
              species are now feasible. In  particular, the extensive collections of
              specimens from dozens of  deep-sea sampling efforts provide a wealth of
              potential information  ready to be analyzed. This project will apply the
              techniques of the  polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to characterize genetic
              variation  from alcohol-preserved specimens of deep-sea amphipods, with the 
              goal of estimating genetic population structure and gene flow at  intra-ocean
              and inter-ocean geographic scales. To accomplish this  goal, this project will,
               1.) with PCR, amplify rapidly evolving  portions of the mitochondrial DNA
              (mtDNA) from 15-25 individuals in  each population with universal primers
              constructed from mtDNA  sequences of Drosophila; 2.) inspect amplified segments
              for  hypervariable regions; 3.) identify 15-20  base pair regions where  most
              variation is confined to 1 or 2 polymorphic nucleotides and  design
              allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) probes for each  allele; 4. hybridize ASO
              probes to amplified hypervariable regions  from 100-200 individuals per
              population; 5) calculate allele and  genotype frequencies in each population
              and evaluate population  structure.  The results of this project should provide
              the first  detailed examination of genetic population structure across deep 
              ocean basins and between world oceans. In addition, this project  has the
              potential to demonstrate the applicability of molecular  biological techniques
              to problems in deep-sea ecology and to  promote further use of available
              resources in addressing important  evolutionary issues in the oceans.  ***
