Title       : The Study of Ultrafast Intramolecular Rearrangements via Microwave Dielectric
               Relaxation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1994      
File        : a9212062

Award Number: 9212062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest N. DiCarlo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's University
	      5600 City Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191311308    215/879-7300

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award, in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic                  
              Chemistry Program, will support studies on very rapid intra-                   
              molecular rearrangements of organometallic molecules using the                 
              technique of microwave dielectric relaxation.  The systems                     
              chosen for study are primarily those that have previously                      
              resisted characterization by dynamic, NMR techniques because                   
              their rates of rearrangement.  Systems to be studied include                   
              tetrahedral - square planar interconversions in four coordinate                
              nickel(II) complexes, Berry pseudorotation processes in                        
              trigonal bipyramidal compounds of P, Sb, Ru and Os, and eight                  
              coordinate beta-diketonate complexes of Zr, Ce, Th, and U.                     
              Measurements will be made as a function of temperature so that                 
              activation energies can be extracted from the data.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              It has been recognized for some time that many molecules                       
              undergo a variety of types of intramolecular motions.  In the                  
              case of many organometallic compounds these motions may result                 
              in the interconversion of stereoisomers and can have important                 
              consequences for chemical reactivity.  In other cases, such as                 
              those to be examined here, the rearrangements are degenerate                   
              and result in no apparent change in the structure of the                       
              molecule.  Understanding the nature of the energy barriers to                  
              such rearrangements is fundamental to understanding the process                
              itself.  Degenerate rearrangements frequently occur at such                    
              high rates that there are very few experimental techniques that                
              can be utilized.  Microwave dielectric relaxation is one                       
              technique that can be applied to certain compounds.  Although                  
              Professor DiCarlo is located at a primarily undergraduate                      
              institution, his laboratory is one of the few in the world that                
              is equipped to make these measurements and to provide some                     
              badly needed quantitative information concerning the barriers                  
              to rearrangement in some important classes of compounds.
