Title       : Conference to Establish a Consortium of Sociolegal Research Institutions;
               Oxford, England; March 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9212408

Award Number: 9212408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Felstiner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Law & Society Assoc
	      University of Massachusetts
	      Amherst, MA  010030001    413/545-4617

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              To aid in the effort to encourage transnational sociolegal                     
              research, the Law and Society association through its Committee on             
              International Activities is sponsoring a conference to establish               
              an international consortium of sociolegal research institutions.               
              The conference will organize the consortium and develop a program              
              of activities for it, including centralized research information,              
              personnel exchanges, research development, resources development,              
              training, and communications (newsletters and journals).  Open                 
              invitations will be issued to all sociolegal research institutions.            
              Representatives will be able to participate in organizing the                  
              consortium and to form transnational research groups to carry out              
              specific research projects which will be identified at the                     
              conference.  Possible research topics include immigration,                     
              HIV/AIDS, the legal profession, bankruptcy, legal services, social             
              protection, law and feminism, and environmental regulation.                    
                                                                                             
              The conference will not only provide an opportunity for                        
              international collaboration and exchange among sociolegal scholars,            
              it will establish a viable and active consortium of research                   
              institutions from around the world which will lead to a higher                 
              level of transnational research and a greater multinational and                
              multicultural sensitivity to sociolegal research than would                    
              otherwise be possible.  Also, it will initiate a system of                     
              international data access which will reap substantial rewards.
