Title       : Perceptual Information for Moving Observers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9212786

Award Number: 9212786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Cutting jec7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Human beings generally find their way through environments with                
              ease and without injury.  During a normal walk, a pedestrian must              
              judge direction of movement with an accuracy of about 4 degrees of             
              visual angle (about the width of two thumbs held at arms' length).             
              Otherwise he or she risks injury; a driver or pilot risks worse,               
              and must attain considerably greater accuracy.                                 
                                                                                             
              Previously it has been shown that people can find their way based              
              on information in the global pattern of movement at the back of the            
              eye, called the retinal flow.  More particularly, as one moves                 
              through the environment, an individual's natural mode of looking               
              entails a cycle of pursuit fixations and saccades.  That is, an                
              observer looks at a given object (say to the left of his or her                
              path) while moving forward on a linear or curvilinear path.  The               
              pursuit fixation entails a smooth counterclockwise eye rotation                
              during locomotion.  He or she then saccades rightward to a new                 
              object, entailing an abrupt clockwise eye movement.  This cycle                
              generally repeats, either again on the left side or reversing to               
              the right.  Several sources of information are available in the                
              retinal flow during pursuit fixation.  The two most important are              
              differential motion parallax (DMP), the relative motion around a               
              fixated object where near objects move faster than, and in the                 
              opposite direction from, far objects, and inward motion (IM), the              
              motion of objects toward the fovea.                                            
                                                                                             
              These studies will continue this basic line of research,                       
              investigating further the utility of DMP and IM, and exploring new             
              sources of information, including several entailed in a constant               
              gaze-movement angle which may be useful in detecting collisions.               
              In particular, the experiments will determine how moving observers             
              negotiate moving objects in a rigid environment.  The research                 
              should result in a deeper theoretical understanding of the limits              
              and nature of human beings' wayfinding ability, with a long-term               
              aim of promoting traffic safety.  Stimuli will be presented to                 
              individual viewers on a computer screen and will be manipulated in             
              ways that obey the mechanics of the real world and the biomechanics            
              of human locomotion.
