Title       : Causality in Crisis: A Conference on the New Debate About Causal Structures in
               the Social Sciences to be held at Notre Dame University October 15-16, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9212492

Award Number: 9212492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernan McMullin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Vaughn R. Mc Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen P. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The status of the social sciences as sciences has always been                  
              precarious.  However, the central role played by statistical                   
              methods in the modern social sciences has seemed to provide at                 
              least several of them with a badge of scientific status, inasmuch              
              as a recurrent theme in the use of statistics in social inquiry has            
              been the idea that statistical methods should be capable of                    
              revealing distinctive laws and causal relations upon which the                 
              social world is ordered.  Yet today, the major methodological issue            
              confronting the social sciences is the emergence of a crisis over              
              the most widely used statistical methods, generally known as                   
              "causal modeling" techniques.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This conference, being held at Notre Dame University in October,               
              1993, is bringing together for the first time the major                        
              protagonists in the current debate about whether statistical                   
              methods can generate causal knowledge.  Also participating are                 
              sophisticated critics from philosophy and social sciences who are              
              exploring alternative interpretations of the crisis at the broadest            
              philosophical level.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The significance of the present situation is considerable, for the             
              "natural science" model of social scientific knowledge has had a               
              substantial impact on many areas of thought.  Its apparent                     
              dissolution from within is an event requiring philosophical                    
              interpretation.  This conference promises to assist in bringing                
              these controversies out of the narrowly technical literature and               
              into the consciousness of the larger intellectual community.
