Title       : Axiomatic and Strategic Analysis of Resource Allocation Rules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1994   
File        : a9212557

Award Number: 9212557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145168             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Thomson 7162752236  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of this project is to construct allocation rules                 
              satisfying appealing properties.  Special attention is paid to                 
              rules that are equitable and immune to manipulative behavior.  The             
              project studies bargaining, taxation, allocation of private goods,             
              allocation of public goods, and allocation of indivisible goods.               
              In general, economists do not pay enough attention to normative                
              issues of fairness and many important questions that the general               
              public cares about have been neglected for too long: Who should pay            
              for disaster relief?  How should the cost of military alliances be             
              distributed?  Are the salaries of executives justified?  How should            
              the "peace dividend" be allocated?  Is the income disparity between            
              industrialized countries and countries of the Third World                      
              acceptable?                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The most convincing argument one can make in favor of an allocation            
              rule is that it satisfies appealing properties and, in this                    
              research, properties of rules, not the rules themselves, are the               
              starting point.  Several kinds of properties will be analyzed.                 
              Monotonicity properties state that all agents should be affected in            
              the same direction by changes in their environment; these changes              
              can be in resources, technology, population, etc.  Consistency                 
              properties guarantee that the recommendation made by a rule is                 
              never contradicted by the recommendation it makes when some of the             
              agents leave the scene with their payoffs.  The converse property              
              allows us to deduce the desirability of a decision for a whole                 
              economy on the basis of its desirability for small subgroups.                  
              Strategy-proofness says that the rule provides agents the incentive            
              to tell the truth about the data over which they have control.                 
                                                                                             
              Studying the manipulability and the implementability of rules                  
              should indeed be components of any comprehensive research program              
              on mechanism design.  This study is very important because it will             
              help trace out the boundary between which combinations of social               
              objectives are compatible and which are not, taking into account               
              the strategic behavior of agents.
