Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: A Molecular Analysis of the Phylum Ctenophora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9212757

Award Number: 9212757
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George I. Matsumoto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Pelagic biogeography has been limited by the inability to                      
              distinguish genetic structure of a species.  The problems include              
              constant movement of local populations, unknown oceanic circulation            
              patterns, the 3-dimensional aspect of the ocean and the                        
              difficulties inherent with oceanic sampling.  This project will                
              examine members of the Phylum Ctenophora using modern molecular                
              techniques to help elucidate the taxonomy of this understudied                 
              group of organisms.  Ctenophores are abundant in all the oceans and            
              occur at all depths in the water column.  Distribution of                      
              ctenophores is often patchy and these patches can fluctuate in time            
              and location.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The techniques developed by molecular biologists (e.g.  allozymes              
              and nucleic acid analyses) are appropriate for the marine sciences             
              and represent novel tools for the marine scientist to examine the              
              distribution of marine populations.  These techniques have been                
              utilized for fisheries but have not been applied to gelatinous                 
              zooplankton despite the importance and abundance of this group.                
                                                                                             
              There are a number of ctenophore species that occur in the Monterey            
              Bay area, the majority of which are still undescribed. This project            
              will consist of:: 1.  Collection of specimens and the isolation of             
              genomic DNA focused on Monterey Bay with shallow-water and deep-               
              water collections; 2. Use of the Polymerase Chain Reaction to                  
              amplify the nuclear encoded small ribosomal subunit genes (ssRNA),             
              spacer regions, and certain DNA segments of the mitochondrial                  
              genome;  3.  Analyze the amplified DNA with restriction enzymes in             
              order to detect any Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms that             
              are present: 4. Sequencing of the amplified DNA either directly                
              from the PCR product or after cloning the product; 5. Analysis of              
              the sequences will be done using DOTPLOT, BESTFIT, and                         
              GAP/RANDOMIZATION; 6. Clarification of the taxonomy of the Phylum              
              Ctenophora using a combination of the molecular data and classical             
              data (morphology and natural history).  The use of the ssRNA                   
              sequences will be most useful for the higher taxonomic levels while            
              the sequence information from the spacer region or mtDNA regions               
              will be useful for examining the variation within species.
