Title       : Evolution of Complexity in Vocal Repertoires: A Comparative Phylogenetic Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9212395

Award Number: 9212395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. L. Gaunt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1160,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Standard practice in animal communication studies is to define                 
              signal units subjectively.  In this pilot study, the researchers               
              will explore the feasibility of using recently developed                       
              quantitative methods to define objectively the basic signal units              
              (notes) in the vocalizations of a monophyletic group of birds                  
              (chickadees).  After assessing the performance of the computer-                
              based SIGNAL Sound Analysis System, they will assess intra-                    
              population and inter-population variation in several common notes              
              of representative species.  They will then define the entire                   
              repertoire of a previously unstudied species in a hierarchical                 
              manner by examining clusters of similar combinations of note-                  
              types.  Finally, they will assess the feasibility of using vocal               
              data for phylogenetic reconstruction.  If these preliminary                    
              studies are favorable, they will propose a follow-up project                   
              using these methods to reconstruct the evolution of vocal                      
              complexity in chickadees.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This study, should it prove generally successful, will clarify                 
              hypothesized analogies between human and animal communication                  
              systems.  For example, human phonemes and animal note-types                    
              function similarly as basic units of differentiable sound.                     
              Although human and animal communication systems differ                         
              quantitatively in the amount of information they can encode, they              
              may have converged evolutionarily on a generally optimal                       
              organizational framework founded on a few dozen distinct sounds.               
              This similarity suggests that similar constraints on perceptual                
              processing of sound operate in both systems.
