Title       : Workshops on Comparative Examination of Landed Property Rights
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1992     
File        : a9212856

Award Number: 9212856
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Featherman   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Folsom Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc Sci Res Council
	      605 Third Avenue
	      New York, NY  101580001    /   -

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              This workshop facilitates inquiry of the global forces influencing             
              changes in property rights related to land today and over the past             
              two centuries.  One of the workshop's key issues is: have there                
              been converging trends in land rights during recent world history?             
              Another is: do certain property regimes invariably lead to land                
              degradation and other, negative environmental outcomes related to              
              the land?                                                                      
                                                                                             
              A dozen scholars from several different disciplines whose expertise            
              reaches across a number of world regions are participating in the              
              workshop.  Specifically, they meet for four sequential sessions                
              over a span of two years, each presenting, critiquing and refining             
              an analysis of these issues for a given world region.  A second                
              stage of the workshop focuses on the development of a synthesizing             
              essay that looks at trends in property regimes and their influence             
              on environmental issues from a global perspective.  The project is             
              significant in advancing basic understanding of the evolution of               
              property rights due to its transnational focus and contributing to             
              global policy debates about how to govern human use of land in the             
              contemporary world.
