Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: The Development and Use of Molecular Genetic
               Techniques for the Study of Fe Reduction in a Marine Eubacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1993   
File        : a9212460

Award Number: 9212460
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : September 23,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel E. Kostka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Nealson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Physiological data suggest that a thermodynamic hierarchy for the              
              utilization of oxidants could be written for Shewanella                        
              putrefaciens alone from aerobic growth in the oxic zone to                     
              thiosulfate reduction at the interface between sulfide-free and                
              sulfitic zones of suboxic/anoxic marine basins and porewaters. With            
              its versatile carbon metabolism and facultative nature, S.                     
              putrefaciens and organisms like it may well out compete sulfate-               
              reducing bacteria for the consumption of thiosulfate and other                 
              sulfur intermediates in marine anoxic basins and sedimentary                   
              porewaters. These organisms may play a substantial role in the                 
              control of sulfur speciation in the marine environment. By                     
              utilizing organic carbon and producing sulfide, these organisms                
              would be intimately involved in the poise of the chemocline.                   
                                                                                             
              This project will provide new, basic scientific data on the                    
              molecular genetics of a widespread and very versatile anaerobic-               
              respiring organism. By isolating and sequencing genes that code for            
              sulfur reductase, this project will be able to study the regulatory            
              mechanisms of gene expression. Manipulation of the genes in vivo               
              will lead to a better understanding of the relationships between               
              the various sulfur reduction pathways in S. putrefaciens and                   
              possibly other marine eubacteria. Genetic manipulation could also              
              aid in comparing the regulation of sulfur reductase activity to                
              that of nitrate reductase or Fe reductase in S. putrefaciens. This             
              work will lead to the collaborative development of a probe for                 
              nonsulfate-reducing bacteria which utilize sulfur intermediates in             
              natural sediments. Such a probe along with data on the mechanism of            
              sulfur intermediate reduction could be used to explore the                     
              potential contribution of nonsulfate-reducing bacteria such as S.              
              putrefaciens to the geochemistry of S, Fe, and C in a variety of               
              suboxic/anoxic marine environments where these sulfur species                  
              exist.
