Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolutionary Impact of Natural Selection,
               Quantitative Genetic Variation, and Gene Flow in a Salt Marsh Perennial,
               Limonium carolinianum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9212849

Award Number: 9212849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt Johanna_Schmitt@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Rand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Hamilton  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1127,
Abstract    :
              Recent developments in the theory and statistics for measuring                 
              natural selection have allowed the action of selection on the                  
              phenotype to be measured separately from the inheritance of that               
              phenotype and these estimates of natural selection on phenotypic               
              traits have been used to address many contemporary theoretical                 
              issues in plant biology.  The proposed experiments with the salt               
              marsh plant Limonium carolinianum would provide measures of                    
              selection on reproductive traits and address three issues crucial              
              to a more complete understanding of selection estimates and                    
              genotypic responses to natural selection in wild populations:  1)              
              understanding the genetic basis and heritability of the                        
              quantitative traits being measured for selection estimates, 2)                 
              neighborhood parameters that determine the spatial scale over which            
              selection could cause adaptive change by and control the balance               
              between such change by natural selection or by random genetic                  
              drift, 3) experimental manipulation of environment that can                    
              identify the casual selective agents or partially explain why                  
              selection operates in an observed way.  Locally variable natural               
              selection, random genetic drift, and limited gene flow are all                 
              believed to play major roles in the local adaptation of plant                  
              populations.  However, simultaneous estimates of the spatial scale             
              of selection, amount of quantitative genetic variation available to            
              respond to selection, and neighborhood size and area have never                
              been obtained in a wild plant species.  The study will contribute              
              to better knowledge of plant population change in sensitive and                
              shrinking salt-marsh ecosystems.
