Title       : Unassisted Refugee Resettlement in Eastern Sudan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1992      
File        : a9212204

Award Number: 9212204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26916              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johnathan Bascom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The processes of refuge migration and resettlement have long              
              attracted the attention of social scientists.  Much research has               
              enhanced understanding of the ways that refugee populations move,              
              resettle, and adapt under different physical, social, and                      
              regional environments.  Geographers have studied different phases              
              of the refugee experience:  flight, resettlement, repatriation,                
              and reintegration.  New approaches attempt to place the refugee                
              question within a contextual analysis which concerns how social,               
              economic, and political structures impinge upon the resettlement               
              of refugees.  This project will strengthen geographical analyses               
              of refugees by placing refugee resettlement into a larger context              
              of time and social space.  The study will conduct a detailed                   
              longitudinal analysis of unassisted refugee resettlement in the                
              eastern Sudan, and it will identify factors which determine the                
              pace and scale of repatriation.  Data will come from a survey                  
              questionnaire, archival documentation, focus interviews with                   
              local leaders, and interviews with members of the institutional                
              hierarchy associated with refugees.                                            
                   This project will contribute to a better understanding of                 
              refugee resettlement in three ways.  First, it will place refugee              
              resettlement in a larger context which will link processes                     
              operating at different scales of analysis.  Second, it will                    
              examine how relations within the household are reorganized to                  
              accommodate the pressures on refugees.  Third, it will uncover                 
              the specific mechanisms which create differential access to                    
              physical, financial, and social resources among refugees and                   
              their hosts.
