Title       : Prehispanic Intensive Agricultural Systems in the Llanos de Mojos of Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1995      
File        : a9212339

Award Number: 9212339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clark Erickson cerickso@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Clark Erickson will               
              study prehistoric agricultural systems of the Llanos de Mojos of               
              northeastern Bolivia. This region, part of the vast upper Amazon               
              drainage basin, is one of the largest areas of seasonally inundated            
              grassland savanna in the world, covering some 145,000 square                   
              kilometers. During the rainy season of 4-6 months the area is                  
              inundated and the alteration of marked wet and dry seasons and the             
              waterlogged and heavy soils have a significant impact on                       
              contemporary land use patterns. Past indigenous populations                    
              developed a complex system of massive earthworks to solve the                  
              problems of water control and agriculture. Dr. Erickson will                   
              attempt to reconstruct how this worked. To accomplish this he will             
              conduct a number of activities. Aerial photographs and ground                  
              survey will be employed to locate the most extensive and best                  
              preserved raised field complexes and canal-causeway networks.                  
              Accurate topographic maps will also be made. With this as a basis              
              key agricultural structures will be excavated. Long stratigraphic              
              trenches will be dug perpendicular to raised fields causeways and              
              canals to determine their original profiles, individual building               
              stages, post-depositional erosional history, and chronology of use             
              and abandonment. In situ materials will serve both to date and                 
              determine how fields were constructed and used.                                
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new               
              light on the prehistory of a little known area of the world and                
              produce data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also help             
              to devise subsistence strategies which will be of direct use in                
              many regions. In some tropical areas prehistoric population                    
              exceeded its modern counterpart. This most likely is due to the use            
              of appropriate technologies which have since been lost. Dr.                    
              Erickson will help to recover them.
