Title       : Adsorption of Surfactant Mixtures at Solid/Liquid Interface:A Comprehensive
               In-situ Spectroscopic, Microcalorimetric andTheoretical Modelling Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9212759

Award Number: 9212759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ponisseril Somasundaran ps24@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Surfactant adsorption is an important phenomenon in many                       
              processes such as enhanced oil recovery, detergency,                           
              flotation, and molecular electronics and microstructure of the                 
                                                                                             
              adsorbed layers a governing role in determining the efficiency                 
                                                                                             
              of these processes.  An approach combining advanced                            
              spectroscopic techniques such as luminescence, electron spin,                  
                                                                                             
              resonance, Raman and NMR with conventional techniques of                       
              adsorption, electrokinetic, calorimetric and wettability has                   
              been used in recent studies to determine important                             
              microstructural properties such as micropolarity,                              
              microfluidity, aggregation number and surfactant and polymer                   
              orientation for several alumina-dodecyl sulfonate/polyacrylic                  
                                                                                             
              acid systems for the first time.  It is now possible to                        
              determine such properties in mixed surfactant systems that are                 
                                                                                             
              invariably involved in practical systems.  Mixed systems offer                 
                                                                                             
              significant advantages in terms of high surface activity, salt                 
                                                                                             
              tolerance, reduced precipitation loss etc.  On the other hand,                 
                                                                                             
              preferential adsorption from surfactant mixtures will cause                    
              chromatographic separation of the surfactant components                        
              resulting not only in loss of surfactants, but also in                         
              significant changes in the efficiency of the processes                         
              involved.  Important questions to be answered include the                      
              effect of mixing, for example, anionics with nonionics, effect                 
                                                                                             
              of relevant variables such as pH, ionic strength, multivalent                  
                                                                                             
              ions concentration, temperature and order of addition of the                   
              components.  It is most interesting to determine arrangement                   
              and rearrangement of the adsorbate species as the system is                    
              subjected to perturbations of composition, pH, etc. and to                     
              determine the resultant changes in the interfacial behavior of                 
                                                                                             
              the systems.  It is the aim of this work to investigate                        
              molecular level behavior of the species in mixed adsorbed                      
              films as a function of surfactant structure, PH, salinity,                     
              hardness, temperature using the comprehensive approach                         
              involving above spectroscopic and adsorption techniques.  It                   
              will also be a major aim to model these systems with the help                  
                                                                                             
              of additional information to be obtained from                                  
              microcalorimetric investigation.  Also, new techniques will be                 
                                                                                             
              explored as in the past to determine additional micro and nano                 
                                                                                             
              level properties of the adsorbed layers.  With this                            
              multipronged approach, it should be possible to develop an                     
              accurate understanding of the adsorption mechanisms of real                    
              surfactant systems and to develop capability to control                        
              adsorption and to manipulate the configurational properties of                 
                                                                                             
              the adsorbed species and their aggregates.
