Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Studies of Science, Technology and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9212816

Award Number: 9212816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7248               (Estimated)
Investigator: Reed G. Geiger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathryn Steen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Doctoral student:  Kathryn Steen; Dissertation topic:  "Wartime                
              Catalyst and Postwar Reaction:  The Making of the U.S. Synthetic               
              Organic Chemicals Industry."                                                   
                                                                                             
              Prior to World War I, the United States had virtually no synthetic             
              organic chemicals industry.  By the end of the 1920s, however, the             
              domestic industry was firmly established as a world competitor                 
              capable of producing such notable products as aspirin, plastics,               
              and dyestuffs--all of which had come in whole or part from Germany             
              before the war.                                                                
                                                                                             
              Entering World War I, the United States possessed one of the                   
              strongest industrial sectors of any nation--with the exception of              
              synthetic organic chemicals.  The wartime shortages may account for            
              the initial impetus for the industry's growth, but it fails to                 
              explain the concrete steps taken to translate the recognized                   
              deficiency into a viable industry.  The significance of this topic             
              lies in discovering and analyzing the specific measures taken by               
              industrialists, policy makers, universities, and others who worked             
              to establish an industry where virtually none had existed before.              
                                                                                             
              Ms. Steen, under the direction of her dissertation adviser, Dr.                
              David Hounshell of the Carnegie Mellon University, is traveling to             
              several archival collections crucial to documenting the process of             
              development of this critical industry.  Included among the                     
              collections to be consulted for this research are the Charles H.               
              Herty papers at Emory University, the Francis P. Garvan papers at              
              the University of Wyoming, and several corporate records                       
              depositories.
