Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: Population Genetics and Gene Flow in Hydrothemal Vent
               Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1992 
File        : a9212771

Award Number: 9212771
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 23,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Karl   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Vrijenhoek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Lutz  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Deep-sea hydrothermal vents comprise systems of patchy habitats                
              with obligate, diverse, highly specialized communities of sessile              
              organisms.  These sites provide a promising opportunity to study               
              dispersal and gene flow in the deep sea.  Previous allozyme studies            
              of several of these animals have revealed generally low levels of              
              genetic variability and only limited indications of genetic                    
              separation between populations.  What is most surprising is that               
              genetic studies of Riftia pachyptila (a vestimentiferan tube worm),            
              indicated little or no inter-population variation, but it has been             
              suggested to have limited larval dispersal ability, whereas studies            
              of Bathymodiolus thermophilus (a vent mussel) demonstrated                     
              significant genetic separation between vent populations in spite of            
              what appears to be a small, broadly dispersing larva.  Given the               
              large taxonomic difference between these two species and a low                 
              level of observed genetic variation in R. pachyptila, the above                
              discrepancy provides little insight into population-genetic                    
              processes in these unique communities.  What is most needed is                 
              sufficient genetic variation in taxonomically closely related                  
              species in order to detect population genetic sub-structuring while            
              at the same time considering phylogenetic constraints.                         
                                                                                             
              Studies currently underway at Rutgers (NSF OCE-8917211) are aimed              
              at assessing rates of gene flow and systematic relationships of                
              molluscan populations associated with deep-sea hydrothermal vents.             
              Allozyme studies of mytilid and vesicomyid bivalves from a variety             
              of vent sites are nearly completed, and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)              
              studies have just begun.  Parallel studies of tube worms, Riftia               
              pachyptila, are also underway.                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project will expands upon these ongoing studies in two main               
              ways.  First, since previous studies found only a low level of                 
              allozyme polymorphism in B. thermophilus and R. pachyptila, a more             
              sensitive technique of assaying anonymous nuclear DNA restriction-             
              site polymorphism will be developed to survey genetic variation.               
              These data, along with the mtDNA restriction-site data, will                   
              provide a comprehensive, multi-locus analysis of genetic variation,            
              within and between sites (both maternally and biparentally derived)            
              in these organisms.  Second, this project will survey genetic                  
              variation in the giant vent clam, Calyptogena magnifica.  C.                   
              magnifica has large eggs and a larval stage that is believed to be             
              non-planktotrophic.  By including C. magnifica, this research will             
              be able to make direct genetic comparisons to the results obtained             
              with another vent bivalve, B. thermophilus, which appears to have              
              planktotrophic larvae and presumably greater dispersal abilities.
