Title       : Dissertation Research: Genetic Relatedness and the Costs-Benefits of Group
               Living in the Coati (Nasua narica)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9212747

Award Number: 9212747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7430               (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew E. Gompper  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many ecological costs and benefits thought to result from group                
              living are a direct result of cooperative interactions among                   
              individual group members.  Underlying these cooperative                        
              interactions are the concepts of kin selection and reciprocity,                
              analysis of which is dependent upon understanding the genetic                  
              relatedness of the involved (and non-involved) individuals.  Yet               
              traditional difficulties in determining the relatedness of specific            
              individuals in a group have hampered our understanding of if and               
              how postulated ecological benefits are gained by all group members.            
              This study proposes to examine ecological and genetic factors                  
              influencing the social system of the coati (Nasua narica), a                   
              Neotropical procyonid whose social structure of female-bonded                  
              groups and solitary males is unique within the Carnivora.                      
              Combining field observations of an extensively known population                
              with genetic fingerprinting techniques will allow examination of               
              three potential ecological explanations (predation, foraging, and              
              parasite pressures) for the evolution and maintenance of the coati             
              sociality-asociality dichotomy.  Quantifying the importance of                 
              genetic relatedness to variation in cooperative interactions among             
              individuals will provide a better understanding of underlying                  
              relationships and constraints and how ecological costs or benefits             
              vary with the relatedness of individuals.  The study can provide               
              important clues to the stability and instability of mammalian                  
              societies.
