Title       : Dissertation Research: A Hierachical Analysis of PhylogenticRelationships in
               Bufonidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1992   
File        : a9212572

Award Number: 9212572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10850              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Wake wakelab@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna Graybeal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   True toads of the large family Bufonidae are a rich resource              
              for studying pattern and process in species diversification, but               
              the potential cannot be realized without an understanding of the               
              phylogenetic relationships among the family's members.  There is no            
              robust phylogenetic hypothesis available for Bufonidae.  While the             
              large size of the family prohibits the estimation of a phylogeny               
              resolved to the species level, this level of detail is not required            
              to answer many questions.  Instead what is needed is an                        
              understanding of the phylogenetic relationships among the major                
              subclades of the family and within small clades of recently                    
              diverged species.                                                              
                   This study represents a hierarchical approach to the                      
              elucidation of phylogenetic relationships within Bufonidae and the             
              application of this information to an understanding of species                 
              diversification.  DNA sequence data from representative species at             
              two levels of divergence within the family: among distantly related            
              species and within one species group, will be used to estimate                 
              phylogenetic relationships at these levels.  With a phylogenetic               
              hypothesis for the distantly related taxa, two questions will be               
              addressed: 1) biogeographic relationships among continents and 2)              
              morphological innovation.  With a hypothesis of phylogenetic                   
              relationships within one species group, patterns and processes of              
              speciation will be studied.
