Title       : Occasion Setting in Conditional Discriminations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1994      
File        : a9212267

Award Number: 9212267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Holland pch@dukemvs.ac.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research provides a bridge between traditional analyses of                
              simple conditioning and the study of more complex cognitive and                
              organizational processes in behavior.  Previous research has                   
              yielded a set of procedures and phenomena that capture many of                 
              the more cognitive aspects of learning while building on the                   
              simplicity of simple conditioning.  In simple conditioning, an                 
              insignificant event, the conditioned stimulus (CS), comes to                   
              control behavior as the result of the formation of connections                 
              between neural representations of that CS and of another,                      
              biologically significant event, the unconditioned stimulus (US).               
              Under some circumstances, an event acquires the ability to                     
              modulate the effectiveness of connections among other events.                  
              Although this modulatory process (called occasion-setting) is                  
              based on simple conditioning, it is functionally distinct, and in              
              some cases follows different rules.  This occasion-setting                     
              process has much in common, both neurally and behaviorally, with               
              more complex memory phenomena studied by neuropsychologists.                   
                                                                                             
              The present research uses a variety of conditional-discrimination              
              tasks (those in which a CS signals one event in one circumstance               
              but another event in another circumstance) to (1) more precisely               
              specify the conditions under which occasion-setting occurs,                    
              including the development of mathematical models, (2) further                  
              explore what organisms actually learn about in conditional-                    
              discrimination tasks in which occasion-setting has been                        
              implicated, (3) examine the relation between simple Pavlovian                  
              conditioning (in which the CS signals the occurrence or                        
              nonoccurrence of the US), occasion-setting (in which an occasion-              
              setter signals the validity of a relation between another CS and               
              the US), and operant conditioning (in which a CS indicates when                
              particular behavior will produce the US).                                      
                                                                                             
              The existence of occasion-setting suggests that important changes              
              and expansions to our current theories of conditioning are in                  
              order.  Those changes may well lead to a more profitable                       
              integration of relatively well-understood but simple conditioning              
              phenomena and more complex but poorly understood phenomena of                  
              cognition.  Furthermore, given the popularity of conditioning-                 
              based theories of phobias, eating disorders, substance abuse, and              
              other socially-significant phenomena that are surely under                     
              conditional or contextual control (and hence more analogous to                 
              occasion-setting than to simple conditioning), it is important to              
              understand the differences in the actions of simple conditioned                
              stimuli and occasion-setters.
