Title       : Perceptual Interactions Among Auditory Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9212043

Award Number: 9212043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil A. Macmillan nmacmill@broadway.gc.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Brooklyn College
	      Office of Research & Program Dev
	      Brooklyn, NY  112102889    718/951-5622

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate people's perceptions of                         
              multidimensional auditory stimuli.  Examples of such stimuli                   
              include simple sounds, like tones, that can be made to vary in both            
              frequency and intensity and speech sounds, which are inherently                
              complex.  The principal research question is whether or not the                
              components of such sounds are perceived independently, and if not,             
              what kinds of interactions take place.                                         
                                                                                             
              Experiments will use speech and nonspeech sounds that are difficult            
              to distinguish.  The presence of perceptual interaction can be                 
              diagnosed by comparing people's ability to discriminate different              
              combinations of sounds with the predictions of a quantitative                  
              theory.  Several series of experiments will be conducted.  The                 
              first series will test whether observed interactions are sensory               
              effects, or arise from the observer using less-than-ideal decision             
              processes.  The second will measure whether interactions change                
              with experience and whether such improvement is due to a change in             
              the decision rules the observers use.  The third will investigate              
              whether listeners find some auditory dimensions more available than            
              others in analyzing complex sounds.  The fourth will compare                   
              interactions with hard-to-discriminate stimuli and with clearly                
              audible sounds.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The results of these experiments will shed light on the problem of             
              designing informative auditory displays.  Multidimensional displays            
              are known to be optimal for conveying complex information, but only            
              if the dimensions are independent; determining whether dimensions              
              are independent, or become independent with training, is a goal of             
              this research.
