Title       : Molecular Systematics of the Lower Lepidoptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9212669

Award Number: 9212669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome C. Regier regier@glue.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles W. Mitter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Phylogenetic relationships within insects, the most diverse               
              class of organisms, are a major unsolved systematic problem.                   
              Nucleotide sequence characters could be a key part of the answer,              
              but there have been only a few studies, based mostly on the same               
              gene.  One model system is the enormous order Lepidoptera                      
              (150,000 species), subject of innumerable comparative research                 
              programs whose well-studied basal relationships provide a strong               
              test for the utility of new molecules.  Prior to this project,                 
              computer search, Southern hybridization, and polymerase chain                  
              reaction (PCR) studies were used to identify five previously                   
              untested nuclear genes which appear suitable for higher-level                  
              phylogenetics (elongation factor-l (alpha), the largest subunit                
              of RNA polymerase II, dopa decarboxylase, elongation factor-2,                 
              phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase).  Oligonucleotide primers were              
              synthesized for all five genes, plus the nuclear ribosomal RNA                 
              gene, and tested for successful genomic amplification in                       
              primitive Lepidoptera and related panorpoid orders.  Portions of               
              the elongation factor-1 (alpha) and ribosomal genes have been                  
              sequenced directly from PCR products for 6 and 11 taxa,                        
              respectively.  The resulting trees, under several analytical                   
              methods, show concordance with morphology.                                     
                   Additional studies will complete evaluation of potentially                
              informative nuclear genes by sequencing larger portions of                     
              elongation factor 1 (alpha), RNA polymerase II and the ribosomal               
              gene in 15 species that together represent relationships strongly              
              supported by morphology within basal Lepidoptera and closely                   
              related orders.  Trees constructed by independent analyses of                  
              each gene will be tested for concordance with each other and with              
              the morphological phylogeny.  For genes showing strong                         
              concordance, the analysis will then be extended to an additional               
              20 moth species that sample, in duplicate, all major lower                     
              lepidopteran lineages, including problematic relationships;                    
              sufficiently conservative genes will additionally be used to                   
              initiate a broader study of relationships among panorpoid orders.
