Title       : Science in the Negotiation of Quality in Agricultural Subsectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1994       
File        : a9212928

Award Number: 9212928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165783             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Busch lawrence.busch@ssc.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine ethical and political dimensions in new              
              developments in agricultural science, and illuminate the values                
              imbedded in the intersection of ethical, social and scientific                 
              priorities.  Two different crops in two different cultures will                
              be selected for intensive study.  Contemporary agriculture is                  
              often divided into subsectors, i.e., social networks of people                 
              and things organized around given commodities and held together                
              through negotiations.  Subsectors are also vehicles for                        
              transforming nature and (re)distributing income, wealth, status,               
              and power.  Different actors within a subsector define the good                
              differently.  A good scientist, farmer, processor, etc., must                  
              each pass different tests to demonstrate their goodness.                       
              Similarly, the commodities must pass different quality tests.                  
              The common good may be served by a compromise among the different              
              actors.  This project examines ethical commitments and values as               
              they manifest themselves in subsector maintenance and                          
              transformation, and how conflicts are mediated.  It examines how               
              ethical and value issues enter into scientific and technical                   
              processes and, conversely, how various actors use such processes               
              and other strategies to further certain values.  Using historical              
              studies, interviews, and content analysis of the literature, the               
              project follows two commodities through the complex path from                  
              production to consumption.  It notes how the transformation of                 
              both the commodity and the social actors is negotiated at each                 
              step.  Several audiences -- agricultural scientists,                           
              administrators, policy makers, and scholars who study the                      
              relationships of science, technology and society -- will be                    
              interested in the results of this project.  Different routes will              
              be used to address results to these different audiences and the                
              general public.
