Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Role of Lipid Metabolism in Light-Mediated
               Circadian Rhythms in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1995    
File        : a9212633

Award Number: 9212633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19679              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Crain   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5942,
Abstract    :
              9212633  Crain    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Richard  C. Crain,
              Department of Molecular and Cell  Biology, University of Connecticut, to pursue
               with Dr. Youngsook Lee, Department of Life  Science, Pohang Institute of
              Science and  Technology, for 24 months, a program of  cooperative research on
              the role of lipid  metabolism in light-mediated circadian rhythms  in plants. 
              Changes in lipid metabolism that  they hypothesize are involved in mediating 
              light-induced opening of stomata - microscopic  pores at the surface of leaves
              - will be the  central focus of their research.  Plant cells respond to many of
              the same  environmental signals as animal cells,  including light, stress, and
              gravity, as well  as internal hormonal and cell-cell contact  signals.  In
              animal cells, the biochemical  mechanisms coupling environmental signals to 
              ultimate responses, in many cases, have been  carefully analyzed, and many
              receptors,  enzymes, and second messengers have been  identified and
              characterized.  In plants,  however, the understanding of such pathways is  far
              from complete.  The U.S. and Korean  collaborators are highly respected
              scientists  with proven ability in the field of this  research.  Dr. Crain's
              laboratory has  experience with the biochemical methods for  extraction,
              separation, and quantification of  the lipids and their metabolites.  Dr. Lee
              has  experience in the isolation of light-responsive  guard cell protoplasts
              and the measurement of  stomatal apertures.  Experimental methods to  achieve
              their specific objectives will take  advantage of the research expertise of
              both  collaborating laboratories.  This project is  relevant to the objectives
              of the U.S.-Korea  Cooperative Science Program which seeks to  increase the
              level of cooperation between U.S.  and Korean scientists and engineers through
              the  exchange of scientific information, ideas,  skills, and techniques and
              through  collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.   Korean participation in
              the project is  supported by  the Korea Science and Engineering  Foundation
              (KOSEF).  This project adds an  international cooperative dimension to the PI's
               research under NSF Grant No. DCB-9206179.  ***
