Title       : Mechanisms of Magnetoreception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1994      
File        : a9212102

Award Number: 9212102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262006             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Phillips   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Phillips will use behavioral techniques to examine the                     
              detection and use of the earth's magnetic field by the eastern                 
              newt (Notophthalmus viridescens).  Previous work has shown that                
              the magnetic compass used by newts for shoreward orientation is                
              influenced by the wavelength of light.  Measurements of the                    
              wavelength-dependence of magnetic compass orientation will be                  
              extended into the near-ultraviolet to better characterize the                  
              visual inputs that contribute to the magnetic compass.  In                     
              addition, the wavelength of light reaching the pineal organ and                
              eyes will be selectively altered to find out if the light-                     
              dependent magnetic compass is located in one of these two                      
              photoreceptive organs.  To investigate the involvement of the                  
              magnetic field in homing and, more specifically, in the "map" or               
              geographic-position sense that is required for homing,                         
              experiments will be carried out to examine the effects of varying              
              the wavelength of light and of manipulating specific components                
              of the magnetic field (i.e., the dip angle and total intensity)                
              on homing orientation.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research will contribute to a better understanding of the                 
              function of the pineal and of the processing of sensory                        
              information by the brain of vertebrates.  In addition, the                     
              information gained from this research will help to characterize                
              the extent to which the visual system of amphibians has become                 
              specialized to perform specific sensory functions (i.e.,                       
              detection of the earth's magnetic field).  A more complete                     
              understanding of these specialized sensory functions will make it              
              possible to determine when the amphibian visual system can serve               
              as an appropriate model system for studying visual processes that              
              occur in other vertebrates, including humans.  Finally,                        
              investigation of the strategies used by amphibians to orient                   
              during long-distance movement will contribute to a better                      
              understanding of how the brain of vertebrates processes spatial                
              information.
