Title       : Socioendocrinology of Cooperative Breeding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9723842

Award Number: 9723842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. French jfrench@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9723842  French  Among mammals, infant care is commonly limited to maternal
              care.  However, in a  small proportion of species, fathers and other group
              members  contribute to the  care and provisioning of dependent infants
              (paternal and  alloparental care,  respectively).  Although we know much about
              the patterning of this  care, little  attention has been directed toward the
              underlying mechanisms that  regulate the  delivery of parental care by
              individuals other than the mother.  The studies proposed  will examine the
              physiological and experiential determinants of  parental care in the  black
              tufted-ear marmoset (Callithrix kuhli). In the marmoset,  maternal effort is
              limited  essentially to nursing, and adult males and older offspring  provide
              the majority  of care to dependent infants.  Initial observations indicate that
               older sons and fathers  living in family groups undergo breast elaboration in
              the presence  of infants, suggesting an  endocrine involvement in infant care
              by males.  Through the use of  unobtrusive  behavioral observations and
              noninvasive urine sample collection,  French will test the  degree to which
              responsiveness to infants and levels of parental  behavior are affected by 
              gonadal steroids (estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone) and  pituitary
              peptides  (prolactin). The generality or specificity of the physiological 
              responses to infants will be  tested by comparing the endocrine responses of
              both marmosets and  squirrel monkeys  (a non-paternal species) to
              infant-associated stimuli.  Further,  the strength of the social  attachment
              between male and female partners, assumed to be  critical for the evolution  of
              male parental care, will be tested by providing pairs with a  variety of
              threats to the  integrity of the pair (e.g., temporary separations, encounters 
              with strangers).  Together,  these projects will provide insights into the
              mechanisms that  control responsiveness to  infants and adult social partners
              in a species characterized by  high levels of male parenta l  care and strong
              heterosexual relationships.
