Title       : Thiamine Synthesis as a Model for Metabolic Pathway Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9723830

Award Number: 9723830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana M. Downs downs@bact.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9723830  Downs  The biosynthesis of thiamine in Salmonella typhimurium
              serves as a good model system to address pathway integration since several
              metabolic pathways impinge on thiamine synthesis and several pathway
              redundancies have been discovered. These redundancies include the THI pathway
              for formation of the pyrimidine moiety of thiamine that is the focus of this
              work. This project seeks to genetically and biochemically characterize steps in
              the THI pathway for the conversion of aminoimidazole ribotide to hydroxymethyl
              pyrimidine by: i) identifying mutants defective in this pathway, ii) sequencing
              the loci affected by these mutations, and iii) initiating studies to address
              the biochemical role of the respective gene products. The inhibition of this
              pathway that occurs when cells are grown with fructose as a sole carbon source
              will also be addressed. To accomplish these objectives, modern chemical,
              biochemical, molecular biological and genetic techniques will be employed.
              Results of this comprehensive study of the biochemical, genetic, and regulatory
              components of the THI pathway will provide insights into a number of areas
              related to pathway integration.    A fundamental question in cell biology is
              how metabolic pathways are integrated and controlled to produce a balanced,
              efficient metabolism. The long term goal of this research is to gain a
              molecular understanding of regulatory and metabolic interactions amongst
              pathways using thiamine synthesis in the bacteruim Salmonella typhimurium as a
              model system. Understanding of such metabolic integration underlies efforts to
              predict the response of cells to environmental change and developmental
              switches, efforts to develop metabolic modeling systems and efforts targeting
              metabolism for rational drug design and/or production of small molecules.
              Ultimately this work will contribute to the understanding of global metabolic
              strategies that S. typhimurium uses to survive in its natural environment.
              These strategies are expected to be representativ e of those used by other
              cells to respond to developmental and environmental stimuli.
