Title       : Biosynthesis, Structure, Function, and Regulation of NitrousOxide Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9723715

Award Number: 9723715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Dooley dmdooley@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723715  Dooley  The biochemistry, biosynthesis, structures, reactivity, and
              function of nitrous oxide reductase, the terminal enzyme in bacterial
              denitrification, is being investigated. Denitrification is a key component of
              the global nitrogen cycle and is the pathway that balances the cycle, returning
              fixed nitrogen to the atmosphere.  The ecology involving nitrogen fixation,
              assimilation, and denitrification substantially impacts agricultural
              productivity and water quality.  Denitrification may release N20 to the
              atmosphere, where it may contribute to ozone depletion and global warming. This
              research addresses several outstanding issues in the biochemistry of
              denitrification, in the bacterium Achromobacter cycloclastes, with the goal of
              a thorough molecular understanding of this pathway. The roles of the proteins
              encoded by the genes nosD, F,Y,L,X, which are (or may be) required for the
              biosynthesis of nitrous oxide reductase, are being examined. The general
              strategy is to clone and over-express the soluble, periplasmic nos-coded
              proteins, which may be involved in the biosynthesis of the catalytic site of
              nitrous oxide reductase, thereby insuring sufficient material for detailed
              biophysical and functional studies. Site-directed mutagenesis, together with
              variable -temperature absorption, CD, MCD, EPR and resonance Raman spectroscopy
              will be used to probe the nature of the catalytic site in nitrous oxide
              reductase (thought to be the Cuz site), and the mechanism of reduction of
              nitrous oxide, including the interactions with physiological electron donors.
              Concerted efforts are underway to develop rapid, generally applicable schemes
              to purify nitrous oxide reductase, with the objective of obtaining crystals of
              nitrous oxide reductase suitable for x-ray diffraction analysis. Results of
              these experiments should be applicable to major themes in modern biochemistry
              such as  metalloenzyme structure and function; metal ion metabolism and the
              biosynthesis of metalloproteins; and the recognition and acti vation of
              kinetically-inert small molecules.    This research project seeks to understand
              how bacteria in soil and water convert  nitrate, an important source of
              nitrogen for plants, into nitrogen gas, which is released to the atmosphere. A
              substantial fraction of the fertilizers applied to crops are wasted as a result
              of this conversion. The organisms responsible contain an enzyme known as
              nitrous oxide reductase, which plays a critical role in the overall process. A
              major goal of the project is to understand how this enzyme is made, its
              structure, and exactly how it functions. Understanding how bacteria convert
              nitrate to nitrogen gas could eventually lead to effective controls of this
              process, thereby resulting in substantial savings to farmers. It might also be
              possible to turn the tables and exploit this process to safely remove nitrate
              from drinking-water supplies, where it can be a problem.
