Title       : Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference, Madison, WI, August 5-10,
               1997 and August 1999.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9723526

Award Number: 9723526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie Russel russelm@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol A. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Gourse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    Russel  9723526  The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference,
              traditionally held at Cold Spring Harbor and now being held alternate years at
              the University of Wisconsin in Madison and at the Cold Spring Harbor
              Laboratory, is a central forum for presentation of new results in prokaryotic
              molecular genetics.  On the order of 200-300 participants attend, representing
              laboratories throughout the world, and most present either short talks or
              posters.  Its breadth makes it an important focus for the exchange of
              information in this era of scientific specialization.  Topics covered include
              fundamental work on bacterial replication, recombination, repair,
              transposition, control of gene expression, translation, signalling, heat shock,
              protein folding and secretion, cell development and division, and pathogenesis.
                For many graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, this is the first large
              meeting at which they have an opportunity to speak.  Due to its highly
              interactive nature, the meeting provides an important opportunity for these
              young scientists to meet and talk to the senior scientists they know from the
              literature.  In response to the large numbers of students who attend the
              meeting and the diversity of topics covered, established and distinguished
              scientists are now invited to chair each session.  This has strengthened the
              meeting because each chairperson gives a short introduction in which he or she
              summarizes some of the key facets of the field to be covered and provides a
              conceptual framework for the major questions that the talks will address.  As
              an additional benefit, publicizing the judiciously chosen chairpeople and
              session topics in announcements of the meeting, encourages the submission of
              abstracts in exciting new areas and stimulates attendance by a larger
              constituency.  Funds are provided for a few key chairpersons and participants
              who require financial assistance to attend the meeting.
