Title       : Feature Extraction for Dolphin Identification: Automated Database Indexing Using
               Field Photographs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9723000

Award Number: 9723000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $546160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert R. Hillman gil.hillman@utmb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd G. Wursig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nasser Kehtarnavaz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will construct a database of dorsal fin images  of Tursiops
              truncatus (bottlenose dolphins) sighted near the  Texas and California coasts,
              and software to automatically  identify individual dolphins based on fin
              morphology. The  system will be used to match individuals in new photographs 
              to existing known individuals by finding the database member  that most
              resembles the new input data. An existing resource  of many thousands of images
              of dolphins will be processed by  the system and will constitute the largest
              searchable  database of dolphin sightings available.  The database will 
              provide new information regarding the site fidelity and  migratory patterns of
              dolphins. The system will be developed  for immediate use in marine biological
              research, and will be  demonstrated and tested using images of the dorsal fins
              of  dolphins. However, the system will be sufficiently versatile  for many
              other applications requiring identification of  individual animals.    The
              project will be conducted by two collaborating teams of  investigators:
              computer scientists and biologists. Each team  has specific objectives, but
              their coordinated work will  result in a computer-based biological research
              tool that  will be useful to investigators conducting studies requiring  the
              identification of individuals within a population.    The computational
              objectives of the project will be to:    1.Extract the individuals' fin shapes
              from photographic  data; 2.Calculate of characteristics of the shape that can 
              be used to    distinguish one individual from another;  3.Create of a database
              of images, indexed by the features    extracted from the images;  4.Provide
              capabilities for entering data, building,    searching,  and modifying
              databases, with a convenient    user interface.      The software system will
              be offered to biologists needing to  identify individuals of any species on the
              basis of  photographic data. The image processing portion of the  system will
              be suitable for recognizing a profile of a bo dy  part, such as a fin or an
              ear, having distinctive  irregularities. The database system, however, will not
              be  limited to descriptions of profile shapes, but will be  applicable to any
              situation where some distinctive aspect of  an animals appearance can be
              measured.    The dolphin database will be made available to investigators 
              interested in behavioral biology of cetaceans, and to  ecologists interested in
              the environmental influences acting  upon abundance and distribution patterns.
