Title       : Characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana Mutants with Enhanced Disease
               Susceptibility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1998   
File        : a9723493

Award Number: 9723493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Nuss nuss@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Glazebrook  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723493  Glazebrook    Technical section  Mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana with a
              phenotype of enhanced disease susceptibility (eds) were isolated and some were
              identified as alleles of NPR1 and others as alleles of PAD genes. NPR1 genes
              are known to be involved in the regulation of  systematic acquired resistance 
              and the PAD genes in the phytoalexin synthesis, a known defense response. In
              addition the EDS4 gene controls expression of the defense genes PR1 and PR5 in
              response to infection by a bacterial pathogen.  Thus, the eds mutations define
              genes with important roles in plant defense against pathogen attack. The
              characterization of eds mutants will lead to identification of novel genes that
              play major roles in plant disease resistance. The EDS genes will be mapped and
              characterized in relation to their effect on defense gene expression and
              establishment of systemic acquired resistance. The range of pathogens that are
              affected by the eds mutations will be determined and EDS4 will be cloned using
              a map-based approach.    Non-technical section  The responses by which plants
              defend themselves from pathogen attack have not been subjected to rigorous
              genetic analysis, in part because the plant hosts have been used in molecular
              and biochemical analysis of disease resistance are difficult subjects for
              genetic studies due to large or polyploid genomes and long generation times.
              The use of the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana, has made genetic studies
              feasible. Therefore, a powerful approach is now available for identifying
              regulatory factors and other defense response components in plants that are not
              already correlated with a known biochemical or molecular genetic response  ***
