Title       : Metabolism of Abscisic Acid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9723408

Award Number: 9723408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan A. D. Zeevaart zeevaart@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723408  Zeevaart  Biosynthesis of the plant growth substance abscisic acid
              (ABA) is stimulated during water stress so that there is a large increase in
              the ABA content during drought. Following rehydration, ABA is rapidly degraded
              to phaseic acid (PA). This project deals with both the biosynthesis and
              catabolism of ABA. The research is focused on two key reactions: 1) the
              oxidative cleavage of epoxycarotenoids (C40) by a dioxygenase to form xanthoxin
              (Cl5), a precursor of ABA, and C25- epoxy-apocarotenoids; and 2) the oxidative
              deactivation of ABA to PA, catalyzed by ABA 8'- hydroxylase, a cytochrome P450
              monooxygenase. The research is based on the hypothesis that the cleavage
              reaction is the key regulatory step in ABA biosynthesis. Experiments will be
              conducted to test this hypothesis at the mRNA and protein levels in
              water-stressed bean leaves and ripening avocado fruits, two systems that
              accumulate large amounts of ABA. Genes encoding the cleavage enzyme will be
              cloned by the polymerase chain reaction with degenerate primers of conserved
              domains in dioxygenases. Leaves will also be treated with ABA or ABA analogs
              prior to wilting to determine whether expression of the gene encoding the
              cleavage enzyme is subject to negative feed-back regulation. The strategy to
              clone ABA 8'-hydroxylase is based on differential expression of the
              8'-hydroxylase in control and ABA-treated tissue. Putative cDNA clones for
              8'-hydroxylase will be expressed in yeast and assayed for their ability to
              convert ABA to PA. Effects of tissue water status and ABA levels on expression
              of 8'-hydroxylase will be investigated.     Abscisic acid (ABA) is a plant
              hormone that is involved in a number of physiological processes, such as
              closure of stomata, seed maturation and dormancy, and amelioration of
              environmental stresses (drought, salinity, low temperature). The cloning of two
              genes for key steps in ABA metabolism will provide powerful tools to manipulate
              ABA levels in plants. By raising their ABA levels, plants may be bett er
              adapted to grow under stressful conditions.  This could be used to increase
              crop yields in unfavorable climates.
