Title       : Interactive Insect Neuroanatomy Databases for the World Wide Web
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a9723657

Award Number: 9723657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424228             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Strausfeld flybrain@manduca.neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will continue the development of "Flybrain," an  interactive
              database of the central nervous system of Drosophila and  describes specific
              aims for both levels of database construction. At  the deep, infrastructural
              level (level one), the specific aims of the  project include increased
              automation of data integration and transfer;  optimization of interactive
              viewing and virtual dissection programs;  creation of programs to display
              physiological records; and design and  implementation of a concept-based search
              engine. Level two specific  aims focus on the addition of a second core Arias
              of the thoracic and  abdominal central nervous system of Drosophila and the
              implementation  of parallel databases, two devoted to the brains of
              neurobiologically  important insect groups, the other focusing on the evolution
              of  arthropod brains. These developments will provide topical and much  needed
              access to detailed graphical data on the organization of brains  and nervous
              systems of the dominant metazoan Phylum, to the benefit of  a wide
              international community of neuroscientists and evolutionary  biologists, as
              well as new tools for database management and  manipulation of
              three-dimensional data.    The implementation of professionally managed
              neuroscience databases on  the World Wide Web provides immediate and extremely
              efficient access to  graphic data on the structure and function of central
              nervous systems  that are particularly relevant to modern research. These
              databases  range from interactive atlases of human brains, through databases on
               the nervous systems of zebra fish, Aplysia, nematodes, and fruit flies  (this
              project). Three mirror sites in the United States, Germany, and  Japan have
              collaborated in the design and implementation of the project  which has made
              unexpectedly rapid progress in the first 16 months of  its National Science
              Foundation funding.    Major advances were achieved in the first funding phase
              at two levels  of database development: 1) the design and implementation  of a
              stable  framework and robust mechanisms to acquire, organize, manage, search, 
              and mirror large amounts of image data with minimum maintenance and 2)  the
              installation of comprehensive, annotated searchable atlases of wild-  type
              Drosophila brain with links to allied data such as reconstructed  single
              neurons, pathways, and schematics, as well as homologous  structures of other
              insects. New methods have been implemented for  retrieving information from a
              highly linked network of data modules.  Novel graphical representations reveal
              new ways to view and manipulate  two- and three-dimensional structure.
