Title       : Neurochemical Analysis of Motivated Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9723876

Award Number: 9723876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Meisel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                  NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY      Principal Investigator:  Meisel,
              R.    Proposal Number:  IBN-9723876             Neurochemical Analysis of
              Motivated Behavior                                  The long-term goal of this
              project is to explore how  chemical systems in the brain control motivated
              behavior.  Among motivated behaviors, ingestive behaviors such as  feeding and
              drinking have formed the focus of such studies.  To develop general principles
              to explain the control of  motivated behaviors, the results from studies on a
              variety  of behaviors (e.g., reproductive behavior, aggression) are  needed. 
              To date, little is known about the neurochemistry  of the motivational
              components of female mating behavior.  We have pursued studies showing a link
              between the  mesolimbic dopamine system and the control of the incentive 
              (e.g., reward) properties of female mating behavior, using  hamsters as our
              experimental model.  The studies in this  proposal are designed to further
              pursue this link between  neural dopamine pathways and female sexual behavior
              in three  specific ways.  First, we intend to continue microdialysis  studies
              demonstrating proximal relationships between female  reproductive function and
              extracellular dopamine levels in  the nucleus accumbens.  We have demonstrated
              that  experienced female hamsters show higher, and more sustained 
              extracellular dopamine levels during interactions with males  compared with
              inexperienced females.  As sensitization of  responsiveness is one property of
              dopamine neurons  repeatedly activated with drugs, we will explicitly test 
              whether this augmentation of nucleus accumbens dopamine  levels in experienced
              female hamsters reflects a sensitized  response of these neurons to stimuli
              received during mating  encounters.  This would be the first such demonstration
              of  sensitization of dopamine neurons resulting from the  expression of a
              naturalistic behavior.  Our second goal is  to provide a broader neurological
              perspective on the  relationship be tween dopamine and female mating behavior. 
              To date, the nucleus accumbens and dorsal striatum are the  only brain regions
              in which in vivo measurements of dopamine  during mating encounters have been
              taken.  We intend to  extend this analysis to other behaviorally-relevant 
              dopaminergic terminal fields, such as the frontal cortex,  medial preoptic
              area, and amygdala.  In the context of these  experiments we will determine the
              degree to which dopamine  in each of these areas is related to the expression
              of  female mating behavior or some other factor associated with  social
              encounters.  A key issue in the interpretation of  these behavioral findings
              centers around the degree to which  individual dopaminergic neurons project to
              multiple targets.  That is, do similarities or differences in dopaminergic 
              activity in each terminal field derive from the activity of  the same or
              different dopamine neurons.  This is an  unresolved issue for any species, and
              we propose to  determine quantitatively the degree to which individual 
              dopamine neurons innervate multiple terminal fields.  Together these studies
              will provide a framework for defining  how functional dopaminergic pathways
              regulate different  components of female reproductive behavior, providing a 
              basis for developing generalizations of the role of dopamine  in motivated
              behavior.
