Title       : Pathways of Intestinal Absorption and Their Ecological Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2001   
File        : a9723793

Award Number: 9723793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Karasov wkarasov@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Karasov  9723793  A  widespread  notion  is that sugar (D-glucose)  is  mainly
               actively  absorbed by the intestine. The Pi's have evidence,  however, that
              birds can absorb considerable amounts  of  the  other  form  of glucose,
              L-glucose, which is thought  to  be  absorbed passively, not actively. The
              proposed studies  test  the  assumption  that L-glucose is absorption 
              passively  by  birds,  and the inference that most D-glucose absorption  is 
              passive.  The  studies  will  also  determine  how   passive  absorption  by 
              the  avian intestine  varies  with  size  of  water-soluble  molecules,  and 
              whether  the   movement   of  absorbed solutes occurs across or between
              intestinal  cells.  The   findings   will   be   important   to  
              physiologists,  evolutionary  biologists, toxicologists, and  ecologists.  A 
              finding  that  most  sugar is absorbed  passively  would  be  important   
              because    it   would   challenge    prevailing  physiological  ideas about
              nutrient absorption  as  well  as  current  analyses in evolutionary digestive
              physiology  that  attempt  to  match  the  physiological  capacity  to  absorb 
              nutrients   with   nutrient  intake.   A   high   intestinal  permeability 
              permitting  passive  absorption  might  permit  toxins to be absorbed from
              plant and animal material in  the  intestine.   This  scenario  would  beg 
              research   on   the  ecological cost associated with exposure and detoxication
              of  natural  toxins, and perhaps the sensitivity of wild animals  to  the  new 
              generation  of  water-soluble  herbicides  and  pesticides produced by humans.
