Title       : Intracelllar Signaling During the Meiotic Maturation of Starfish Oocytes: Are
               PKN and Rho activated?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9723231

Award Number: 9723231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrill B. Hille mbhille@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9723231  Hille          The animal ooctye during its growth stores
              proteins and  messenger RNAs that are required for meiosis, fertilization and 
              the rapid cleavages of the egg that follows fertilization.  After  growth
              oocytes are usually arrested in prophase I of meiosis  until stimulated by a
              maturation hormone that activates the  stored components in a process called
              meiotic maturation.  Because of the availability of stored proteins and
              messenger RNA,  no transcription of new messerger RNA occurs during meiotic 
              maturation of any animal embryo.  Proteins in many complex  biological pathways
              are activated during meiotic maturation  including the maturation promotion
              factor (MPF), which leads to  the breakdown of the nuclear membrane and the
              meiotic reduction  of chromosome; proteins that  stimulate protein synthesis; 
              and  those that are required to recruit stored mRNAs.  This  proposal  is
              concerned with the activation of stored proteins that  stimulate oocyte
              maturation.  This laboratory had identified a  protein kinase C-like activity,
              which appears prior to MPF  activity and prior to the increase in protein
              synthesis rates,  and possibly represents one of the earliest enzymes activated
               in  the maturing starfish oocyte.  A protein kinase C-related enzyme  that is
              a homologue of mammalian PKN gene and has abundant  transcripts in starfish
              oocytes, has been cloned by this  laboratory.  Experiments by other
              laboratories suggest that  mammalian PKN is activated by unsaturated fatty
              acids in vitro  and by Rho in vivo, and not by the traditional phorbol ester 
              activators of the protein kinase C family.  This grant  application
              hypothesizes that the early protein kinase C-related  activity in the starfish
              ooctyes is due to starfish PKN.  The  research  aims to determine: whether PKN
              is present in immature  oocytes,  when it is activated during meiotic
              maturation, the  function of PKN, and the mechanisms for its activation. 
              Information gained from this research will expand the knowled ge  of signal
              transduction pathways for the activation of maturation  in oocytes, and will
              serve as a prototype of a signal  transduction pathway in differentiating
              cells.  %%%      This research is studying the activation of stored proteins 
              that are important in the maturation of starfish oocytes.  This  investigator
              is looking at an enzyme identified in her  laboratory, which has similarities
              to a known mammalian enzyme  which is important in signal transduction
              pathways.  This  research will provide new information on the signaling
              mechanisms  in oocyte development.  ***
