Title       : The Integration of Flight Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9723424

Award Number: 9723424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Dickinson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dickinson  9723424    Flight in insects is a complex form of locomotion that
              requires an             array of physiological and  morphological
              specializations. The research to be done under this award             to the PI
              will focus on  how muscles, skeletons, and brains function together to enable
              flying             animals to perform elaborate  aerial maneuvers. The research
              in this proposal focuses on flies, which             although using relatively 
               simple brains, are capable of elaborate flight behavior. Flies are  unique
              among all flying animals in possessing specialized sensory  structure called
              halteres that serve as a gyroscopes during flight. The  first goal of the
              research is to study how the halteres are used to  increase flight stability.
              These experiments will employ a  mechanically-oscillating flight arena to
              characterize the behavioral  responses elicited by angular perturbations. The
              second goal of the  project is to use a large scaled model of a flapping fly to
              determine  how changes in wing motion effect the production of aerodynamic
              forces.  The third goal of the research is to combine electrophysiology with 
              high-speed video imaging to characterize how steering muscles act to  change
              the motion of the wings during flight. These first three sets of  experiments
              will determine how animals use corrective reflexes to  maintain stable flight.
              The final portion of the project is to  determine how animals initiate
              voluntary maneuvers when they are  actively searching their environment for
              food or mates. This research  will contribute to the understanding of the rapid
              neural processing and  aerodynamic mechanisms that are required to produce
              sophisticated  flight behavior.
