Title       : Regulation of Biogenesis and Topogenesis of Acetylcholine Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9723145

Award Number: 9723145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362065             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joav M. Prives joav@pharm.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9723145    Joav Prives PI   SUMMARY      These studies are designed to
              analyze the means by which  muscle cells regulate the intracellular assembly
              and  delivery to the cell surface of a neurotransmitter receptor,  the
              nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR). These receptors  are crucial
              components for transmission of  impulses across  the synapses between motor
              neurons and muscle cells. Located  on the subsynaptic surface membrane of
              muscle cells, AChRs  function as acetylcholine-gated ion conducting membrane 
              channels at the neuromuscular junction.  Like genetically  related receptors,
              each AChR is a complex comprised of five  separate membrane spanning protein
              subunits. The molecular  mechanisms by which AChR is assembled from its
              subunits is  still undefined, as are the pathways that target  AChR  to 
              restricted cell surface domains at postsynaptic regions of  the muscle
              membrane. Elucidation of these mechanisms will  lead to a more fundamental
              understanding of the regulation  of signaling across synapses.   The
              intracellular mechanisms  that direct the folding of newly made  subunits and
              their  subsequent assembly into pentameric  AChRs will be  studied  in cultured
              muscle cells that are genetically programmed for  efficient expression of these
              receptors on the cell surface.  An  alternative experimental system - 
              nonmuscle cells that  have been  transfected with the AChR subunits -  will be 
              utilized for the dissection of key regulatory aspects of the  assembly process.
                Planned experiments are based on recent  findings that  AChR subunits  are
              folded and  assembled in  an intracellular compartment termed the  endoplasmic 
              reticulum (ER) with the participation of calnexin, an ER  resident molecular
              chaperone that interacts with newly  synthesized  polypeptide chains to prevent
              their aggregation  and misfolding, and  possibly to mediate oligomerization. 
              The proposed studies are aimed  at identifying  the  structural features that
              determine calnexin  binding to AChR  subunits and the m olecular mechanisms by
              which  calnexin  facilitates AChR assembly.       The concentration  of  AChR
              into high density patches  in the muscle  membrane region directly adjacent to
              nerve  endings is crucial for  efficient neuromuscular transmission  of
              impulses. Like the  intracellular assembly of AChR, the  formation and
              maintenance of high  density surface AChR  clusters under nerve endings
              requires highly  regulated  interactions between AChR and other proteins. The
              regulation  of the surface distribution of  AChR will be studied in  muscle
              cell  cultures, using an experimental approach that  combines biochemical 
              analysis of protein - protein  interactions and high resolution 
              immunofluorescence  microscopy. These studies will focus on defining  those 
              signaling pathways that direct the redistribution of AChR  into  high density
              patches in response to neuronal cues.  By focusing on the mechanisms that
              control AChR assembly and  surface topography, the proposed studies should
              provide  important insights into the regulatory pathways that  modulate the
              functional state of synapses. Moreover, because  several of the fundamental
              characteristics elucidated in the  case of AChR have proven applicable to other
              members of the  ligand-gated ion channel family,  AChR studies will be 
              valuable toward understanding the molecular  basis of  communication between
              excitable cells across synapses.
