Title       : Studies Towards Understanding the Functional Significance of Multiple GnRHs in
               Vertebrate Brains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9723643

Award Number: 9723643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yonathan Zohar zohar@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                PI:  Zohar, Y.  IBN-9723643  Gonadotropin releasing hormones (GnRH's) are
              decapeptides produced in the brain that are integral for reproduction in all
              vertebrates.  These neurohormones function by regulating gonadotropin synthesis
              and release in the pituitary.  The discovery, however, that in all vertebrates,
              multiple forms of GnRH coexist in the brain of a single species, indicates that
              during evolution GnRH's may have acquired additional functions that are not
              related to reproduction.  The differential roles of the multiple GnRH's are not
              yet fully understood, and their relative involvement in reproduction has yet to
              be defined.    Nine distinct forms of GnRH have been described thus far in
              vertebrates, out of which six are fish-specific.  Although two to three forms
              of GnRH are now believed to be present in the brains of all vertebrates,
              perciform fish were the first, and to date, the only vertebrates in which three
              forms have been definitively identified in the brain of a single species. 
              These three GnRH forms have been completely characterized both at the peptide
              and nucleotide level.  Therefore, at present, perciform fish represent the best
              available model for studying the reproduction-related significance of GnRH
              multiplicity in vertebrates.  The primary objective of the proposed research is
              to understand which of the multiple forms of GnRH are involved in the control
              of reproduction, and to elucidate the relative reproduction-related roles of
              these forms.  The PI will use striped bass and gilthead seabream, both
              perciform fish possessing three GnRH forms as experimental models.  The
              reproductive endocrinology of these fish has been studied extensively, and all
              biochemical and genetic tools required for the proposed studies are readily
              available.  Three hypotheses will be tested:  1)  That gene expression and
              peptide levels of those GnRH's that are involved in the regulation of
              reproduction vary at different stages of gonadal development;  2)  That the
              gene expression an peptide levels  of those forms that are involved in
              reproduction are responsive  to environmental changes that influence
              gametogenesis;  and, 3)  That gene expression and peptide levels of
              reproductively-relevant GnRH's are regulated by gonadal steroid feedback.  The
              results of these studies will contribute to the global understanding of the
              functional significance of GnRH multiplicity in all vertebrates including
              mammals.  It is also expected that this research will pave the way for future
              studies concerned with the regulation of biosynthesis and release of GnRH forms
              relevant to reproduction , at the organisimal, cellular and molecular levels. 
              Finally, as reproductive failure in farmed fish appears to be due to GnRH
              disruption, the results of this research may have significant implications for
              commercial fish farming.
