Title       : RUI: Beta-Oxidative Biosynthesis of Bile Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9723771

Award Number: 9723771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean A. Cuebas dac012f@smsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9183,9229,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9723771  Cuebas  The biosynthesis of bile acids from cholesterol is an
              important process that occurs in liver cells of all vertebrates. The objective
              of this research is to characterize the enzyme system(s) responsible for
              the(-oxidative modifications of the steroid side chain in the formation of bile
              acids in several lower vertebrate species and in the rat. Since the
              end-products of cholesterol degradation are bile acids, this project will
              improve our understanding of the processes by which cholesterol is eliminated
              from organisms. There is a lack of information regarding the enzymes in
              peroxisomes that catalyze these conversions and the stereochemical mechanisms
              by which these enzyme reactions proceed. This project will involve the chemical
              synthesis of the Coenzyme A derivatives of putative sterol intermediates during
              bile acid biosynthesis as well as the purification and characterization of the
              enzymes found to catalyze these transformations. Spectrophotometry, HPLC, NMR,
              and GC/MS will be used to determine the kinetic constants, substrate
              specificities, and the stereochemistries of these reactions. Enzymes will be
              purified from liver tissue using conventional chromatography and FPLC. Since
              peroxisomes harbor two different multifunctional proteins that catalyze the
              formation of (-hydroxyacyl-CoA intermediates with opposite stereochemistries,
              it will be of significance to determine which of these multifunctional proteins
              is necessary and/or sufficient for bile acid biosynthesis. This biosynthetic
              pathway will be studied in liver obtained from toad, bullfrog, lizard,
              alligator, and the rat. Since the extent of side chain modification in primary
              bile acids appears to be correlated to the degree of evolutionary development
              of the particular class of vertebrate, these studies will uncover species
              differences in(-oxidative enzyme systems responsible for bile acid biosynthesis
              and thereby provide valuable information in tracing evolutionary relationships
              between species. To aid in the detection o f auxiliary bile acid biosynthetic
              pathways, site-directed irreversible inhibitors will be synthesized that
              specifically inhibit enzymes catalyzing the peroxisomal oxidase and thiolase
              steps. Results from this project will not only make a significant contribution
              to our present knowledge of bile acid biosynthesis in mammals, but they will
              also uncover the enzymology behind the evolutionary diversity of bile acids
              produced by various species of vertebrates throughout the animal kingdom.   
              The conversion of cholesterol to bile acids is an important process that occurs
              in liver cells of all vertebrates. The bile acids are detergents that are
              secreted into the digestive tract and are essential for the digestion of fatty
              materials that are consumed in the diet. In addition, the fecal excretion of
              bile acids is the primary mechanism by which organisms can eliminate
              cholesterol from their body. The objective of this project is to investigate
              the enzymatic mechanisms that have evolved for the conversion of cholesterol to
              bile acids in mammals, reptiles, and various amphibians and thereby provide
              valuable information concerning cholesterol metabolism in various species.
              Results from this project will not only make a significant contribution to our
              present knowledge of bile acid biosynthesis in mammals, but they will also
              uncover the details behind the evolutionary diversity of bile acids produced by
              various species of vertebrates throughout the animal kingdom.
