Title       : Progression and Spacing of Heterocyst Differentiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1999     
File        : a9723193

Award Number: 9723193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Coleman P. Wolk wolk@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wolk  9723193  Anabaena, a filamentous cyanobacterium, carries out oxygenic
              photosynthesis and aerobic N2-fixation in two types of cells, vegetative cells
              and heterocysts, respectively. Comprised wholly of vegetative cells in the
              presence of fixed nitrogen, filaments respond to nitrogen deprivation by having
              5 to 10% of their cells, at semi-regular intervals, differentiate into
              heterocysts. This organism offers one of the few opportunities to study the
              ways in which a prokaryote regulates structural cellular differentiation, and a
              nearly unique opportunity to study prokaryotic formation of multicellular
              patterns. A number of developmental regulatory genes and genes involved in
              synthesis of heterocyst-specific structures have been identified, and certain
              of their interdependencies identified. However, the detailed mechanisms that
              regulate the progression of the differentiation process once that process has
              been initiated remain largely unknown, and no overall regulatory strategy has
              been discerned. hepA is a gene that is activated specifically in immature
              heterocysts starting several hours after nitrogen stepdown and whose activity
              is required for normal formation of a principal structural element of
              heterocysts, the outer, polysaccharide layer of their envelope. Aspects of the
              regulation of hepA will be investigated. Experimental evidence indicates that
              the pattern of spaced heterocysts results from an inhibition, by mature and
              developing heterocysts, of the differentiation of nearby cells into
              heterocysts, and suggests that the inhibition is mediated by the elaboration of
              some differentiation-inhibiting substance that moves outward along a filament.
              Because the differentiation of heterocysts is organized by inhibition, it
              appears appropriate for Anabaena to have genes whose products inhibit the
              initiation or progression of differentiation. However, a mutation in such a
              gene could lead all vegetative cells to start to differentiate into
              heterocysts, a result that might heretofore have been recog nized only as a
              lethal mutation. Analysis of a restricted class of conditional mutations will
              show whether there are such genes that control differentiation in Anabaena.
              Results obtained with these conditional mutations can elucidate mechanisms that
              underlie cellular differentiation and (or) multicellular pattern formation.   
              The oxygen in the earth's atmosphere came initially from the growth of
              oxygen-producing cyanobacteria. This oxygen prevented the assimilation of
              nitrogen gas. Certain filamentous cyanobacteria overcame that impediment by
              inventing multicellular division of labor: spaced cells in a filament became
              heterocysts, cells unable to photosynthesize and grow, but able to fix nitrogen
              gas in an oxygen-containing environment. Thus arose what may have been the
              first multicellular pattern, and Anabaena, still an outstanding example of
              bacterial multicellularity. Heterocyst formation is being analyzed because it
              provides an example of bacterial differentiation that may be regulated in a
              unique fashion, and because of the important contribution of heterocysts to
              global nitrogen fixation. Analysis of the regulation of hepA and the use of
              conditional mutants represent approaches to understanding how differentiation
              progresses.  Conditional mutation may also assist mechanistic analysis of
              pattern formation.
