Title       : Pattern Formation in the Wing of Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9723564

Award Number: 9723564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth S. Blair ssblair@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723564  Blair    In recent years a great deal of  information has been
              accumulated concerning patterning of growing appendages in Drosophila.  The
              variety of genetic and molecular manipulations possible in Drosophila are
              unmatched.  Interestingly, many of the signalling pathways used in Drosophila
              are conserved in vertebrates, often in very similar patterning situations. 
              However, there are still huge gaps in our understanding  of these patterning
              events, and this project outlines three ongoing projects seeking to fill some
              of those gaps.  The wing of Drosophila develops from the wing imaginal disc, a
              small epthelial sac.  During the extensive proliferative phase of disc
              development cell lineages are for the most part unfixed and cells utilized
              cell-cell interactions to determine their positions and take on appropriate
              fates.  The compartment boundaries, however, are exceptions to this rule; these
              act as lineage restrictions, preventing intermixing between adjacent cells in
              the disc epithelium.  The first aim of this proposal is to examine the basis of
              compartmentalization, exploiting some exciting new data which indicates a role
              for intercompartmental, Hedgehog based signalling in maintaining the A/P
              boundary.  Because there is much not understood about the pathway by which
              Hedgehog signals from the posterior to the anterior compartment, the second aim
              of this proposal is to continue investigating the role of shifted, a putative
              member of the Hh signalling pathway.  Finally, local patterning also depends on
              more local interactions to define particular tissue types, such as the
              specialized epithelial cells that secrete the thickened cuticle of the veins. 
              The last aim of this proposal is to examine the vein-intervein subdivision, and
              in particular the role of crossveinless genes is specifying the anterior and
              posterior cross veins.
