Title       : The Chemical Basis of Viral Assembly and Disassembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a9723752

Award Number: 9723752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Young myoung@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                MCB 9723752  Mark Young (Montana State University)  The Chemical Basis of
              Viral Assembly and Disassembly    ABSTRACT     1. Technical    This study uses
              the cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV), a member of the bromovirus group of
              the Bromoviridea family, as a unique model system to determine the detailed
              chemical role protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions play in the
              assembly, maturation, and disassembly processes of a virus.  An icosahedral
              virus, CCMV is constituted by a four component positive sense stranded RNA
              genome and capsids containing 180 identical coat protein subunits, each of
              19.8KD. The specific objectives of this proposal are to: (1) Determine the
              critical viral RNA-coat protein and coat protein-coat interactions that act as
              molecular determinants regulating virion architecture and stability; and (2)
              Determine the ability of the N-terminus of the coat protein to undergo a
              structural transition from the interior of the virion to the exterior of the
              virion in order to form a channel for the passage of virion RNA during
              disassembly. The experimental approach combines molecular and structural tools.
              Genetic mutations with altered virion architecture and stability are generated
              and examined for their effect on virion assembly and disassembly in vitro and
              in vivo, so that critical components can be identified.  The results of this
              research will have significant implications for a broad range of animal, plant,
              and insect viruses and should provide the basis for strategies for preventing
              viral infections.    2. Non-technical    Understanding the chemical basis of
              protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions is one of the major goals
              of modern biology.  Virion assembly, maturation, and disassembly is
              particularly suitable for determining the underlying principles of these
              interactions.  The objective of this study is to determine how the detailed
              molecular interactions occurring during virus assembly and disassembly
              influence and regulate virus infectivity. The spherical , cowpea chlorotic
              mottle virus is the subject of this research project. Biochemical and
              structural approaches to the analysis of genetic mutants are used to identify
              the critical components. The findings should contribute to the basic knowledge
              of how viruses are formed and disrupted, and provide essential information for
              the design of strategies to prevent viral infection to plants and animals.
