Title       : Regulation of Expression of Fish Insulin-like Growth Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9723529

Award Number: 9723529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Chen tchen@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723529  Chen      Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) or somatomedins are
              mitogenic and anabolic peptize hormones that play an important role in growth
              and differentiation of vertebrates.  Results of numerous studies in mammals
              suggest that while IGF-II is produced in the liver and several other pre-natal
              and neonatal tissues, IGF-I is primarily produced in the post-natal livers
              under the modulation of growth hormone (GH).  Although the molecular mechanism
              underling the regulation of IGF-I and IGF-II genes has been extensively studied
              in mammals, very little has been done in lower vertebrates like fish.  The PI's
              research objectives are to investigate else regulation of IGF gene expression
              and the involvement of IGF-I and -II in somatic growth, using rainbow trout as
              model experimental animals.  In the previous funding cycle, the PI has isolated
              and characterized IGF-I and cDNA ahead their genes, and has shown that
              expressions of these two genes are regulated by growth hormone (GH).  In the
              present application, the PI proposes to study: (1) the biological relevance of
              IGF I and II mRNA expression during the early embryonic development, and (2)
              the involvement of CCAAT cis-acting element and its hepatic nuclear binding
              protein (C/EBP) on the regulation of IGF gene expression.  Fish represent the
              largest and the most diverse group of vertebrates and their unique evolutionary
              position relative to other vertebrates and their ability to adapt to a wide
              variety of environments make them ideal for studying the molecular mechanisms
              of growth regulation.  Therefore, results of these proposed studies will
              advance the knowledge of vertebrate JGF gene regulation and expression in a way
              that is both easily generalized to vertebrate models, and will provide a
              phylogenetic perspective that has proved useful in the studies of other complex
              biological phenomena.  Furthermore, results of these studies will be applied to
              commercial aquaculture.
