Title       : Control of Actin Ring Formation During Cell Division in Aspergillus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9723711

Award Number: 9723711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723711  Harris     In preparation for cytokinesis, both animal and fungal 
              cells assemble a cortical actin ring.  The formation of this  ring appears to
              be temporally and spatially controlled by  signals from mitotic nuclei. 
              Current models suggest that  the actin ring functions via two possible
              mechanisms to  effect cytokinesis.  In animals and certain fungi, the actin 
              ring contracts, splitting cells in two.  In other fungi, the  ring defines a
              region where a cell plate forms to divide the  cell.  Regardless of mechanism
              used, the actin ring is  essential for cytokinesis.  Previous studies employing
               various biochemical and genetic approaches have identified  numerous proteins
              necessary for the formation and/or  function of the actin ring.  However, it is
              not at all clear  how these proteins function in an integrated manner to 
              control cytokinesis.  Moreover, it has become increasingly  evident that a
              complete inventory of actin ring proteins has  not been attained.  The overall
              objective of Dr. Harris'  research program is to use the power of genetics to
              identify  and characterize additional proteins required for the  formation and
              function of the actin ring, and thereby  elucidate the molecular mechanisms
              underlying cytokinesis in  the genetically tractable filamentous fungus,
              Aspergillus  nidulans.  This fungus undergoes cytokinesis by forming 
              crosswalls known as septa.  Septum formation in A. nidulans  is temporally and
              spatially coordinated with mitosis, and  requires the formation of a
              contractile actin ring.  Genetic  screens have resulted in the identification
              and  characterization of gene products which act at different  steps to control
              septation in A. nidulans.  For example, the  analysis of sepB mutants has
              revealed the existence of a  checkpoint which prevents septum formation in the
              presence  of DNA damage.  In contrast, the characterization of sepA  mutants
              has led to the identification of an evolutionarily  conserved protein that may
              control the assembly of the actin  ring.   The objective of this research
              project is to address  the hypothesis that the sepA gene product plays an
              essential  role in septum formation by promoting the formation of the 
              contractile actin ring.  Specifically, Dr. Harris will use  indirect
              immunofluorescence to determine if SepA localizes  to the incipient division
              site.  In addition, he will  establish the timing of SepA localization relative
              to  mitosis and actin ring formation.  He also plans to employ a  battery of
              genetic and biochemical approaches to identify  proteins that interact with
              SepA.  In particular, he will  test predictions that SepA function requires
              interactions  with the actin-associated protein profilin and with the  septins.
                 The fascinating process of cytokinesis, in which a living  cell literally
              separates itself into two progeny cells,  underpins the nature of life.  This
              research project should  lead to a better understanding of the general
              mechanisms  underlying cytokinesis.  The use of a filamentous fungus as  the
              model organism in this study is a particularly good  choice because of the
              pronounced societal impact of fungi.  On the one hand, some fungi cause
              diseases; on the other  hand, they produce useful natural products such as 
              antibiotics and commercially important enzymes, and can be  genetically
              engineered to produce non-fungal proteins of  commercial interest.   Thus, an
              increased understanding of  how septum formation permits filamentous fungi to
              grow and  reproduce can lead to ways of combating fungal infections of  plants,
              animals, and humans, as well as allowing fungi to be  used more efficiently as
              industrial biocatalysts for the  production of commercially important enzymes
              and other  proteins.  ***
