Title       : Interaction of Two Neuromodulators in Olfactory Bulb and Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9723947

Award Number: 9723947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305442             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hasselmo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Christiane Linster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Michael E. Hasselmo    PROJECT SUMMARY  Computer modeling techniques are
              required to understand how  neurochemicals with subtle and broadly distributed
              effects  alter brain function.  In the proposed research, computer  models of
              the olfactory system (the brain system for odor  perception) will be used to
              aid in understanding the action  of the neurochemicals acetylcholine and
              norepinephrine on  the function of cells can affect the processing of odor 
              memories.    OBJECTIVES  Research will focus on the following central
              questions:  1. How do the combined effects of noradrenaline and  acetylcholine
              in the  olfactory system affect the capacity  of memory? Computer simulations
              will be used to model two  components of the olfactory system: the olfactory
              bulb and  olfactory cortex.  Models will be used to analyze how  modulation of 
              inhibitory effects by acetylcholine and  norepinephrine in the olfactory bulb
              and cortex increases  the number of odor memories that can be stored by
              allowing  them to be coded by separate populations of cells. 2. How  does
              regulation of noradrenaline and acetylcholine in the  olfactory system affect
              behavior in an odor learning task?  Computer models will be used to analyze
              recent behavioral  experiments in this laboratory testing how  rats respond to
              odor pairs which share components (odor A  with odor B, odor A with  odor C)
              versus how they respond to  odor pairs that do not share components (odor A
              with  odor  B, odor C with odor D).  The model will generate predictions  about
              how the response to odor pairs with shared components  should differ depending
              on whether the response to odor  pairs is based on the familiarity of the odor
              pair, or on  whether  the odor pair has been paired with a reward. 3. Does 
              acetylcholine more strongly suppress spread of activity at  synapses that have
              been recently increased in strength?  Computer models show that storage of 
              odor memories in the  olfactory system appears to function more effectively
              when  acetylcholine suppresses the  spread of activity at recently 
              strengthened  synapses.  This prevents recently stored  memories from 
              interfering with storage of new memories. In  slices of olfactory cortex, we
              will test whether drugs that  activate acetylcholine receptors more strongly
              suppress  spread of activity at synapses which were  recently  strengthened by
              repetitive stimulation. 4. Computer models  will be used to analyze the effect
              of  acetylcholine and  norepinephrine on fast and slow oscillations of activity
              in  the olfactory system.  The  interaction of oscillations in the olfactory
              bulb and  olfactory cortex will be analyzed, with  an  emphasis on  feedback
              connections from the olfactory cortex back to the  olfactory bulb.
