Title       : Mechanisms Underlying Plant Cell Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1998  
File        : a9723895

Award Number: 9723895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. O'Leary   (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Verbeke  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                          9723895  Verbeke        The process of cellular differentiation is
              of fundamental significance to our understanding      of plant growth and
              development, yet experimental studies in this area have been rare.      During
              development, each cell must somehow determine its position relative to others,
              and      must differentiate accordingly. However, almost nothing is known about
              the mechanisms      by which cells establish their positions and subsequently
              give rise to appropriate cell types.      Although cell and tissue
              differentiation must certainly be the result of selective expression      of
              the genome, a critical problem has been our inability to make the connection
              between      phenotype and genotype. At a time when knowledge of gene structure
              and even function      seems to be increasing exponentially, there is still
              little known about how these genes      actually cause cells to differentiate
              and form tissues, organs, and organisms.            Determination is a
              reflection of the state of differentiation of individual cells. For this     
              reason, it may be quite useful to study cells which display a high degree of
              determination,      as indicated by a resistance to redifferentiate. Plant
              epidermal cells are such entities. In the      absence of wounding (and usually
              in spite of wounding), plant epidermal cells are      developmentally
              incompetent to redifferentiate or change their fate. However, fusing floral    
               organs are naturally occurring exceptions to this rule.                  The
              overall goal of the work described here is to learn more about the controls of
              plant cell      differentiation. These experiments represent an ongoing
              characterization of the cell-to-cell      communication events and signals
              which convey positional information. The specific      question to be addressed
              will focus on characterization of the chemical identity of the     
              redifferentiation factors.            The periwinkle system described here is
              one of only a few plant systems in which dire ct      experimental evidence
              documenting cell-cell interaction in the form of diffusible factors has     
              been shown. This is also the first clear documentation in a plant system that
              two apparently      identical organs in the same flower may be inherently and
              critically different from one      another.
