Title       : Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics of Entner- Doudoroff Metabolism
               in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2000  
File        : a9723593

Award Number: 9723593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tyrrell Conway   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peekhaus Norbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723593  Conway  The Entner-Doudoroffpathway (ED) forms the core of central
              metabolism in a large number of important microorganisms and is widely
              distributed, including the most deeply rooted Archae. In E. coli, the ED
              pathway is induced for gluconate catabolism, together with two systems for
              gluconate transport and phosphorylation. While it is generally appreciated that
              E. coil has evolved to grow in the intestinal habitat, little is known about
              which nutrients are used. Recent evidence suggests that metabolism of gluconate
              via the ED pathway is essential for E. coli to colonize the large intestine.
              The long term goal of this laboratory is to understand the roles of the ED
              pathway in nature and during the course of evolution of glycolytic pathways. We
              have begun to employ genomic information to study the four gluconate
              transporters, two gluconate kinases, and two regulatory proteins involved in
              gluconate metabolism. The GntI system for gluconate transport and
              phosphorylation contains two transporter genes, gntT and gntU. The work
              addresses how differential expression of these transporters impacts the
              physiology of growth on gluconate. Glucuronate, not gluconate, signals
              induction of gntP, another recently discovered gluconate transporter gene.
              Since the large intestine contains more glucuronate than gluconate, and since
              glucuronate induces the catabolic pathway for yet another sugar acid, it
              appears that glucuronate provides a general signal of sugar acid availability
              in nature. The importance of glucuronate-induction and GntP function for growth
              on gluconate is being investigated. The GntII subsidiary system for gluconate
              transport and phosphorylation (which normally functions only in the absence of
              the GntI system) also encodes two newly identified "dehydrogenase-like" enzymes
              which allow growth on L-idonic acid, with gluconate as a key intermediate. The
              biochemistry and physiology of the GntII pathway is being studied. Since
              gluconate appears to be an intermediate of the GntII pathway, and  since
              gluconate is an inducer of other regulons, it seems important in terms of
              cellular economy to have crosstalk between these pathways. A protein that is
              both a positive regulator of GntII and a negative regulator of GntI is being
              characterized. The ultimate goal of this project is to elucidate the
              physiology, biochemistry and, regulation of sugar acid metabolism by E. coli in
              order to more fully understand its ecology.    While it is generally
              appreciated that E.coli has evolved to grow in the intestinal habitat,  little
              is known about which nutrients are used to support growth. Recent evidence
              suggests that metabolism of gluconate, an acidic form of the sugar glucose, is
              essential for E. coil to colonize the large intestine. In E. coil, the
              Entner-Doudoroff pathway is used for metabolism of gluconate and other sugar
              acids that are found in the large intestine. The Entner-Doudoroff pathway, as
              it  operates in E. coli, is very complex; there are at least ten genes and
              three levels of genetic  regulation involved in sugar acid metabolism. The goal
              of this project is to characterize the  physiology, biochemistry and,
              regulation of sugar acid metabolism by E. coli in order to more  fully
              understand the role of the Entner-Doudoroff pathway in colonization of the
              large intestine.
