Title       : Shared Instrumentation for Computational Neuroanatomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1997     
File        : a9723281

Award Number: 9723281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364416             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur W. Toga toga@loni.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin Holmes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Recent enhancements in the resolution of primary data and the  complexity of
              algorithms have resulted in significant increases in the  computational load
              for the neuroimaging, `rain mapping and biomedical  imaging communities. In
              response to these increased demands, a group of  neuro- and biomedical
              scientists with common interests and  computational needs have come together to
              seek funding for a shared  graphics supercomputer. This group has a critical
              need for potent  visualization hardware, extremely fast, parallelizable CPU 
              architectures and considerable amounts of data storage and transfer 
              capabilities. This equipment is required to satisfy the demands  generated by
              three dimensional volume viewing, intricate surface  extraction, nonlinear
              warping and the volumetric blending of complex  polygonal objects with both raw
              data and the results of statistical  analysis. Housed at the Laboratory of
              Neuroimaging at UCLA, the device  will be available on a shared basis for
              interactive use locally and  batch processing remotely. After evaluation of
              several vendors of  graphics platforms, the equipment selected was an Onyx
              graphics  supercomputer manufactured by Silicon Graphics Inc. Simulations and 
              benchmarking confirmed the ability of this instrumentation to fulfill  the
              needs of the participants. An administrative plan was created to  manage the
              equipment equitably and to optimize its utility for the  participating research
              projects. The ongoing research in nine local and  four remote projects will
              directly and immediately benefit by using  existing software that is capable of
              taking advantage of the features  of the instrument. Programmers and other
              experts in this architecture  are already members of the staff. Technical and
              management personnel  are also among the funded group of participants. The
              existing  collaborations of the participants and the common algorithmic 
              requirements will enable sharing of computer code, analytic procedures  and
              computational strategies. The availability of suc h a machine will  enhance the
              productivity of ongoing funded research and foster the use  of leading edge
              technology for all participants.
