Title       : Oscillatory Models of Short-Term Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9723466

Award Number: 9723466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276294             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Lisman lisman@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723466  Lisman    The long-term goal of this project is to understand the 
              network and cellular basis of short-term memory, the type of  memory used in
              remembering brief lists of items such as a  phone number. Psychophysical tests
              on humans have shown that  there is a limit of about 7 items that can be stored
              in  short-term memory. The proposed research will extend  previous theoretical
              work showing how a single brain network  can keep 7 memories active at the same
              time using a  multiplexing scheme. This scheme is closely tied to 
              physiological observations on brain oscillations;  multiplexing is achieved by
              a clocking mechanism, which is  apparent in brain recordings as nested
              oscillations in which  about 7 gamma (20-80Hz) oscillations occur within a
              single  theta (4-10Hz) cycle. Memories become serially active in  sequential
              gamma cycles. The psychophysical analysis of  human memory provides a rich
              quantitative data set.  The  goal of the proposed work is to a develop a more
              detailed  physiological model that correctly predicts this data. The  first
              specific aim is to provide a specific model of how  memories are scanned during
              a recognition memory test.  Computer simulation methods will be used to model
              brain  networks in a physiologically plausible way. The second aim  is to
              understand a surprising constancy observed by  Cavanagh: the time required to
              scan a memory and the number  of memories that can be held both vary with the
              complexity  of the memory; however the product of the two appears to be  a
              universal constant. The third aim is to understand whether  there are
              fundamental network constraints that limit how  fast gamma oscillations can be;
              if they were faster, more  memories could be held, but there may be reasons why
              gamma  cannot be faster. Preliminary  results related to the first  two aims
              indicate that theta oscillation frequency may  decrease as  the number of
              stored  memories increases. Furthermore, gamma frequency may  decrease as the
              complexity  of stored items increases.  These  are important findings because
              they provide a way of  relating easily manipulatable aspects of short term
              memory  to brain signals and because they are very testable. As the  fourth
              goal of this proposal, collaborative efforts will be  initiated to test these
              predictions.
