Title       : Mechanisms of LysR-type Protein-Mediated Regulation of Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9723452

Award Number: 9723452
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Wesley Hatfield gwhatfie@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723452  Hatfield  Much attention is currently being focused toward
              understanding how the transcriptional efficiencies of promoters are influenced
              by the superhelical density of the DNA template.  In bacteria it has been shown
              that the transcription process alters the local super helical density of the
              chromosome; positive DNA supercoils are generated in front of a transcribing
              RNA polymerase and negative DNA supercoils are generated in its wake. 
              Moreover, the local negative DNA supercoiling generated behind a transcribing
              RNA polymerase can activate transcription initiation from a nearby divergent
              promoter site.  Although divergent promoter arrangements are common in all
              organisms, the physiological significance of these divergent promoters is not
              fully understood.  In bacteria, the most common positive regulators of gene
              expression are the LysR family of proteins.  Members of the LysR family are
              characterized as sequence-related, co-inducer responsive, transcriptional
              activator proteins that activate transcription of a target gene(s) and
              autoregulate their own synthesis.  The IlvY protein is a LysR family protein
              that negatively regulates the expression of its own structural gene, ilvY, and,
              in the presence of a small molecule co-inducer, positively regulates the
              expression of a divergently transcribed ilvC gene which encodes the second
              enzyme of the parallel L-isoleucine, L-valine biosynthetic pathway.  It
              recently has been demonstrated that this activation of transcription is
              significantly influenced by the superhelical density of the DNA template.  On
              the basis of this observation and other preliminary evidence, it has been
              hypothesized that as co-inducer levels increase more co-inducer binds to a
              performed IlvY-operator DNA complex and further activates ilvC transcription. 
              This increased ilvC promoter activity generates negative supercoils in its wake
              and enhances the transcriptional activity of the nearby, divergent, ilvPY
              promoter.  This increased ilvPY promoter activity results in hig her IlvY
              production and greater IlvY occupancy at the tandem operator sites.  Under this
              condition the ilvC gene can be induced to a higher maximal level of expression
              because of higher IlvY occupancy at the tandem operator sites.  Thus, this
              transcriptional-coupling between the divergent ilvPC and ilvPY promoters
              provides a sensitive and energetically economical mechanism to adjust IlvY and
              isomeroreductase (ilvC gene product) production with substrate-inducer levels
              which reflect the demands of the cell for isomeroreductase activity for
              branched chain amino acid biosynthesis.  This research will test the
              predictions of this transcriptional-coupling hypothesis and to elucidate the
              protein-protein and protein DNA interactions important for IlvY
              protein-mediated activation of transcription from the ilvC gene.  It is
              anticipated that the results of this research will provide fundamental
              information for understanding the roles of DNA supercoiling-dependent
              structures in gene expression, will enhance the current level of understanding
              of the mechanism of action for other LysR-type gene activators, and will be of
              general interest for investigations of divergent promoter systems in lower and
              higher eukaryotic systems.  %%%  Much attention is currently being focused
              toward an understanding of the roles of DNA supercoiling-dependent (chromatin)
              structures on gene expression.  In bacteria, the most common positive
              regulators of gene expression are the LysR family of proteins which activate
              transcription of a target gene(s) and autoregulate their own synthesis.  This
              research will provide fundamental information for understanding the roles of
              DNA supercoiling-dependent structures in gene expression, will enhance the
              current level of understanding of the mechanism of action for other LysR-type
              gene activators, and will be of general interest for investigations of
              divergent promoter systems in lower and higher eukaryotic system.  ***
