Title       : Structural Dynamics of DNA Triple Helices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9723694

Award Number: 9723694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irina M. Russu irussu@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723694  Russu  The research will address the question of intramolecular
              recognition in triple helix formation by mapping the energetics and dynamics of
              DNA triple helical structures at the level of individual bases.  The five DNA
              triple helices proposed for investigation contain canonical as well as
              noncanonical base triplets.  The structural free energies that stabilize each
              base in its closed, hydrogen-bonded conformation in the DNA triple helices of
              interest will be obtained by measuring the thermodynamics and kinetics of
              opening of individual base pairs using proton exchange and NMR spectroscopy. 
              These parameters will define the stability of individual Hoogsteen base pairs
              within canonical and noncanonical base triplets, the energetics perturbations
              of Watson-Crick base pairs in duplex DNA resulting from triple helix formation,
              and the influence of noncanonical base triplets upon the stability of other
              triplets in the structures.  The resolution of the energetic maps of the DNA
              triple helices of interest will be enhanced by labeling the molecules with 15N
              at sites involved in triple helix formation.  The isotopic labeling will allow
              novel heteronuclear 1H - 15N methods to be used to probe conformational
              fluctuations at these sites, and to correlate them with local stability in the
              triple helical structures of DNA.    Triple helices are alternative DNA
              structures that involve recognition of base sequences in the double helix by a
              third strand of DNA oligonucleotide.  This recognition reaction has an
              outstanding base sequence specificity, and thus allows triple helical
              structures to participate in selective control of gene expression and in
              chemical modification reactions of the genetic material targeted at specific
              sites.  The molecular mechanisms by which this high degree of specificity is
              achieved represents a fundamental question in understanding the biological
              functions of these DNA structures.  ***
