Title       : Characterization of Mechanisms That Regulate Inositol Metabolism In Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9723756

Award Number: 9723756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia McGraw mcgraw@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723756  McGraw  The long-term goal of this research project is to uncover the
              pathway that links the function of a regulator of inositol metabolism encoded
              by the OPI1 gene to the metabolite inositol. The B vitamin inositol is an
              essential biomolecule in metazoa. In every cell type that has been examined,
              starvation for inositol causes cell death, although little is known about the
              mechanism of this phenomenon. Termed inositolless death in 1959 by Lester and
              Gross, it was first described by G.W. Beadle in 1944, who stated that "...death
              ensues when the reaction pathways which utilize the missing or limiting
              component cannot 'keep up' with the other reaction pathways and this in turn
              may reasonably be defined as a condition of imbalance". Some of the cellular
              processes that require inositol are well-documented.  In eukarytoic cells 
              inositol is a component of a major class of membrane phospholipids that
              includes phosphatidylinositol (PI) and its polyphosphorylated derivatives
              (PIPs). In this capacity, inositol provides structure to the cell membrane
              (PI), and also functions in transmitting information (PIPs) from the
              environment to the interior of the cell.  Experiments during the previous
              funding period demonstrated that inositol uptake from the environment is
              subject to complex regulation. It was shown that the activity of the major
              inositol permease, encoded by the ITR1 gene, is regulated at multiple levels
              including both transcription of ITR1 and stability of the Itr1 permease. 
              Ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation was found to be necessary for
              inactivation and endocytosis of the Itr1 permease. Remarkably, the same
              ubiquitin conjugating enzymes required for Itr1 degradation were also required
              for derepression of transcription of ITR1. In this case, the ubiquitin system
              could be bypassed by deletion of the OPi1 negative regulator. The research to
              be carried out will include the construction of mutations in OPI1 in vitro that
              will then be analyzed in vivo. Mutations will be introduced in ar eas of the
              gene encoding regions of Opi1p regions such as the leucine zipper and
              polyglutamine tracts, in PEST regions, and in potential ubiquitination sites.
              The consequences of these mutations on Opi1p stability, on Opi1p-mediated
              negative regulation, and on formation and stability of a high molecular weight
              Opi1p complex will be analyzed .  Additionally, the cellular location of Opi1p,
              and the effects of mutations in OPI1 and  other genes such as ITR1, ITR2, INO2,
              and INO4, on that localization will be determined.  Antibodies will be used to
              localize Opi1p in the presence and absence of inositol by confocal fluorescence
              microscopy. Preliminary data suggest that Opi1p is not located in the nucleus.
              There is evidence that other inositol-dependent processes exist; mutations that
              affect a variety of functions have been coincidentally found to perturb
              inositol metabolism.      The B vitamin inositol is essential for all higher
              organisms. The study of a eukaryotic model system in which mutations can be
              easily constructed and analyzed provides an opportunity to dissect the
              mechanisms that link inositol metabolism to membrane biogenesis and cellular
              growth. This work will further understanding of how the  supply and demand for
              inositol is sensed by the cell. The research is part of a broad investigation
              of the mechanisms that maintain metabolic balance and ensure normal
              physiological function.
