Title       : The Developmental Biology of Fear: Effects of Prenatal Stress on
               Corticotropin-Releasing Factor (CRF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9723900

Award Number: 9723900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale L. Birkle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Birkle  9723900             Developing organisms are sensitive to various
              influences; exposure at critical times during development can permanently
              affect behavior and metabolism.  In humans, psychosocial stress in expectant
              mothers is associated with developmental lag and behavioral disturbances in
              their children.  When pregnant rats are stressed, their offspring develop the
              prenatal stress syndrome, characterized by abnormal behavioral and
              physiological responses to fear-provoking stimuli.  Offspring of stressed rats
              (i.e., prenatally stressed rats) are less capable of coping with stress, and
              therefore respond to stressful stimuli to a greater degree.  The working
              hypothesis of this project is that prenatal stress imprints the organizing
              brain during critical stages of prenatal development, creating effects that
              remain with the animal and alter the input, processing and behavioral responses
              to stimuli.  This project will determine mechanisms for these effects  by
              investigating the imprint of prenatal stress on the development of a
              neuropeptide system that could mediate the increased fearfulness and increased
              stress response observed in the offspring of stressed rats.          This
              project will investigate neurochemical  mechanisms for long-lasting
              developmental effects of prenatal stress.  The research will focus on a
              specific neuropeptide in the brain, corticotropin releasing factor (CRF).  CRF
              is a well-established mediator of both physical and mental responses to stress.
               The project will study changes in CRF in prenatally stressed offspring as
              compared to offspring of unstressed dams.  The proposed experiments will
              localize changes in CRF content and CRF mRNA in specific regions and nuclei of
              the brain.  These experiments will evaluate age of offspring as major variable.
               A develop mental change in CRF may  be due to alterations in the regulation of
              CRF synthesis or release.  In other words, the effects of prenatal stress on
              CRF systems may be secondary to changes in the responses to o ther hormones or
              neurotransmitters.  The proposed experiments will investigate the effects of 
              stress and drugs on CRF mRNA, CRF content and CRF release in prenatally
              stressed rats as compared to normal rats.  The results of the proposed
              experiments will contribute to our understanding of the developmental
              neurobiology of the most basic emotion, fear.  These studies may also reveal
              linkages between maternal stress and the production of offspring that are
              vulnerable to stress-related diseases and mental illness.
