Title       : Sound Fields and Mate Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9723521

Award Number: 9723521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Bradbury   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9723521  Bradbury  The adaptive design of many animal sound production systems 
              is strongly  influenced by selection for increased call amplitude and 
              efficient  projection of those sounds in the direction of intended  recipients.
              In some  systems, specific structures have profound effects on both  volume and
               directionality.  One such structure which appears as an  accessory organ in 
              the sound production systems of many diverse vertebrate  groups is an 
              inflatable air sac. While this adaptation is clearly an  important feature  of
              these systems, very little is known about how air sacs  affect sound  volume
              and directionality.  Using newly developed multitrack  recording  techniques,
              this study will focus on several species of  lekking grouse to  clarify the
              relationship between display call amplitude, the  directionality  of the call,
              and the shape and number of vocal sacs. We have  chosen grouse  because of the
              degree of interesting variations in air sac  position and  operation in the
              different species.  Some grouse have paired  external air  sacs. Preliminary
              evidence suggests that sage grouse males  may use their  two-sac system to beam
              certain components of their mating  displays toward  females regardless of the
              males' relative orientation.  These data will  also be used to re-examine the
              role of amplitude in mate  choice of female  sage grouse.  Sage grouse leks are
              one of the best studied  systems in which  females choose mates solely on the
              basis of male phenotype;  call amplitude  is the only parameter which has
              remained resistant to proper  measurement.  We now have the means to make these
              measurements and  complete the analysis.  Our hope is that this comparative
              study will generate models  that can be  applied to vocal sac function in other
              groups and, more  broadly, contribute  to our understanding of the importance
              of amplitude and  directionality in  female choice biased mating systems.
