Title       : Role of Parafusin in Membrane Fusion in Exocytosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9723532

Award Number: 9723532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Birgit H. Satir   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yeshiva U Albert Einstein
	      500 West 185th Street
	      Bronx, NY  104587809    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723532  Satir    Regulative secretion in eukaryotic cells involves a large
              number of components that interact to control   membrane fusion and exocytosis
              via a signal transduction cascade.  In many systems, this cascade is  
              initiated by an increase in cytosolic Ca2+.  The targets of this Ca2+ increase
              are not completely   understood.  They probably include a phosphoglycoprotein,
              parafusin (PFUS), that is widely found from   protozoa to mammalian cells. In
              Paramecium  where PFUS has been carefully studied, a Ca2+-dependent  
              dephosphoglucosylation of the molecule is clearly correlated with exocytosis. 
              The possibility that PFUS is   a critical component of the secretory apparatus
              has now been enhanced by the finding that PFUS localizes   to the surface
              "coat" of the dense core secretory vesicles in Paramecium  and to the cell
              membrane prior to   exocytosis and that it changes its localization when
              exocytosis is induced.  Coat proteins are important in   many membranes to
              determine localization within the cell.  In this proposal we seek to explore
              the   function of PFUS  in membrane fusion and exocytosis, including a possible
              relationship of PFUS to   specific components of the 20S docking complex.  This
              function may have fundamental consequences for   the signal transduction
              cascade leading to exocytosis and secretory product release in tissues of  
              multicellular organisms.     The secretion of proteins from cells is an
              essential physiological process in cells as diverse as unicellular   organisms
              to organs of animals. This process involves the intracellular packaging of
              secretory proteins   into membrane-bounded vesicles that fuse with the cell's
              limiting membrane, or plasma membrane, to be   secreted into extracellular
              space. A conserved protein, termed parafusin appears to be involved in the  
              fusion of the secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane. The PI has found that
              the reversible attachment   of a phosphoglucose to the parafusin protein may
              regulate the fusion of the secretory vesicle  to the plasma   membrane. This
              type of modification of a protein is apparently unique to this protein. The
              regulation of   the attachment and removal of the phosphoglucose  is proposed
              as a critical step to regulate the secretion   of proteins from cells. This
              award will fund basic research in the functional role and regulation of  
              parafusin phosphorylation in protein secretion.
