Title       : Nuclear Permeability as a Function of Cellular Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9723015

Award Number: 9723015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Feldherr feldheer@anatomy.med.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723015  Feldherr     Signal-mediated nuclear transport varies as a function of
              cellular activity.  Thus, as proliferating fibroblasts become quiescent there
              is a significant decrease in the size of materials that are able to enter the
              nucleus.  Conversely, nuclear transport capacity increases in rapidly dividing,
              SV40-transformed cells.  The experiments proposed are designed to investigate
              nuclear transport during oogenesis in Xenopus laevis.  There are several
              advantages for using this system to study the regulation of nuclear transport. 
              First, there is a considerable amount of data, obtained from oocytes, relating
              to the composition and structure of the pores, as well as the cytoplasmic
              factors that are required for transport.  Second, since oogenesis is
              accompanied by a high level of nuclear synthetic activity, these cells are
              especially useful for studying nuclear transport.  Third, it is possible to
              correlate nuclear permeability changes with specific changes in RNA synthesis. 
              In preliminary studies, it was found that there is a size-dependent increase in
              the nuclear import of colloidal gold particles coated with nucleoplasmin (a
              Xenopus nuclear protein) as Stage 1 oocytes progress to Stage 2 (early
              vitellogenesis).  This is accompanied by a shift in RNA production from
              primarily 5S RNA (during Stage 1) to mainly 18 and 28S rRNA (in Stage 2 cells).
               Studies are proposed to further characterize nuclear transport capacity at
              these stages, and determine: 1, if there are differences in import rates that
              are independent of substrate size; and 2, if there are corresponding
              differences in nuclear export.  Transport will be investigated by
              microinjecting either fluorescent labeled proteins or coated colloidal gold
              particles into intact cells, and subsequently analyzing the intracellular
              distribution of the particles.  It has also been established, using
              permeabilized HeLa cells, that cytosolic extracts obtained from vitellogenic
              oocytes are more effective in promoting nuclear import than Stage 1  extracts. 
              There is evidence that this difference is due either to variations in the
              activity of cytoplasmic translocation factors (rather than binding factors) or
              to the presence of transport inhibitors (particularly in Stage 1 extracts). 
              Experiments will be performed to distinguish between these possibilities, and
              also to determine if known translocation factors (e.g., Ran or p10) are
              involved in altering transport capacity.        The eukaryotic cell is highly
              compartmentalized, with various specific cellular functions and metabolic
              processes localized in one or another compartment.  These functions need to be
              coordinated and regulated.  The nucleus of the cell is the compartment which
              contains the genetic material, DNA, and within which all of the DNA-based
              metabolic functions (replication and transcription) occur.  Those proteins that
              are involved in these functions are manufactured in the cytoplasm, and must be
              transported into the nucleus; similarly, the RNA that is transcribed from the
              genes and serves as the templates for all of protein synthesis must be
              transported out of the nucleus.   Regulation of nucleocytoplasmic exchange
              could represent a fundamental mechanism for modulating metabolic processes in
              cells.  In the proposed studies, changes in nuclear transport will be analyzed
              during oogenesis in Xenopus laevis (the African clawed frog).  This
              experimental system is especially suited for examining the molecular basis of
              transport changes.  ***
