Title       : RUI: Regulation of Myosin Heavy Chain IIB Expression: An Integrative Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9723351

Award Number: 9723351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Swoap sswoap@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Muscles are designed to perform many different functions within the body. 
              Different muscle types perform each of these different functions.  There are
              certain key characteristics within a muscle that makes it better suited to
              perform a particular function.  For example, those muscle groups involved with
              sprinting, or any high power activity, have a typical "fast muscle" phenotype. 
              That is, these muscles can move limbs extremely fast and can generate energy
              for that movement quickly.  However, these fast muscles fatigue very quickly. 
              Muscles that are designed for posture or endurance exhibit a typical "slow
              muscle" phenotype.  These slow muscles produce much less power than fast
              muscles, but can remain active for much longer than fast muscles.  Thus,
              muscles show an inverse relationship between power production and fatigue.     
              Muscles have the remarkable ability to change fiber type phenotype.  For
              example, a person training to become an endurance runner will significantly
              increase his/her number of slow muscle cells within locomotor muscles.  This
              ability to adapt allows organisms to better handle a new environment.  The
              studies to be performed during the present proposal address the fundamental
              mechanisms that dictate muscle fiber type diversity in animals.  Specifically,
              the genetic component of muscle fiber type adaptation, i.e. DNA, will be
              studied herein.
