Title       : Genetic Dissection of Female Gametogenesis in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9723948

Award Number: 9723948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Philippe Vielle-Calzada vielle@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ueli Grossniklaus  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Grossniklaus  9723948  The mechanisms controlling the development of the female
              gametophyte in plants are largely unknown. Approximately 60 mutants in which
              the gametophytic phase of the life cycle has been affected as judged by reduced
              fertility and non-mendelian segregation have been identified from over 5,000
              lines of insertional mutants of the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. Initial
              studies indicate that different stages of megagametogenesis are affected in
              these lines and it is proposed to dissect the genetic hierarchy controlling
              female gametogenesis by analyzing these mutants further at the genetic level
              including reversion and transmission analysis, the determination of map
              position and the characterization of regulatory interactions with other genes
              expressed in the female gametophyte. One mutant will be chosen for an in-depth
              molecular and genetic analysis. The structure and sequence of the gene will be
              determined as well as its expression at the RNA and protein level.    Plants
              have evolved a characteristic life strategy with alternating generations and
              the absence of a distinct germ line. The plant life cycle alternates between a
              diploid and a haploid generation, the sporophyte and the gametophyte. In the
              sexual organs of the flower, haploid products of meiosis are produced which
              mark the beginning of the gametophytic phase, which eventually results in the
              development of the gametophytes. The mechanisms controlling the development of
              the female gametophyte are largely unknown and this study will use a
              combination of genetic, molecular and cell biological techniques to dissect
              that pathway. A detailed knowledge of the genes and molecules controlling
              female gametogenesis will provide insights into fundamental morphogenetic
              mechanisms and cell differentiation pathways, and open up new possibilities for
              the manipulation of the reproductive system harboring great potential for plant
              breeding and crop improvement.
