Title       : The Genetics of Cell and Tissue Shape in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1999     
File        : a9723791

Award Number: 9723791
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Jack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jack  97-23791    The actin-myosin cytoskeleton controls the shape of cells in a
              variety of situations. Changes in the shapes of cells caused by contraction of
              the actin cytoskeleton are known to be responsible for tissue morphogenesis,
              invagination of epithelial sheets, cell rearrangement, and cell motility in a
              variety of organisms. Contraction of the actin cytoskeleton is caused by the
              action of nonmuscle myosin proteins on actin filaments. Preliminary results
              identify three mutations that prevent cells in various tissues--especially
              tubular epithelia and the nervous system--from assuming their proper shape. One
              of the three mutations, zipper, encodes nonmuscle myosin II. The products of
              the other two, raw and rib, are unknown. The rib and zip mutations are nearly
              identical in phenotype. Both cause embryonic defects and abnormalities in
              tissue morphology consistent with a function of their products in conferring
              cell shape. Mutations of raw cause a subset of the phenotypes of rib and zip
              mutants. In addition to the remarkable similarity of their phenotypes,
              mutations of the rib and zip genes are synthetically lethal, further suggesting
              that the products function in the same process. Experiments in this proposal
              are designed to test the hypothesis that the products of the raw and rib genes
              are required for the cell shape changes caused by the contraction of the actin
              cytoskeleton by nonmuscle myosin II. Tissues and cells of mutant embryos will
              be studied in greater detail to test the prediction that the abnormalities
              caused by the mutations will be consistent with defects in cell shape. In order
              to test hypotheses regarding the functional interaction between the raw and rib
              products and nonmuscle myosin, the distribution of filamentous actin and
              nonmuscle myosin between tissues and within cells will be compared in wild type
              and mutant animals. In addition, the requirement of other cytoskeletal
              components on tissue morphology will be examined by assessment of the mutant
              phenotypes and genetic i nteractions of mutations of the genes that encode
              them. Cloning of rib will be undertaken in order to characterize the sequence,
              cellular location, and biochemical interaction of its product with nonmuscle
              myosin II.
