Title       : Study of Whether Neurofilaments Undergo Axonal Transport as Cargo of
               Microtubules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9723979

Award Number: 9723979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35856              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas B. Shea Thomas_Shea@uml.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Like the entire body, the brain is composed of cells.  Neurons, the "thinking"
              cells of the brain are unique in  that they connect to each other by long,
              extensions which  received and transmit electrical signals.  The transmitting 
              connections ("axons") are quite long, and are maintained by  an internal
              skeleton (the "cytoskeleton") that is comprised  of an unique interconnected
              network of fibers. These fibers  themselves are assembled from repetitive
              subunits that are  manufactured in the neuron's body and transported into the 
              axon by a process called "axonal transport".  It remains  unclear how the major
              fibers ("neurofilaments" NFs and  "microtubules") are organized and how they
              undergo axonal  transport.  What is clear, however, is that the proper 
              development of axons (and therefore that of the entire  nervous system) is
              dependent upon the proper transport and  accumulation of neurofilaments and
              microtubules within  developing axons. Furthermore, failure to maintain these 
              fibers during later life can lead to axonal atrophy and the  progressive
              neuronal death associated with aging and  Alzheimer's disease.      In other
              cell types, microtubules are known to slide past  one another by means of
              associated motor-like proteins that  "walk" one microtubule along another one. 
              Similar proteins  are used to move membrane-enclosed packets of material along 
              microtubules into the axon. Dr. Shea and colleagues  hypothesize that
              neurofilaments make their way out into the  axon by traveling as cargo of
              microtubules, perhaps via  similar associated motor proteins.  They will test
              this  hypothesis by introducing drugs that cripple several  distinct aspects of
              microtubule assembly and axonal  transport.  If their hypothesis is correct,
              Dr. Shea and his  colleagues anticipate that these drugs will also cause 
              axonal transport of neurofilaments to cease.
