Title       : Purification and Cloning of Hepta-beta Glucoside Elicitor- binding Protein(s)
               from Soybean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9723685

Award Number: 9723685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Hahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723685  Hahn    The long-term goal of this research is to understand how plant
              cells perceive and respond to extracellular   signals.  The model system used
              in these studies is the induction of plant defense responses, specifically  
              phytoalexin accumulation, in soybean (Glycine max) by oligosaccharides
              (elicitors) originating from the   mycelial wall of a phytopathogenic oomycete,
              Phytophthora sojae var. glycines.  Considerable information   has accrued about
              the structure of an elicitor (a branched hepta-beta-glucoside) derived from
              mycelial wall   glucans and about the identity and regulation of
              elicitor-induced genes encoding enzymes required for the   biosynthesis of the
              phytoalexins.  However, little is known about the mechanisms by which plant
              cells   perceive the elicitor, or how that signal is transmitted to the cell
              nucleus to initiate changes in gene   expression. The research described in
              this proposal focuses on the first step in the elicitor-stimulated   signal
              transduction pathway, namely the recognition of a hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor
              by a plasma   membrane-localized receptor.  Recent studies strongly suggest
              that the 75 kDa polypeptide previously   thought to be a hepta-beta-glucoside
              elicitor-binding protein (EBP) is, in fact, a non-specific glucan-  binding
              protein.  Preliminary studies using modified extraction procedures and
              photo-affinity labeling   have now identified a 90 kDa polypeptide as a
              candidate EBP.  The overall goal of the research proposed   in this application
              is to identify, purify, and clone EBPs from soybean root membranes and to
              obtain   evidence that the EBPs are physiological receptors for the
              hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor.  The first specific   goal is to identify and
              purify EBPs.  The number and identity of polypeptides in solubilized membrane  
              protein preparations that have hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor-binding sites will
              be established by photo-  affinity labeling. The specificity of the
              photo-affinity labeling will be rigorously established in l igand   competition
              assays with oligoglucosides structurally related to the hepta-beta-glucoside
              elicitor.   Polypeptides present in the membranes that bind to
              elicitor-inactive beta-glucans will be eliminated first   and then the EBPs
              will be purified by ligand-affinity chromatography.  Partial amino acid
              sequences will   be determined for the polypeptide(s) found to have a specific
              hepta-beta-glucoside elicitor-binding site.    The second specific goal is to
              obtain antibodies against the EBPs.  These antibodies will be used to  
              localize EBPs in plant tissues and to isolate genes encoding EBPs.  The third
              specific goal is to clone   cDNA(s) that encode EBPs.  Degenerate
              oligonucleotides will be synthesized and used to amplify, by   PCR, a
              double-stranded DNA probe from a heterogeneous population of single-stranded
              cDNAs made   from soybean root mRNA.  This probe will be used to screen a
              lambda gt10 library for cDNAs encoding   EBPs.  Alternatively, antibodies
              generated against affinity-purified EBPs will be used to screen a cDNA  
              expression library for clones expressing EBP sequences.  Any cDNA clones that
              are obtained will be   purified and sequenced.  The ability of the protein(s)
              encoded by the cloned cDNA(s) to bind the hepta-  beta-glucoside elicitor
              specifically and with high affinity will be determined.  The cDNA clones and
              their   derived sequences will be used to identify possible structural and
              functional domains in the EBPs that   might relate to their role in signal
              transduction. The research outlined in this renewal application will lay   the
              groundwork for future work that will test whether the EBPs function as
              physiological receptors and to   identify and characterize components that
              interact with EBPs and might function downstream of the   receptor in the
              cellular signaling pathway that results in the accumulation of phytoalexins in
              elicited plant   cells.  The results of these studies should provide additional
              insight into the mechanisms used by plant   cells to perceive and  respond to
              extracellular signals.  These studies should also increase our   understanding
              of the roles of carbohydrate signal molecules (oligosaccharins) in the
              regulation of   biological processes in diverse organisms.    Plants perceive
              and respond to pathogen attack. The perception of the infection of a pathogen
              is mediated   by the detection of specific compounds termed elicitors are
              associated with the attack. Cell surface   proteins detect the presence of
              these elicitors which signal a variety of processes within the plant cell to  
              marshal defense reactions. Dr. Hahn has identified a soybean cell-surface
              protein that binds an elicitor   originating from the pathogen Phytophthora.
              The binding appears to be highly specific to a single protein   and has
              characteristics that make it a candidate for the elicitor receptor. With this
              award Dr. Hahn will   purify and isolate the receptor protein. Data obtained
              from the purified protein will be used to obtain a   cDNA clone of the elicitor
              binding protein. The results of this research will yield information on the  
              mechanisms by which plants perceive infection of pathogens. This information is
              extremely important in   understanding how plants maintain growth in a hostile
              world and it has potential practical applications I   improving and modifying a
              plants response to pathogen challenge.    ***
