Title       : Interaction of the Plasma Melatonin Rhythm with other Hormone Rhythms During
               Development and on Various Light/Dark Cycles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9723858

Award Number: 9723858
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111751             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Wright wrightm@elms.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Our Lady of Elms College
	      291 Springfield Street
	      Chicopee, MA  010132837    413/598-8351

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Metamorphosis of the amphibian tadpole is a developmental program driven mainly
              by an increased secretion of thyroid hormones, although other hormones, such as
              adrenal corticoids, prolactin, and melatonin may accelerate or inhibit its
              progress.  Many hormones exhibit rhythmicity, and peak in the blood at specific
              times of the day.  Differences in the timing of the peak level of various
              hormones could be critical to the regulation of metamorphosis.  However, the
              rhythm of hormones in the plasma of tadpoles is not known.  Using
              radioimmunoassay, this project will study the circadian rhythmicity of the
              metamorphic hormones mentioned above in the plasma of tadpoles from early to
              late stages of development.  Tadpole development rate is also dependent on the
              light/dark cycle, as are plasma melatonin levels, which are higher in the dark.
               Melatonin inhibits the thyroid gland of tadpoles, as well as the tissue
              response to thyroxine.  This research will also focus on the relationship
              between the light/dark cycle and thyroxine and melatonin levels and rhythms. 
              This work will further understanding of the role of hormones in development,
              especially the influence of melatonin.  Since the secretion of melatonin is
              related to light and darkness, the research will also help us to understand the
              influence of the environment on amphibians.  This is a problem of much concern
              in view of the recent appearance of frog abnormalities, some of which appear to
              be developmental in origin.  The work will be done at an undergraduate
              institution with the collaboration of undergraduate researchers, who will be
              introduced to the scientific process in preparation for professional and
              scientific careers.
