Title       : Analysis of Proteins Which Interact With a Protein Tyrosine Phosphatase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9723509

Award Number: 9723509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizabeth A. Perkins perkins@helix.mgh.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Perkins  97-23509      Protein tyrosine phosphorylation is a remarkably
              conserved mechanism which is implicated in the control of cell growth,
              differentiation and cell survival in organisms as distantly related as yeast
              and humans. Although many tyrosine kineses have been described, only recently
              have protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPases) been implicated in receptor
              tyrosine kinase (RTK) mediated signal transduction pathways. The Drosophila
              gene corkscrew (csw) encodes a protein which is among the first PTPases whose
              gene mutations are facilitating a genetic analysis of function in vivo.
              Genetic, developmental and molecular studies have demonstrated that Csw
              functions positively in multiple RTK pathways, four of which are essential
              during embryonic development. These analyses suggest that Csw is a member of
              the conserved signaling cassette that operates downstream of all RTKs. Csw also
              has been functionally conserved through evolution since a structurally similar
              mammalian PTPase, SHP-2, can substitute for Csw during development; therefore,
              the observations made for Csw may be generally applied to its mammalian
              homolog.    Preliminary work reveals that Csw physically interacts in viva with
              two novel proteins, D2 and 61. To understand the function of D2 and 61 in Csw,
              hence RTK, signaling a number of genetic and biochemical approaches have been
              designed. Specifically the experiments will: 1. determine the functions of D2
              and 61 during Drosophila development and RTK signaling, 2. determine if their
              functions are dependent on the activation state of the RTK, 3. determine
              whether D2 and 61 are required to positively or negatively transduce an RTK
              signal, and if so 4. determine if D2 and 61 act upstream or downstream of Csw,
              and more precisely where in the signaling cassette they function. Understanding
              the genetic and molecular mechanisms of Csw action are critical first steps
              towards determining how a PTPase functions positively in RTK pathways that are
              essential for cell growth and differentiati on.
