Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Regulation of Tropic Growth in Arabidopsis
               thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9723124

Award Number: 9723124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emmanuel Liscum liscume@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9723124  Liscum  Higher plant are dependent upon light not only as an energy
              source to drive carbon fixation, but also as a modulator of growth and
              development throughout  their life cycle.  Multiple wavelength regions of the
              electromagnetic spectrum can be utilized as regulatory cues of various
              developmental and morphological (photomorphogenic) responses through the action
              of several photoreceptor systems and associated signal transduction cascades. 
              However, in most cases very little is known about the molecular basis for these
              response pathways. Our long-term objective is to elucidate the cellular and
              components of a plant light environment.   Towards that end we have been using
              Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh, as a model system to investigate genetic and
              molecular basis of the phototropic response, or the differential growth
              response of various plant organs in response to directional light cues, and
              have identified mutants at several loci of that affect this response.  Mutants
              in the nph4 (non-phototropic hypocotyl 4) allele series affect not only
              phototropism but also gravitropism and thigmotropism suggesting that NPH4
              protein may be involved in the regulation og differential growth.  We propose
              to: (a) Characterize a variety of physiological and developmental properties
              that require changes in growth for phenotypic expression (e.g., tropisms,
              light-dependent hypocotyl growth inhibition, inflorescence bolting) of the nph4
              mutants in single mutant backgrounds, as well as in double and multiple mutant
              combinations with other phototropic and photomorphogenic mutants. (b) Clone and
              characterize the NPH4 gene.  (c) Initiate studies to determine the biochemical
              function(s) of the NPH4 protein. (d) Use a variety of genetic screens
              (mutational, as well as biochemical) to identify additional components required
              for phototropism. (e) Use the photobiological characters elucidated from mutant
              analyses in our ongoing project to generate a genetic hierarchy for the
              regulation of phototropism.    The rese arch proposed here should provide a
              wealth of information about a subset of the components of the phototropic
              signal-response system that are also necessary for additional tropic responses
              of higher plants.  In addition, these studies may provide important insights
              into the mechanisms of how plant achieve and regulate differential growth.
