Title       : Regulatory Specificity of the Maize Myb-Domain Proteins P and C1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9723355

Award Number: 9723355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich Grotewold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723355  Grotewold  Transcription factors frequently belong to families of
              proteins that share related DNA-binding domains and bind similar DNA sequences.
               Yet, these factors are able to regulate different cellular processes by
              activating specific sets of target genes.  It is therefore fundamentally
              important to understand the mechanisms by which transcriptional regulators with
              similar DNA-binding domains direct specific patterns of gene expression to
              achieve biological specificity.  This research will investigate the mechanisms
              by which P and C1, two maize proteins related to the Myb oncogene, regulate the
              accumulation of different flavonoid pigments by activating overlapping sets of
              biosynthetic genes.  Our previous studies showed that P and C1 encode
              sequence-specific DNA-binding proteins that recognize with different affinities
              identical cis-acting promoter elements in a commonly regulated gene.  Whereas
              C1 requires the bHLH factors of the R/B family for regulatory function, P does
              not, but may require other as yet-unidentified cellular factors to regulate
              promoters lacking high-affinity P-binding sites.  How combinatorial
              interactions with accessory factors modulate P and C1 regulatory function is
              not known.  Previous studies have also shown that the conserved Myb-domains of
              these proteins are sufficient for their regulatory specificity:  The Myb domain
              is solely responsible for the DNA-binding properties of these proteins, and the
              Myb-domain of C1 mediates the interaction with the R/B proteins, indicating a
              need to elucidate the structure of Myb-domains to understand how biological
              specificity is achieved.  To determine how P and C1 regulate specific patterns
              of gene expression and to understand how plant Myb-domain proteins achieve
              biological specificity, we will determine the residues in C1 that allow it, but
              not P, to interact with R/B.  Since the interaction of C1 with R/B proteins is
              fundamental for C1 function, we will investigate why C1 requires R/B, whereas P
              does not.  We will inv estigate whether additional cellular factors are
              required for the regulatory function of P and C1.  This question is important
              because neither P nor C1+R/B are sufficient to regulate promoters lacking
              high-affinity DNA-binding sites for these proteins.  This research will
              contribute to a fundamental understanding of the mechanisms used by
              transcription factors to regulate the expression of different genes to achieve
              biological specificity.  %%%  Regulation of gene expression is a central
              process in all living organisms.  Transcription factors frequently belong to
              families of proteins that share related DNA-binding domains and bind similar
              DNA sequences.  Yet, these factors are able to regulate different cellular
              processes by activating specific sets of target genes.  It is therefore
              important to understand how transcriptional regulators with similar DNA-binding
              domains achieve biological specificity in directing specific patterns of gene
              expression.  Our approach to this biological question is to investigate the
              mechanisms by which two maize proteins related to the Myb oncogene regulate the
              accumulation of different flavonoid pigments by activating overlapping sets of
              biosynthetic genes.  This research will contribute to a fundamental
              understanding of the mechanisms used by transcription factors, to regulate the
              expression of different genes to achieve biological specificity.  ***
