Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of dpp Signaling Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9723455

Award Number: 9723455
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen S. Laughon alaughon@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723455  Laughon  Members of the Smad protein family have been identified as
              central components of TGF-( signaling pathways.  These pathways allow cells to
              respond to short- and long-range signals that affect many aspects of pattern
              formation and growth in higher animals, including control of cell
              proliferation.  In response to signaling, Smads are phosphorylated and
              transported from cytoplasm to nucleus, where they activate transcription of
              target genes.  This lab has recently discovered that Drosophila Mad protein, a
              founding member of the Smad family and the homolog of vertebrate Smadl, is a
              sequence-specific DNA binding protein.  DNA binding activity and the ability to
              oligomerize are localized within a conserved N-terminal domain, while the
              conserved C-terminal domain inhibits DNA binding.  This research will focus on
              understanding the role of Smad-DNA interactions in determining the regulatory
              specificity in TGF-( pathways, and in determining the threshold responses of
              individual genes to short- or long-range signals.  The first aim is to
              characterize the DNA binding specificities of Mad, Smad2, Smad3 and Smad4.  The
              functional differences between Smads suggest that they may differ significantly
              in DNA binding specificity.  DNA binding specificities of Smads will be
              characterized by analysis of binding to wild-type and mutated natural binding
              sites, and by binding site selection.  The second aim is to identify amino
              acids within the Smad DNA binding domain that are responsible for any
              differences in DNA binding specificity.  Such specificity determinants will be
              identified by creating a series of Mad-Smad2/3 chimeras and testing these for
              specificity of DNA binding and reporter activation.  The third aim is to
              determine how the affinity of Mad for its binding sites affects threshold
              responses to Dpp signaling.  Visualization of reporter expression in Drosophila
              wing imaginal discs, will be used to investigate how responses to short and
              long-range Dpp signaling are affected by mutations tha t increase or decrease
              the affinity of target enhancers for Mad.  The effects of altering the number
              of Mad binding sites will also be determined.  %%%  Members of the Smad protein
              family have been identified as central components of TGF-( signaling pathways. 
              These pathways allow cells to respond to short- and long-range signals that
              affect many aspects of pattern formation and growth in higher animals,
              including control of cell proliferation.  This lab has recently discovered that
              Drosophila Mad protein, a founding member of the Smad family and the homolog of
              vertebrate Smad1, is a sequence-specific DNA binding protein.  This research
              will focus on understanding the role of Smad-DNA interactions in determining
              the regulatory specificity in TGF-( pathways, and in determining the threshold
              responses of individual genes to short- or long-range signals.  ***
