Title       : RUI: Sphingolipid Metabolism in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9723329

Award Number: 9723329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel V. Lynch dlynch@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9723484  Lynch  The previous characterization of enzymatic reactions involved in
              sphingolipid metabolism in plants serves as a foundation for the proposed
              research. The intracellular locations of the individual enzymatic steps
              involved in sphingolipid synthesis and turnover will be determined in bean and
              corn tissues using cell fractionation and marker assays. The specific
              sphingolipid content and composition in the isolated membrane fractions will
              also be determined. The transfer of labeled sphingolipids through the cell will
              be tracked by coupling in vivo labeling of sphingolipids and fractionation
              procedures. Using this approach, information on the route and kinetics of
              intracellular sphingolipid transport will be obtained. The topology of
              glucosylceramide synthesis in intact membrane vesicles will be investigated by
              examining the sensitivity of the reaction to proteolytic enzymes. As well, the
              role of steryl glucoside as the glucose donor for this reaction will be further
              investigated. Finally, the enzymatic reaction catalyzing the synthesis of
              ceramide phosphorylinositol, the biosynthetic precursor for inositol
              phosphorylceramides, will be demonstrated and characterized in microsomal
              preparations from bean and corn. Subsequently, its subcellular distribution and
              topology will be characterized. The proposed research will provide an
              integrated view of plant sphingolipid metabolism, intracellular
              transport/compartmentation, and the topology of key enzymes thought to be
              involved in establishing the asymmetric transbilayer distribution of
              glucosylceramide in the plasma membrane. It will also provide new information
              about the first step in the synthesis of inositol phosphorylceramides, a
              diverse class of complex sphingolipids in plants.    Sphingolipids are present
              in all organisms except bacteria and are known to function as structural
              components in cells and as regulators of various biological processes. Little
              is known, however, about the function and metabolism of sphingolipids in
              plants. The  proposed research, a continuation of previous work supported by
              the NSF, will provide an integrated view of where and how sphingolipids are
              produced, transported, and degraded in the cell. It will also investigate, for
              the first time, the synthesis of inositol phosphorylceramides, a novel and
              diverse class of complex plant lipids. The results from these studies will
              contribute to understanding the role of these unusual lipids in plant growth
              and development.
