Title       : Studies of Tetrachlorohydroquinone Dehalogenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1998  
File        : a9723308

Award Number: 9723308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley D. Copley copley@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723308  Copley  Tetrachlorohydroquinone (TCHQ) dehalogenase is found in
              Sphingomonas chlorophenolica, a Gram-negative soil bacterium that completely
              degrades pentachlorophenol, a widely used wood preservative. This enzyme
              catalyzes two successive reductive dehalogenations to convert TCHQ to
              trichlorohydroquinone and then to dichlorohydroquinone.  The reducing
              equivalents for each step are provided by two molecules of glutathione.
              Previous work in the investigator's laboratory has shown that TCHQ dehalogenase
              is evolutionarily related to enzymes in the theta class of the glutathione
              S-transferase (GST) superfamily and that it, like the GSTs, catalyzes the
              nucleophilic attack of glutathione upon an electrophilic substrate to form a
              glutathione conjugate.  However, TCHQ dehalogenase has additional capabilities
              that allow it to convert glutathione conjugates to reduced products by
              replacement of the glutathionyl moiety with a hydrogen.  This study focuses on
              the catalytically important processes that are unique to TCHQ dehalogenase. 
              Catalytic acids and bases will be identified and their pKa values determined. 
              The role of a 20-amino acid insert that is not present in GSTs and that may
              provide part of a second glutathione binding site will be explored.  Pre-steady
              state kinetic experiments will be carried out to characterize catalytic events
              and conformational changes taking place during a single-turnover.  Finally,
              efforts to crystallize the enzyme will continue.    Chlorinated organic
              compounds, including many pesticides, are important environmental pollutants. 
              A number of these compounds are persistent in the environment, toxic and/or
              carcinogenic, and some may disrupt endocrine function in humans and wildlife. 
              Biodegradation of these compounds requires removal of chlorine atoms.  This
              type of reaction is catalyzed by microbial enzymes called dehalogenases.
              Tetrachlorohydroquinone dehalogenase catalyzes a key step in the biodegradation
              of pentachlorophenol, a widely used wood preservative.  Th e investigator will
              study the mechanism of this enzyme and its relationship to a broad class of
              detoxification enzymes that catalyze reactions that are similar in some
              respects.  This work will lead to a greater understanding of the evolution of
              enzymes for biodegradation of toxic chlorinated organic compounds.
