Title       : RUI: Interactions of Neurofilament Proteins During Filament Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9723288

Award Number: 9723288
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Cohlberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9723288  Cohlberg   Research will be conducted on the pathway and mechanism of 
              assembly of mammalian neurofilaments (NFs) from their  constituent proteins and
              the role of phosphorylation in  regulating the assembly process and the
              properties of the  filaments.  The goals of the research are to identify and 
              quantitatively characterize the interactions which determine  the specificity
              of interaction of neurofilament proteins and  are responsible for filament
              stabilization, and to gain  information about the parameters which characterize
              the  dynamic properties of NFs.    In large caliber neurons of the central
              nervous system, NFs  are composed of three "NF triplet" proteins, termed NF-H 
              (high), NF-M (middle), and NF-L (low) according to their  molecular weights. 
              In certain neurons, other proteins,  including alpha-internexin, are present in
              NF.  Neurofilament (NF) proteins contain alpha-helical rod  domains flanked by
              nonhelical head and tail domains. They  aggregate to form coiled coil dimers,
              which then aggregate  further to form NF-L/NF-M and NF-L/NF-H heterotetramers, 
              which in turn serve as intermediates in the assembly of  filaments.  It is not
              certain whether the coiled coil dimers  are heterodimers or homodimers. 
              Disulfide cross-linking  will be used as a probe to detect the formation of 
              heterodimers from homodimers, and the kinetics of monomer  exchange and its
              dependence on solvent conditions will be  characterized.  The stabilities of
              various heterodimers  containing both full-length proteins and their rod
              domains  will be investigated by sedimentation and cross-linking  studies, and
              the roles of various proteins domains in the  association of dimers to
              tetramers will be characterized.  The roles of the various domains in the
              formation of  heterotetramer assembly intermediates will be investigated  by
              the use of nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel  electrophoresis.  The principal
              question to be answered is  whether specific interactions among rod domains are
              fully  responsible for th e specificity of protein association at  this level
              (LM and MH complexes are formed, but not MH) or  whether the head and tail
              domains also play a role.  Furthermore, the roles of the various protein
              domains in  determining the specificity with which proteins associate to  form
              filaments will be examined by filament reconstitution  experiments and analyzed
              by filament pelleting experiments  and by examination of reconstituted
              filaments by electron  microscopy, including immunogold labeling studies. 
              Finally,  NF proteins will be modified by the covalent attachment of 
              fluorophores, and the assembly and disassembly of filaments  and the exchange
              of proteins between filaments will be  followed by fluorescence energy transfer
              measurements.  All  of these studies will include experiments on alpha- 
              internexin as well as the NF triplet proteins.    A key attribute of eukaryotic
              cells is the presence of  filamentous structures inside the cells, collectively
              termed  the cytoskeleton, which provide a structural framework for  the
              cytoplasm and its functions.  The three major types of  cytoskeletal "elements"
              in cells, distinguished by their  molecular composition and structural
              features, are the actin-  containing microfilaments, the 10-nm diameter
              intermediate  filaments, and microtubules.  Neurofilaments (NF) are those 
              members of the family of intermediate filaments (IFs) that  form part of the
              cytoskeleton in neurons (cells of the  nervous system).  They are found
              primarily running  longitudinally down the long cellular projections known as 
              axons, along with microtubules, and they are thought to be  responsible for
              promoting the radial growth (thickening) of  axons, establishing axonal
              diameter, and maintaining the  structural integrity of the axon and its
              resistance to  compressive forces.   In large caliber neurons of the  central
              nervous system, NFs are composed of three "NF  triplet" proteins, distinguished
              by their molecular weights  (heavy-, middle-, and low-weight).  In certain
              neurons,  add itional proteins, e.g.,  alpha-internexin, are present in  NFs. 
              The proteins are synthesized in the cell body and move  down the axon in a
              process known as slow axonal transport,  eventually leaving the moving phase
              and becoming  incorporated into the stationary filament network of the  axon. 
              A number of diseases of motor neurons involve  abnormal NFs, and overexpression
              of either the light or  heavy weight NF  in transgenic mice leads to pathology
              very  similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or "Lou  Gherig's
              Disease").  Very little is known about how these NF  proteins assemble to form
              functional filaments.  This  research will provide vital information on the
              chemical and  physical properties of NF protein components and their 
              interactions with each other, which will help us better  understand filament
              assembly and transport in living  neuronal cells.  ***
