Title       : Characterization of a Novel Circadian Clock in Drosophila Excretory Organ
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9723227

Award Number: 9723227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jadwiga M. Giebultowicz giebultj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Circadian rhythms are ubiquitous in the living organisms, synchronizing life
              functions at the biochemical, physiological, and behavioral levels. The rhythms
              generating mechanisms. collectively known as circadian clocks, are not fully
              understood in any organism. Research in the fruit fly Drosophila has led to
              major insights into the molecular bases of the circadian mechanism. Two clock
              genes, period and timeless, have been shown to play central roles in the
              function of the brain-centered clock, which controls behavioral rhythms of
              adult flies. Using those genes as markers, the PI has identified a new
              circadian clock in the fly excretory organ, the Malpighian tubules and
              established that this clock can function in the absence of the brain. The PI
              plans to study the relationships between the peripheral clock in the excretory
              organ and pacemakers in the central nervous system. Experiments will involve
              organ transplants and in vitro cultures, using novel strains of transgenic
              flies carrying luciferase reporter, which allows real time continuing
              measurement of mRNA levels of clock genes. The PI wishes to establish the
              degree of autonomy of the peripheral clock in the Malpighian tubules and to
              test how other tissues affect its function. The PI will also probe the nature
              of the photoreceptor that mediate the resetting of the clock by light and
              investigate the functional role of the clock in the excretory organ.  In this
              pursuit, the PI seek to answer a fundamental question of whether the circadian
              system in Drosophila is a centralized one, comprised of a single dominant clock
              that would control all rhythmic functions, or is a decentralized system with
              several independent clocks located in different tissues and controlling subsets
              of physiological functions.    Malpighian tubules are uniquely accessible to
              both physiological and molecular genetic investigations. The broad scope of
              this proposal will allow thorough characterization of the circadian clock in
              this tissue. providing impetus for future resear ch aimed at understanding how
              already identified clock genes receive environmental input on one hand, and
              produce rhythmic outputs on the other.
