Title       : Modulation of Calcium Signaling in Neurons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9723796

Award Number: 9723796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley A. Thayer thayer@lenti.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Nerve cells use calcium ions to convert electrical signals  into biochemical
              changes within the cell.  Electrical  activity increases intracellular calcium.
               Once inside the  cell, calcium acts as a messenger carrying information to 
              various parts of the cell interior where it acts to trigger  processes ranging 
              from gene expression to the release of neurotransmitters and  hormones.  Only
              during electrical stimulation, or during  certain pathologies, is the calcium
              concentration in the  cell elevated.  Under normal conditions the intracellular
               calcium concentration is kept very low by a complex series  of pathways which 
              pump calcium out of the cell.  The objective of this  proposal is to study the
              modulation of three calcium  regulatory processes.  1)  Within the cell are
              specialized  organelles that take up, store and release calcium.  The  signals
              that regulate the coupling of electrical activity at  the cell surface to the
              release of calcium from these  internal stores will be studied.  2)  Another
              intracellular  organelle that can take up calcium is the mitochondrion, the 
              cell's powerhouse.  Using recently developed methods to  measure calcium within
               the mitochondrion, factors that influence mitochondrial  calcium uptake will
              be determined.  3)  Calcium loads are  ultimately removed from the cell by
              pumps embedded in the  cell-surface membrane.  There are many genetic varieties
              of  these pumps. It is not known how these variants differ  functionally.  The
              functional characteristics of individual  pump variants, particularly their
              sensitivity to modulation,  will be determined.  To achieve these goals neurons
              will be  grown in culture (in a dish), and studied individually with  optical
              and electrophysiological instrumentation developed  by the investigator.  This
              work  will increase our understanding of how neurons process  information at
              the molecular and cellular level, and may  reveal new targets for drugs.
