Title       : Maturation of GnRH Neurons by Neurotrophic Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1998  
File        : a9723398

Award Number: 9723398
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea C. Gore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Gore, A.  Proposal Number:  IBN-9723398  The overall goal of this research
              proposal is to characterize the development of the gonadotropin-releasing
              hormone (GnRH) neurosecretory system in the mouse, and to study the maturation
              of these cells using a cell line model.  GnRH is the key hormone regulating
              reproduction; it is produced in neurons whose cell bodies reside in the
              preoptic area anterior-hypothalamus (POA-AH) of rodent brains.  This peptide
              hormone is released into blood vessels which project to the pituitary gland;
              there, GnRH stimulates synthesis and release of the gonadotropins, luteinizing
              hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH).  These latter hormones in
              turn affect the synthesis and secretion of ovarian and testicular steroid
              hormones.  The release of GnRH changes developmentally, particularly at birth
              and puberty, and an increase in pulsatile GnRH release is the critical factor
              for the onset of puberty.  Because the GnRH neurosecretory system is already
              established before birth, it is believed that changes in inputs to GnRH neurons
              are responsible for the alterations in GnRH synthesis and release that occur
              during development.  Growth factors produced by glia (non-neuronal elements in
              the brain) such as insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) appear to play an
              important role in the changes in GnRH release and biosynthesis that occur
              during development.  It is the intention of this proposal to characterize the
              molecular and anatomical changes in the GnRH system in relation to the IGF-1
              system during the early developmental period.  In Aim 1, the role of IGF-1 on
              GnRH biosynthesis will be studied in developing male and female mice.  The
              anatomical relationship between GnRH neurons and IGF-1-producing glia will also
              be ascertained.  A mutant mouse strain which lacks IGF-1 (the IGF-1 knockouts)
              will be evaluated as to the effects of the absence of IGF-1 on hypothalamic
              development.  In Aim 2, the immortalized hypothalamic GT1-7 cell line, which
              synthesizes and secretes G nRH, will be used to examine the effects of IGF-1 on
              the "maturation" of these immature cells.  It is the intention of this Aim to
              make the GT1-7 cells more like a normal GnRH neuron in the brain.  Data
              provided by these studies should provide insights into the role of the
              neurotrophic factor IGF-1 in the development of the GnRH system which
              ultimately results in the onset of reproductive maturation.  The results should
              also lead to a better understanding of the general mechanisms by which brain
              development occurs and is regulated.
