Title       : Structural Enzymology of Allosteric Threonine Deaminase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9723086

Award Number: 9723086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Eisenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723086  Eisenstein  This research aims to forge a quantitative mechanism for
              the allosteric  regulation of substrate binding and catalysis in a family of
              pyridoxal phosphate-dependent threonine deaminases.  The approach consists of
              analyzing complementary information from structural, genetic, thermodynamic and
              kinetic studies to yield more accurate insights into the fundamental
              interactions between subunits that give rise to cooperative ligand binding and
              feedback regulation.  Refining the crystal structure to 2.3 angstroms in the
              presence of feedback modifiers and substrate analogs will shed light on the
              structural basis for the allosteric transition.  Variations in the energetics
              of dimer-tetramer assembly for mutant variants in combination with ligand
              binding studies will reveal changes in subunit interaction energies that are
              linked to cooperative ligand binding.  Additionally, sigmoidal isoleucine and
              valine binding to fully active, dimeric variants will reveal the cooperative
              free energies associated with heterotropic effector binding.  Heterodimeric
              hybrid enzymes containing different arrangements of functional catalytic and
              regulatory sites will be used to assess whether heterotropic effectors promote
              global or only local regulation.  Substrate and solvent isotope effects in
              steady state and pre-steady state kinetics will be used to establish the
              effects of isoleucine and valine on the rate-limiting step(s) in catalysis.    
              This research aims to provide complementary information from diverse
              experimental strategies to develop a molecular level understanding of the
              regulation of catalysis in the threonine deaminase family of pyridoxal
              phosphate-requiring allosteric enzymes. The biological activity of allosteric
              proteins is modulated by small molecules called effectors.  Binding of effector
              molecules results in the propagation of widespread structural changes that lead
              to biologically important changes in function.  This tenet provides a central
              paradigm in biological chemistry, which ul timately will guide the design of
              control features into novel proteins.
