Title       : Temperature--Not Chromosomes--Determines the Gender of Certain Lower Vertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9723617

Award Number: 9723617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Crews crews@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In many egg-laying reptiles, the incubation temperature of the egg determines
              the sex of the offspring, a process known as temperature-dependent sex
              determination (TSD). How temperature both stimulates and inhibits genetic
              cascades to determine gonadal sex and channel sexual development is the focus
              of this application. The PI's working hypothesis is that incubation temperature
              modifies the endocrine microenvironment of the embryo such that steroid
              hormones serve as the proximate trigger for sex determination. This laboratory
              has developed the red-eared slider turtle as an animal model system and
              demonstrated that male and female gonadal development are separate pathways
              influenced by steroids, steroid-augmenting molecules, and steroid-interfering
              molecules. Female determination is caused by estrogens whereas male
              determination is caused by nonaromatizable androgens.    Experiments are
              designed to determine if temperature accomplishes sex determination by acting
              on genes coding for steroid hormone receptors and aromafast, a key
              steroidogenic enzyme. The PI will continue  the cloning and sequencing of the
              aromatase. To identify the patterns of expression and transcriptional
              regulation of selected specific genes during the critical periods of sex
              determination, the PI will utilize homologous antisense probes for estrogen
              receptor and aromatase of mENAs in in situ hybridization and ribonuclease
              protection assays at the beginning, during, and following the
              temperature-sensitive period.    The ability to manipulate sex in TSD species
              by incubation temperature, exogenous hormones, and other agents provides
              unparalleled experimental control, thereby enabling more detailed analysis of
              the normal pattern of gene expression during sex determination than is possible
              with other amniote vertebrate species having sex chromosomes. Except for the
              trigger, the sex determining cascade appears to be similar between vertebrates
              having genotypic sex determination and those with TSD. The work on TSD draws
              attention t o the fact that temperature and steroid hormones can play a pivotal
              role in sexual development in an amniote vertebrate and is thus important for
              several reasons. First, it has long been assumed that steroid hormones of
              maternal or embryonic origin are not involved in gonad formation in mammals and
              birds. The work with TSD reptiles indicates that this conclusion may be
              premature. Second, since TSD may represent the evolutionary precursor to sex
              chromosomes, potential temperature and steroid effects in sex determination may
              be present, but partly or wholly masked, in homeotherms. Third, temperature has
              not been adequately investigated as a factor in steroid hormone action in
              homeotherms despite numerous studies documenting how both hormone
              responsiveness and hormone action are markedly dependent on temperature.
