Title       : Characterization of the Yeast Cell Polarity Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9723071

Award Number: 9723071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas I. Johnson dijohnso@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723071  Johnson     The long-term objective of this project is to understand
              the mechanisms that control cellular morphogenesis during the eukaryotic cell
              cycle.  The goal of this proposal is to decipher the molecular mechanisms that
              control the cell polarity process in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
              Polarized growth in response to different signals during the yeast cell cycle
              can result in the generation of several different morphological structures,
              such as buds, mating projections, and pseudohyphae.  We have previously
              characterized two protein components of the cell polarity apparatus in yeast: 
              the Ras-related GTPase Cdc42p and it guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF)
              Cdc24p.  These components are integral parts of a signal-transduction pathway
              that leads to the generation of cell polarity during the cell cycle.  These
              components have conserved counterparts in other eukaryotes, suggesting that
              common signal-transduction mechanism controlling cell polarity may exist.  In
              addition, several other GTPase molecular switches have been implicated in the
              process, but it is unclear what signals control the activation and
              de-activation of these switches.  The specific aims of this proposal are
              directed at understanding the molecular interactions between the Cdc42p GTPase
              and the Cdc24p GEF.  The questions that will be asked are:  1, do Cdc24p and
              the Ste20p and Cla4p protein kinases, downstream effectors of Cdc42p, interact
              with Cdc42p through the same Cdc42p effector domain?; and 2, how is the
              cellular localization of Cdc24p and Cdc42p regulated?  To study these
              interactions and to further elucidate the function(s) of these proteins in
              controlling cell polarity, genetic and cell biological approaches, including
              the yeast two-hybrid protein assay, GST fusion protein co-precipitation, and
              genetic characterization of mutant phenotypes, will be used.  The answers to
              these questions will not only be relevant to the basic understanding of signal
              transduction mechanism in cell biology, but also t o the understanding of the
              cellular morphogenesis process in yeast and other eukaryotes.    The yeast
              cell, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has long been used as a model for eukaryotic
              cell functions because of its simplicity.  Like most eukaryotic cells, the
              yeast cell "knows" how to distinguish one "end" of its (essentially spherical)
              self from another.  This "polarity" regulation is critical for the yeast life
              cycle, but is also in a more general sense critical for the functions of most
              other eukaryotic cell types.  This proposal addresses the internal signaling
              mechanisms whereby the yeast cell controls its own morphogenesis during
              processes such as mating and budding (cell division).  It is already known that
              a series of proteins interact with one another in a complex cascade of
              catalytic events that are involved in this process.  This project will extend
              our knowledge of this process by filling in important details about how this
              process works.  ***
