Title       : Identification of Cis-Elements and Trans-Acting Factors Involved in the
               Regulation of Alternative Splicing of Protein Kinase C Beta
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  2000 
File        : a9723935

Award Number: 9723935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Denise R. Cooper dcooper@com1.med.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723935  Cooper     The long-range goal of this project is to understand the
              mechanisms regulating physiological responses to insulin.  Studies from this
              laboratory demonstrate that peptide hormones, such as insulin and IGF-1,
              influence alternative splicing of PKC(II mRNA within minutes.  The switch in
              mRNA is accompanied by altered metabolic and mitogenic responses. 
              Peptide-regulated RNA splicing may be an important feature of the response to
              physiological stimuli.  In response to regulation of PKC(II splicing, glucose
              uptake is altered in skeletal muscle cells by insulin.  RNA splicing is
              governed by the regulation of factors that inhibit or activate the use of 3' or
              5' splice sites.  For PKC(II to be encoded, an additional exon is included in
              the mRNA.  If this exon is skipped, PKC(II is encoded.  Activation of an
              additional 5' splice site was identified for PKC(II in insulin-responsive
              skeletal muscle cells.  The sequential activation of  more than one splice site
              by a hormonal stimulus could allow for the unmasking of other regulatory
              features for gene expression.  To examine the mechanisms of hormone-induced
              alternative splice, a minigene corresponding to regions spanning the last exon
              common to both PKC(I and (II, (c, the intervening intron, the (II exon with its
              3' flanking intron, and its 3'untranslated region will be constructed.  The
              construct would contain the genetic information necessary for regulation of
              exon inclusion by insulin following its expression in L6 rat skeletal muscle
              cells.  Cis-elements such as pyrimidine tracts, exon splicing enhancers (ESE),
              stem loops, and serine-arginine rich (SR) protein association sequences will be
              included in the minigene.  Development of an insulin responsive minigene will
              provide a valuable model for examining splicing of mRNA by hormone and growth
              factor signaling cascades.  Previous reported minigenes were constructed from
              simpler genes and were not regulated by extracellular signaling receptors.  The
              regulation of mRNA splicing by pepti de hormones is an emerging field that
              links signals from the cell surface to the nucleus to alter
              post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression.  This report of insulin
              altering PKC(II expression is the first characterization of hormone-regulated
              alternative pre-mRNA splicing.  The development of an insulin-responsive
              minigene will provide a valuable tool for examining the effects of insulin on
              physiological processes since unknown critical elements can be identified in
              future studies through reduction and condensation of portions of the minigene
              not essential for insulin regulation of exon inclusion and mutational analysis
              of known regulatory sequences.     The lone-range goal of this project is to
              understand the mechanisms regulating physiological responses to insulin. 
              Development of an insulin responsive minigene will provide a valuable model for
              examining splicing of mRNA by hormone and growth factor signaling cascades, and
              a valuable tool for examining the effects of insulin on physiological
              processes.
