Title       : Formation of On/Off Retinal Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9723151

Award Number: 9723151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leo M. Chalupa lmchalupa@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723151  CHALUPA      In the vertebrate retina the ON and OFF pathways, which
              signal increments and decrements of light, are anatomically segregated from
              each other into separate layers at maturity, but not early in development. 
              During the previous period of NSF funding for this project, Dr. Chalupa's
              laboratory discovered that treating the developing retina with
              2-amino-4-phosphonobutyrate (APB), the selective blocker of bipolar cell
              activity, prevents the normal stratification of retinal ganglion cell (RGC)
              dendrites into ON and OFF sublaminae in the inner plexiform layer, where
              synaptic contacts are made between the bipolar cells and RGCs.  This finding
              suggested the hypothesis that activity in the bipolar cells regulates the
              retraction of RGC dendrites, which are initially present in both strata, or
              "multistratified."  The current project will extend these findings by
              addressing three specific aims.  The first aim is to establish whether the
              multistratified RGCs, resulting from APB treatment, respond to both the onset
              and offset of visual stimuli.  This would provide functional evidence that
              blockade of the afferent activity during development results in an
              intermingling of ON and OFF retinal pathways.  The second aim is to determine
              the temporal relationship between the ingrowth and segregation of bipolar cell
              terminals and the time course of RGC dendritic stratification.  Segregation of
              ON and OFF bipolar cell afferents prior to the stratification of RGC dendrites
              would lend further support to the hypothesis that retinal afferents regulate
              the normal stratification of RGC dendrites.  The third specific aim is to
              investigate synaptic connectivity between developing bipolar cells and
              multistratified RGCs by using the whole-cell patch-clamp technique to record
              synaptic activity in these neurons while stimulating their retinal afferents. 
              These recordings will provide a direct test of the hypothesis that such retinal
              synapses are functional early in development.  The successful completion of 
              this research project will further our understanding of the mechanisms
              underlying the formation of ON and OFF retinal pathways.
