Title       : Analysis of Microtubule Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9723273

Award Number: 9723273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393119             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Wadsworth patw@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723273  Wadsworth     MT dynamic behavior has been shown to be regulated in
              living cells, and the parameters of MT turnover varies with cell type and stage
              of the cell cycle.  Recently, it has been shown that microtubule turnover in
              epithelial cells is greatly suppressed when cells establish apical/basolateral
              polarity and is stimulated following treatment with a mitogenic growth factor
              (hepatocyte growth factor, or HGF) (which disestablishes polarity).  In the
              first Aim of this project, the behavior of individual microtubules will be
              measured in the leading edge and non-leading lamellar regions of motile (growth
              factor-treated) epithelial cells to test the hypothesis that MT dynamic
              turnover is regionally regulated within the cell.  These measurements will
              directly show if MT behavior varies among different specific regions of the
              cell, and if so, which parameters are altered.  In addition, the correlation of
              MT dynamics to the establishment of cell polarity will be determined by
              measuring dynamics before and after polarization of motile cells.  In the
              second Aim, the molecular basis for the stimulation of MT turnover in
              HGF-stimulated cells will be determined.  Tubulin will be immunoprecipitated
              from extracts of control and HGF-treated cells using anti-tubulin antibodies,
              and any molecules that co-immunoprecipitate with tubulin dimers will be
              identified and characterized.  In addition, MTs will be assembled in vitro from
              extracts of control and HGF-treated cells, using taxol to stimulate net
              polymerization, and MT-associated proteins (MAPs) will be released from the MTs
              using salt and/or ATP.  The composition, phosphorylation and quantity of MAPs
              in control and treated cells will be compared.  In the third Aim, molecules
              that suppress MT turnover in polarized epithelial cells will be identified.  To
              accomplish this goal, a rapid, quantitative, in vitro polymerization assay will
              be developed to screen fractions of an epithelial cell lysate for factors that
              suppress net microtubule growth.  The  effect of the novel proteins thus
              identified will be directly demonstrated by microinjection into living cells
              and measurement of the parameters of dynamic instability.  The results of these
              experiments will provide new information regarding the molecular mechanisms
              that regulate microtubule turnover as cells respond to growth factors and as
              they differentiate.    Microtubules (MTs) are polymers of the subunit protein
              tubulin, and are one of the three major classes of cytoskeletal structures in
              eukaryotic cells.  Their function is critical to a variety of fundamental
              cellular processes, such as cell division, flagellar and ciliary motility,
              intracellular trafficking of subcellular particles, and cell shape regulation. 
              Individual MTs are inherently dynamic, alternating stochastically between
              periods of growth (polymerization) and rapid shortening (depolymerization).  MT
              dynamic behavior has been shown to be regulated in living cells, and the
              parameters of MT turnover varies with cell type and stage of the cell cycle. 
              This project will elucidate some of the biological consequences of MT dynamics,
              and will elucidate the biochemical mechanisms by which cells regulate the
              dynamic instability of MTs.  ***
