Title       : Identification and Characterization of Agrobacterium and Plant Proteins
               Interacting with Proteins of the Agrobacterium T-complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9723735

Award Number: 9723735
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Nester gnester@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luca Comai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Nester  9723735   The interaction between Agrobacterium tumefaciens and plants
              is the only documented case of genetic engineering in nature. Several aspects
              of the molecular mechanism by which Agrobacterium tumefaciens interacts with
              and genetically transforms a wide variety of higher plants are well understood.
              The virulence (vir) regulon of a large tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid of
              Agrobacterium is activated by a number of signal molecules synthesized by
              wounded plants, resulting in the production and transfer of a nucleoprotein
              complex, the T-complex, from the bacterium to the plant cell. The T-complex
              consists of the T-DNA (a single-stranded DNA segment of the Ti plasmid), VirD2
              (the pilot protein covalently bonded to the 5' end of the T-DNA), and VirE2
              (the single-stranded DNA binding protein which envelops the T-DNA). Once
              transferred into the plant cell, the T-complex finds its way into the plant
              nucleus where the T-DNA is integrated and expressed, leading to the
              overproduction of plant growth regulators and ultimately tumor formation.
              However, how the T-complex is transferred across the bacterial envelope, how
              the T-complex is trafficked once within the plant cell, and how the T-DNA is
              integrated into plant chromosomes through non-homologous recombination remain
              poorly understood.  This project initiates a research program that has two
              objectives: to understand the interaction between the T-complex and its
              transport apparatus within Agrobacterium, and to identify plant factors
              involved in the transfer and integration of the T-DNA inside the plant cell.
              Since the specificity of the T-DNA transfer process is determined by the
              protein components of the T-complex, efforts will focus on identifying the
              Agrobacterium as well as the plant proteins interacting with the two protein
              components of the T-complex, VirD2 and VirE2. Several molecular tools for
              studying protein-protein interactions will be used to identify and study
              Agrobacterium proteins which recognize and interact with either VirD2 or  VirE2
              or both and thereby facilitate the transfer of the T-complex from the bacterium
              to the plant cell. These include the yeast two-hybrid system, cross linking,
              and co-immunoprecipitation. This study will also identify the signal domains of
              VirD2 and VirE2 which interact with the bacterial transport apparatus.  These
              studies are expected to provide insights into unexplored areas of the molecular
              interaction between Agrobacterium and its host, such as the sequential events
              of the T-complex transfer in both the bacterium and the host plant cell. This
              will make the Agrobacterium-plant crown gall system a model system not only for
              studying microorganism-eukaryote interactions but also for studying and probing
              nucleoprotein trafficking and translocation in bacteria as well as higher
              plants. The understanding of the host factors involved in the T-DNA transfer
              and integration process will also likely lead to improved methods for
              genetically engineering recalcitrant plant species.
