Title       : Mate Location Tactics, Vision, and Thermoregulatory Behaviorin Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9723160

Award Number: 9723160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63472              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald L. Rutowski r.rutowski@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9723160  Rutowski  In the course of their lives, animals are often faced with 
              conflicting demands on their behavior and how these  conflicts are resolved
              within an individual's life and over  evolutionary time are important questions
              in the study of  behavior.  For example, when active, many  insects use a 
              variety of behavioral mechanisms to regulate their body  temperature within a
              preferred range.  However,  thermoregulatory adjustments occur while animals
              are engaged  in other activities, such as searching for mates.  The 
              interaction between these adjustments and the simultaneous  performance of
              other activities are not well understood.  This  study addresses how
              thermoregulatory behavior patterns  interact with visual mate-location efforts
              in a butterfly of  the Sonoran desert.  Males in this species of butterfly 
              occupy and defend perching sites in the morning where they  perch and wait for
              females to appear.  During the morning  perch preferences change as
              temperatures rise to maintain  body temperature in their preferred range.  When
              cool, males  perch on the ground; however, as the morning progresses and 
              temperature rises, males switch to cooler perches about 1 m  off the ground. 
              This study examines the impact of this  thermally-driven change in perch
              preference on males'  abilities to detect passing females and competing males.
              If  perch preference leads to changes in how the butterfly's  visual system is
              positioned in space relative to the flight  paths of conspecifics, this may
              effect the likelihood that  passing conspecifics will be detected.  To address
              this  question, several research approaches will be taken.  Information will be
              gathered on the flight paths of females  and intruding males, variation in
              visual acuity across the  field of vision, and changes in male body position
              and  orientation. Studies of visual system acuity involve a  complex
              pseudopupil analysis procedure, which will be done  in collaboration with a
              researcher at the University of Lund  in Sweden, one of  few places in the
              world where such  analysis can be done. Another experimental approach will be 
              to use a model flying device (a motorized dummy butterfly  with wings attached)
              at field sites in Arizona to assess  directly how and why the probability of
              detecting  conspecifics changes with perch preference.  Ecological  variables
              such as background contrast will be of special  interest.  The end results
              should be a better understanding  of how insects see their world, and a novel
              integration of  behavior, physiology, and ecology that will permit a more 
              comprehensive understanding of the immediate and  evolutionary resolution of
              conflicting behavioral demands in  animals.
