Title       : Molecular Genetics of Arabidopsis Titan Mutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9723090

Award Number: 9723090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Meinke meinke@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Biao Ding  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Meinke  9723090          The long-term goal of  the PI's research is to identify
              large numbers of genes with essential functions  during plant embryogenesis
              through the isolation and characterization of embryo-defective (emb) mutants of
              Arabidopsis.  The PI's laboratory has played an active role in promoting the
              use of this model organism for research in plant developmental genetics.   In
              this proposal a novel class of emb mutants, called titan mutants, is described
              which exhibit  a dramatic phenotype that should facilitate the analysis of cell
              cycle control during seed development. The common feature among these mutants
              is that endosperm nuclei become gigantic and highly polyploid.   The PI
              proposes here a combination of descriptive, genetic, and molecular studies
              designed to identify TITAN genes, explain the mutant phenotype, and determine
              what role these genes play in regulating cell cycles.  Descriptive studies will
              provide further details on nuclear and cytoskeletal organization in titan
              seeds. Genetic studies will focus on completion of gene mapping, construction
              of double mutants, analysis of marker gene expression, and characterization of
              additional titan mutants.  Molecular cloning of  TTN genes is a major focus of
              the proposal. Emphasis will be placed first on ttn3 because it appears to be
              tagged.   The PI also proposes to isolate TTN1 through map-based  cloning.     
                 How double fertilization leads to the establishment of distinct patterns of
              mitosis and cytokinesis in the embryo and endosperm is a central question in
              plant reproductive biology. Results obtained from this project should provide
              valuable insights into cell cycle regulation and embryo-endosperm interactions
              in angiosperms. Although research on cell cycle regulation in yeast and
              Drosophila should provide a wealth of information applicable to plants,
              analysis of Arabidopsis mutants such as those described here will be needed to
              establish the precise mechanisms of cell cycle control employed throughout
              plant development.
