Title       : Development of a Database of Protein Motions and Associated Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1999      
File        : a9723182

Award Number: 9723182
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Gerstein Mark.Gerstein@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposal is to construct a working database  of protein
              motions. This database will be made into a  publicly accessible WWW community
              resource, of general use  to the molecular biophysics community. It will meet
              the  needs of researchers trying to understand the principles of  protein
              structure and function (since motions are often the  link between structure and
              function). The database will be  associated with a classification of protein
              motions, based  on the packing at mobile interfaces. The construction of  this
              database has recently become feasible because of a  number of developments: the
              great increase in the number of  solved protein structures, the creation of an
              infrastructure  of linked biological databases, and work showing how packing 
              can be used to rationalize mechanisms for protein motions.    The development
              of the database will proceed in two phases  with two objectives in each phase
              (one computational and the  other biological). The principal objective in the
              first  phase will be to establish a working, prototype database of  protein
              motions. Motions in this database will initially be  arranged hierarchically in
              terms of size (i.e. fragment,  domain, and subunit) and then packing. The
              packing  classification will depend on whether or not the motion  involves
              sliding over a continuously maintained interface.  To achieve the first
              objective it will be necessary to  develop a standardized nomenclature and
              conceptual-  information model for protein motions. This will include 
              information such as the number of hinges, the magnitude of  the rigidbody
              rotation, and the number and size of the  mobile interfaces.    Building upon
              the framework established in the first phase,  the second phase of the project
              will expand the database and  associated motions classification. The goal will
              be to have  an entry for every known protein motion. In addition,  "inferred
              motions," in sequence and structure homologues of  a protein with known motion,
              will also be included. To  han dle the large amount of data this will involve
              analyzing  and to help "populate" the database, an automatic  conformation
              comparison tool will be developed. This will  rapidly align and compare two
              arbitrary protein  conformations, identifying rigid core regions, flexible 
              hinges, interface packing differences, and so forth. It will  also determine
              whether these structures have any sequence or  structure homologues that share
              their motion.    The expansion of the database will require a more 
              sophisticated structure for describing the relationships  between motions and a
              more detailed motion classification  scheme than the size-packing hierarchy
              initially used. The  motions classification will be expanded through detailed 
              geometric analysis and calculation, principally focusing on  the packing at
              mobile interfaces.
