Title       : Signal Transduction by Calcium Dependent Protein Kinases in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1999   
File        : a9723539

Award Number: 9723539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $371850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey F. Harper Harper@Scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter J. Chazin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723539  Harper    The long range goal of the proposed research is to understand
              the role of Ca2+-Dependent Protein Kinases (CDPKs) in plant growth and
              development. Our approach is to first understand the structural basis for how
              CDPKs decode and transduce Ca2+ signals, and to use that information to develop
              tools for investigating their in vivo functions.  Isoform CPK-1 from
              Arabidopsis is used here as a model CDPK.  CDPKs are unique because of their
              structural arrangement:  Within a single polypeptide, a kinase is fused to a
              C-terminal calmodulin-like regulatory domain (CaM-LD).  The CaM-LD contains
              four Ca2+ -binding EF-hands, which makes CDPKs a direct target (decoder) of
              Ca2+ signals.  Prior NSF supported research indicated that kinase activation
              involves intramolecular binding between the CaM-LD and the adjacent junction
              (autoinhibitory) domain.  The current research builds on that observation and
              is divided into the following 3 objectives: 1.  Test the hypothesis that the
              CaM-LD is always bound to the junction (even in the absence of Ca2+), and that
              Ca2+ triggers a change in this complex which functions to disengage the
              autoinhibitor (i.e. activate the kinase).  The approach is to use
              multi-dimensional NMR to solve the structure of an isolated junction/CaM-LD
              protein in the presence and absence of Ca2+. 2.  Test the hypothesis that the
              sequence (tether) which connects the CaM-LD to its upstream binding sequence
              provides an important structural constraint, (i.e. the tether is not just a
              simple flexible linker between two domains).  The approach is to increase the
              length and flexibility of the tether by site specific mutagenesis and evaluate
              the impact of these changes on the Ca2+ activation mechanism. 3.  Screen for a
              temperature sensitive kinase mutant which becomes Ca2+ independent at high
              temperatures (e.g. 25 oC).  The approach is to introduce mutations which weaken
              the binding of the pseudosubstrate autoinhibitor to the kinase, thereby making
              the autoinhibitor more sensitive to therma l destabilization.  The purpose is
              to obtain a temperature sensitive kinase which can be introduced into
              transgenic plants and used to conditionally activate a CDPK pathway. The
              primary significance of the proposed research should come from insights
              obtained from the 3 dimensional structures of an apo and Ca2+ loaded
              Junction/CaM-LD complex.  The short term goal is to use these structures to
              propose detailed models on how Ca2+ activates a CDPK, and to test alternative
              models using a molecular genetic and biochemical approach.    Many extrinsic
              signals that are perceived by cells at the cell surface signal that induce
              physiological and developmental events. One of most widely used signaling
              systems in living cells is the calcium-dependent-protein kinase CDPK in which a
              calcium signal results in the CDPK attaching a phosphate to a target protein
              transmitting the calcium signal into a modification of a protein that usually
              alters its activity. How the CDPK functions is of fundamental importance in
              elucidating the perception of signals by cells. This award will fund the
              collaborative research by experts in the protein kinase field and the nuclear
              magnetic resonance field (NMR). NMR is useful to determine the exact structure
              of proteins. The research to be conducted will elucidate the changes in
              structure of CDPK that occur during its function.
