Title       : Molecular Analysis of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation by
               Mycobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9723921

Award Number: 9723921
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerben J. Zylstra zylstra@aesop.rutgers.edu               X320  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9187,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723921  Zylstra  Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) constitute a class of
              aromatic hydrocarbons consisting of two or more fused benzene rings in linear,
              angular, and cluster arrangements. Since many of the aromatic hydrocarbons
              found in the environment have a natural pyrolytic origin they must have been in
              contact with microorganisms throughout evolutionary periods of time. It is not
              surprising therefore that microorganisms have evolved that are capable of
              degrading aromatic compounds. Almost all of what is known about the metabolism
              of PAHs is based on fast-growing gram negative organisms and naphthalene (two
              rings) and phenanthrene (three rings) as model substrates. Slow-growing gram
              positive organisms such as Mycobacterium have been shown not only to degrade
              naphthalene and phenanthrene but also to degrade PAHs consisting of  four or
              more aromatic rings. In fact, this class of organisms is perhaps the best
              studied group for their ability to mineralize high molecular weight PAHs.
              Unfortunately, however, very little is known about the ability of these
              organisms to metabolize PAHs. Catabolic pathways have been proposed but these
              are based on the identification of only a few intermediate compounds that have
              been identified in culture supernatants. This project involves the use of
              molecular genetics and biochemistry to investigate the ability of Mycobacterium
              strains PYO1 and PYO5C to degrade high molecular weight PAHs in more detail. A
              clone for the initial dioxygenase in the catabolic pathway(s) has been
              obtained. Assuming that the genes for PAH degradation are clustered, the
              remaining genes in the pathway can be located by nucleotide sequencing.
              Sequence analysis coupled with biological analyses with expressed, cloned genes
              and with knock-out mutants will identify the function of each identified open
              reading frame. These experiments will result in the determination of every step
              in the catabolic pathway with the identification of every catabolic
              intermediate. In the case that the genes fo r PAH degradation are not linked in
              Mycobacterium then genes will be identified through transposon mutagenesis of
              the Mycobacterium strain. This will be aided by the fact that an insertion
              sequence has been identified in and cloned from the target Mycobacterium
              strain.    Mycobacterium species of bacteria and their relatives are unique in
              their ability to  degrade highly-recalcitrant, stable polycyclic aromatic
              compounds in the environment. However, little is known about the molecular and
              biochemical basis of this activity. This project is designed to investigate the
              ability of Mycobacterium strains to degrade polycyclic compounds at the gene
              and enzyme level. A thorough knowledge of how Mycobacterium degrade these
              compounds will aid in the design of bioremediative processes for removing
              polycyclic compounds from the environment.
