Title       : Synthesis and Use of Chiral Beta-Deuterated Amino Acids for NMR Studies of
               Protein Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9723642

Award Number: 9723642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Curley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723642  Curley  The structure assignment of proteins as determined by modern
              NMR methods is greatly facilitated by access to appropriate regio- and
              stereoselectively labelled amino acids which can be incorporated into the
              proteins.  Use of these labelled amino acids greatly increases experimental
              sensitivity and permits the use of isotope-edited NMR experiments which can
              provide specific structural information otherwise difficult to obtain.    Of
              particular importance to assigning an accurate solution structure of a protein
              by NMR is stereospecific assignment of the amino acid side chain resonances. 
              Useful for these assignments is access to amino acids with stereoselective
              substitution of deuteron for proton on the (-methylene groups of these amino
              acids with prochiral (-methylene protons.   In addition, the effect of
              (-deuteration of the 13C relaxation rate will also facilitate C(carbon
              assignments, especially in large systems.  A generalized, versatile,
              inexpensive method will be developed  for the synthesis of virtually all the
              amino acids with prochiral (-methylene protons in a manner which will
              stereoselectively replace one of the prochiral protons with deuteron.  These
              methods will also permit double labelling of the amino acid with 15N or 13C in
              a variety of patterns and can also be readily adapted to provide the natural
              amino acid L-isomer stereospecifically.  Once obtained, these amino acids will
              be used to study biosynthesis and protein structure by NMR    The function of
              proteins is dependent on their structure.  Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
              spectroscopy has become an important tool for determining the structure of
              proteins in solution.  Proteins are composed of different amino acid building
              blocks which are bound together to make up the entire protein.  The NMR study
              of proteins is made easier if the amino acids are labelled with nonradioactive,
              NMR-detectable isotopes.  This project will develop general methods for the
              synthesis of these specially labelled amino acids.  ***
