Title       : RNA Polymerase II CTD-Binding Proteins in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9723965

Award Number: 9723965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry L. Corden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723965  Cordon  The long term objective of this research is to understand the
              structure and function of the repetitive C-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA
              polymerase II.  Our recent studies have shown that the CTD interacts with a
              novel set of CTD-binding proteins (CBPs).  These proteins are related to a set
              of serine/arginine-rich proteins (SR proteins) that have been shown to be
              involved in processing pre-mRNA.  In addition to specific domains that interact
              with the CTD, CBPs have conserved domains suggesting interations with other SR
              proteins and with RNA.  We have identified CBPs in mouse, rat, human, and yeast
              cells.  The objective of this research is to determine whether the CTD and the
              CTD-binding protein Nrd1 play a role in pre-mRNA processing in the yeast
              Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Specifically we will examine yeast cells expressing
              mutant forms of the CTD or of the CTD-binding protein Nrd1 for defects in
              pre-mRNA splicing, in cleavage and polyadenylation, and in transcription
              elongation.  We will also test mammalian CBPs for their ability to complement a
              yeast NRD1 deletion mutation.  These functional studies are designed to test
              our general hypothesis that the CTD links transcription and pre-mRNA processing
              in vivo.  The construction of genetic and biochemical tools to study
              post-initiation CTD function in yeast will lay a foundation for more detailed
              mechanistic studies of both yeast and mammalian CTD-binding proteins and their
              interaction with phosphorylated forms of RNA polymerase II during transcription
              elongation.  %%%  The long term objective of the proposed study is to
              understand the structure and function of the repetitive C-terminal domain (CTD)
              of RNA polymerase II.  These functional studies are designed to test our
              general hypothesis that the CTD links transcription and pre-mRNA processing in
              vivo.  The construction of genetic and biochemical tools to study
              post-initiation CTD function in yeast will lay a foundation for more detailed
              mechanistic studies of both yeast and mammal ian CTD-binding proteins.  ***
