Title       : Carbon Catabolite Regulation in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9723091

Award Number: 9723091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina M. Henkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Henkin  9723091  The mechanisms for carbon catabolite regulation in
              Gram-positive bacteria such as Bacillus subtilis are not well-understood, but
              are known to differ from the systems found in Escherichia coli and its
              relatives. During growth in high levels of a readily utilized carbon source
              such as glucose, expression of genes encoding enzymes for utilization of
              secondary carbon sources is repressed by CcpA, a DNA binding protein which
              recognizes conserved operator sites in the promoter regions of target genes.
              Under these conditions. CcpA also activates transcription of the ackA gene,
              which is involved in excretion of excess carbon in the form of acetate.
              Activation involves binding of CcpA protein to a sequence identical to the
              operator sites for repression: for ackA, the target. site for CcpA-dependent
              activation is located upstream of the promoter. The molecular mechanism for
              transcriptional activation of ackA by CcpA is unknown, and elucidation of this
              mechanism is a major goal of this project. These studies will involve
              investigation of cis-acting sequences required for activation, DNA binding
              studies, and analysis of the effect of RNA polymerase mutations. The second
              major goal of this project is the identification of additional genes subject to
              transcriptional activation by CcpA. Characterization of new target genes will
              provide information about the global role of CcpA as a regulator of carbon
              metabolism in B. subtilis, and will also provide insight into the mechanism of
              transcriptional activation through analysis of conserved features.  The third
              major goal of this project is the analysis of the mechanism for the response of
              CcpA activity to carbon source activity.    This project will provide new
              information about molecular mechanisms for metabolic control in microorganisms,
              and mechanisms for transcriptional activation. Homologs of the B. subtilis
              carbon catabolite regulatory protein CcpA have been identified in a variety of
              Gram-positive organisms, indicating that the information o btained here is
              likely to apply to a number of experimental systems less directly amenable to
              genetic analysis. A greater understanding of carbon metabolism and regulation
              will also improve the utility of Bacillus systems for industrial production.
