Title       : Gender Differences in Non-Reproductive Brain Areas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9723918

Award Number: 9723918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175593             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice M. Juraska jjuraska@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                           PI:  Juraska, J.  IBN-9723918  Recent advances in imaging
              techniques have made the measurement of the gross structure of the human brain
              more accessible than ever.  Factors being examined include sex differences in
              brain structure, spurred by the sex differences in brain size and the
              possibility of links to sex differences in cognitive behavior.  However, an
              often overlooked problem is that gross size is not a directly meaningful entity
              for brain function; rather it is neurons and their interconnections that are
              the basis for neural function.  One notable example of this is the controversy
              surrounding possible sex differences in the size of the splenial portion of the
              human corpus callosum.  In rats, like humans, males have a larger overall brain
              size than females, and there are sex differences in non-reproductive behaviors.
               The well studied rat brain is an excellent model for understanding possible
              neural bases for sex differences in gross brain size and their functional
              implications.  The goal of the present proposal is to understand the origins of
              sex differences in the cerebral cortex.  The gonadal steroids may be playing a
              role in sculpting both neuron number through the death of neurons in the cortex
              and axon number through the withdrawal of axons in the corpus callosum.  The
              emphasis is on the visual cortex (Oc1) and the concomitant portion of the
              corpus callosum, the splenium, in order to build on previous work from my lab
              that indicates that there are more neurons and glia in the Oc1B (binocular)
              area in male than female rats and our recent work on the late time course of
              axon withdrawal in the splenium of the rat corpus callosum.  As a source of
              natural variation, sex differences can be a valuable investigative tool for
              aiding in the understanding of developmental processes, models of brain
              function and the cognitively mediated functions being visualized with imaging
              techniques.  There are also medical applications.  Many developmental disorders
              such as dyslexia and stutt ering are found more in one sex than another.  In
              addition, there are sex differences in response to brain damage in both
              children and adults, in the incidence of mental illness and in the response to
              drugs.  Most of these dimorphisms involve brain areas not related to
              reproductive functions, such as the cerebral cortex - areas in which sex
              differences are not well understood.  Finally, steroid hormones are manipulated
              in a variety of therapeutic contexts in both adults and children and the
              consequences for brain structure may be widespread.     ??
