Title       : RUI: Understanding Repertoire Diversification in a Nonstandard Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9723569

Award Number: 9723569
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Goldsby ragoldsby@amherst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723569  Goldsby      This project is studying the development of the primary
              antibody repertoire in cattle.  In cattle the ileal Peyer's patch (IPP), a gut
              associated lymphoid tissue, is a major site of B cell diversification.  A
              process of targeted, developmentally regulated somatic point mutation is
              responsible for the generation of diversity in the IPP.  However, this is not
              the sole site or mechanisms for diversification in cattle, since the spleen has
              been shown to be a site of light chain diversification  during fetal
              development.  Also,  this investigator has data suggesting that heavy chain V
              gene rearrangement (but not light chain) occurs in the bone marrow. Thus the
              following  hypothesis is proposed for the development of B cells in cattle :
              1)In the fetal bone marrow rearrangement of heavy but not light chain occurs;
              2)Cells with rearranged heavy  chain genes migrate to the spleen where light
              chains rearrange; 3)Peyer's patch follicles are seeded with B cells from a pool
              that has undergone diversification in the fetal spleen.  Experiments will be
              done to test this hypothesis. These results will provide information on how
              antibody diversification develops in cattle, and will indicate species
              differences in the generation of diversity.  This grant is from a RUI college,
              and undergraduate students will be involved in this research.  %%%    Although
              all higher vertebrates have similar immune systems consisting of antibodies
              produced by B cells and T cells which modulate the immune response, the
              mechanism by which organisms generate antibodies  with different specificities
              is not the same in all species.  The experiments in this project will provide
              information on the development of diverse antibodies in cattle.   ***
