Title       : Signaling Pathways in Insect Immunity: The Role of 18-Wheeler
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1999       
File        : a9723899

Award Number: 9723899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340908             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth D. Eldon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723899  Eldon    The immune response is protection from invasion by a foreign
              organism.  Vertebrate and invertebrate immunity involve the rapid production of
              proteins which inactivate the invader.  The presence of the invader is detected
              usually by a receptor, and a signaling mechanism is required to transmit that
              information.  Cells of the immune system release cytokines or interleukins in
              response to their activation.  The interleukin receptor when activated induces
              a signal transduction cascade which activates a family of transcription factors
              known as NF-kB, which promote the synthesis of the proteins required for the
              immune response.  The interleukin R-NfkB pathway has been found in mammals as
              well as in Drosophila development and immunity.  The research in this grant
              will study the role of the IL-R-NFkB signal transduction cascade in Drosophila
              immunity by looking at the interactions among 18-Wheeler and Toll receptors and
              the NfkB transcriptions factors.  The 18 Wheeler receptors affects the
              synthesis of antimicrobial peptides and has sequence similarity with the
              interleukin receptor and the Toll receptor of Drosophila.  Attacin is the
              antimicrobial gene the transcription of which is dramatically reduced in 18
              Wheeler mutants, so the attacin gene will be cloned and the regions essential
              for its regulation will be identified.  Regions in the cytoplasmic domain be
              identified of the 18 Wheeler receptor that are critical for signaling will be
              indentified, and the relation of 18 Wheeler activity to the nuclear import of
              NfkB transcription factors will also be examined.  This research will provide
              information about the immune system of insects and the immune response.  %%%   
              The immune response is an essential feature of all living organisms. 
              Similarities exist in the response of many organisms to infection.  This
              research will use the fruit fly, Drosophila melanagaster, to study how
              infection by bacteria results in the production of proteins that inactivate
              foreign deleterious substances.   ***
