Title       : Extracellular Fluid Volume Homeostasis in Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a9723306

Award Number: 9723306
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Olson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              As animals evolved, the extracellular fluids became compartmentalized into the
              intravascular (blood) and interstitial (between the cells) fluids.  Blood
              pressure regulation and cardiovascular function is intimately dependent upon
              blood volume and, because fluids can move between blood and interstitial
              compartments, the interstitial fluid volume also influences blood pressure. 
              Due to technical problems, it is impossible to experimentally manipulate these
              fluids in terrestrial vertebrates without drugs or surgery.  The proposed
              research will employ a different animal model, the rainbow trout, to examine
              the interrelationships between fluid volumes and cardiovascular function. 
              Trout are ideal models for these studies because they naturally live in a
              variety of environments that are either dehydrating or hydrating, and salt
              loading or salt depleting.  Fluid compartments will also me measured in other,
              more primitive fish such as the hagfish and shark.  While these fish do not
              tolerate manipulation of the environment as well as trout, they provide an
              evolutionary window into the phylogenetic origin of the relationships between
              fluid balance and the vertebrate cardiovascular system and the factors that
              shaped their development.    In the proposed research, the primary fluid
              compartments, blood, interstitial, and intracellular, will be examined in
              hagfish and sharks and in rainbow trout living in controlled environments in
              which water, salt, and osmotic load are independently controlled.  These
              environments include freshwater, saltwater, freshwater plus high salt diet, and
              high-osmolarity salt-free water.  In addition, the nature of a unique fluid
              compartment, the secondary circulation, will be examined.  This circulation,
              possibly the evolutionary prototype of the mammalian lymphatic system, has not
              been accurately measured in any fish.  Fluid compartments will be measured by
              indicator dilution methods using specific radiolabelled markers.  Once the
              relationships between fluid compartments and water  and salt balance have been
              established, the role of pressure-volume regulatory systems, the renin
              angiotensin system, sympathetic nervous system, antidiuretic hormones (arginine
              vasotocin), and natriuretic peptides will be examined in the context of altered
              water and salt balance.    These experiments will provide the first complete
              quantitative description of fluid compartments in any fish.  They are also the
              first experiments, in any vertebrate, to independently examine how salt and
              water balance are regulated and how these parameters are integrated into
              cardiovascular function.  These studies are not possible with other animal or
              non-animal models.  The information obtained from the project is crucial in all
              areas of cardiovascular, renal and endocrine physiology and it is applicable to
              all vertebrates, including mammals.  The results will also be of practical
              benefit by providing base-line information for development of less stressful
              environments for fish culture.
