Title       : Regulation of Taurine Biosynthesis in the Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9723079

Award Number: 9723079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jang-Yen Wu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Dr. Jang-Yen Wu  Grant Application (IBN-9723079) -  Regulation of Taurine
              Biosynthesis in the Brain       Taurine (2-amino-ethanesulfonic acid), a sulfur
              amino acid  with a  simple chemical structure, is one of the most  abundant
              amino acids in  mammals.  The physiological role of  taurine has received
              considerable  attention since the reports that cats fed a taurine  deficient
              diet  developed visual impairment, abnormality in  brain development and  heart
              function.  Now, taurine has  been shown to be involved in many  important
              physiological  functions e.g., as a trophic factor in the  development of  the
              central nervous system, maintaining the structural  integrity of the cell,
              regulating calcium homeostasis, and  modulation of communication between nerve
              cells.  Despite  its importance, the mechanisms involved in the regulation of 
              taurine formation in the brain remain elusive.  Taurine may  be formed in
              biological systems by several routes.  The  major route of taurine  formation
              in the brain is by  converting sulfur-containing amino acids  such as
              methionine  and cysteine to cysteinesulfinic acid (CSA) and subsequent 
              conversion of CSA to taurine.  The catalysts used in  biological systems are
              called enzymes.  The particular  enzyme  involved in converting CSA to taurine
              is called  cysteinesulfinic acid decarboxylase (CSAD).  Recently, it  was found
              that the activity of  CSAD to synthesize taurine  is altered when the structure
              of CSAD is  modified.  Specifically, CSAD activity is enhanced when a 
              phosphate is  attached to certain amino acids in CSAD  molecule while CSAD 
              activity is suppressed when the phosphate group  is removed  from CSAD
              molecule.  The proposal is designed to  understand  the mechanisms involved in
              the regulation of CSAD  activity.  Some of the questions to be addressed are:
              (1) What are  the  biological catalysts involved in adding or removing 
              phosphate  group to or from CSAD molecules?  (2) What are  the amino acid 
              residues in CSAD responsible for CSAD  activity?   (3) Are the changes  of CSAD
              structure related to  the state of the brain functions?  Information obtained
              from  the proposed studies should shed new light  regarding the  mechanism
              involved in the regulation of taurine  biosynthesis in the brain.  In addition,
              it may also provide  a better  understanding of the function of this important 
              substance in the  mammalian nervous system.
