Title       : Conference: 13th International Congress of Developmental Biology, July 5-10,
               1997, Snowbird, Utah
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9723102

Award Number: 9723102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Rossant rossant@mshri.on.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc For Dev Biol
	      9650 Rockville Pike
	      Bethesda, MD  208143998    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rossant  9723102      Funds are requested for partial support of the 13th
              International Congress of Developmental Biology, to be held at Snowbird, Utah,
              July 5-10, 1997.  This meeting represents an important opportunity to bring the
              international community of developmental biologists to the United States and
              should allow unparalleled opportunities for international and interdisciplinary
              interactions.  This meeting is being organized by the Society for Developmental
              Biology and replaces the annual meeting of the Society for 1997.  It is
              co-sponsored by the International Society of Developmental Biologists, which
              coordinates the ongoing series of International Congresses held  in different
              countries every four years.  The meeting will have 600-800 registrants and will
              provide opportunities to hear the latest work from international leaders in the
              field, as well as from younger scientists, whose work will be chosen for oral
              presentation from the abstracts.  There will be two poster sessions, allowing
              everyone a chance to present their work to an international audience.  The
              topics of the plenary sessions have been chosen to represent some of the most
              exciting areas of current developmental biology research, including signalling
              pathways in development, neural patterning, lineage analysis, asymmetries and
              segregation of  determinants, gene regulation, development and evolution, and
              organogenesis.  Multidisciplinary approaches will be emphasized and speakers
              will be drawn from those working on a wide range of systems, including plants
              and animals.  Continuing the success of issue-oriented workshops at the recent
              annual SDB meetings, the participants will hold workshops on education,
              funding, and future directions in science, drawing on the wider perspective
              provided by the international audience.  The enthusiastic response to our
              invitations to speak at this meeting and the interest already generated in the
              community promise to make this a highly successful gathering.  Developmental
              biology research  is at an exciting stage where fundamental discoveries in many
              different systems are coming together to provide an integrated view of
              developmental organization across evolution.  This Congress provides a timely
              opportunity to survey the state of the art and provide directions for the
              future.
