Title       : Regulation of Plasmid Stability by pAD1 par
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1997    
File        : a9723098

Award Number: 9723098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Weaver kweaver@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Weaver  9723098  A small determinant, no larger than 404 bp, has been identified
              on the  bacterium Enterococcus faecalis plasmid pAD1 that is essential for
              stable inheritance of the plasmid.  This determinant, designated par,
              stabilizes the plasmid via a post-segregational killing mechanism.  Stability
              determinants of this class stabilize plasmid inheritance in a bacterial
              population by killing host cells that lose the plasmid.  Such systems are
              common on plasmids native to Gram-negative bacteria and generally encode a
              stable toxin and an unstable antidote.  The antidote prohibits either toxin
              activity or translation.  Par is the first such system identified on a plasmid
              native to a Gram-positive bacterium.  Preliminary evidence suggests that par is
              regulated by a unique antisense RNA mechanism.  The par "antidote" is a small
              RNA that contains segments complementary to both the 3' and 5' ends of the
              toxin-encoding RNA.  The 5' complementary segments would be expected to
              sequester the translational start site for the proposed toxin of the system,
              but the 3' end may be necessary for initial interactions between the RNAs since
              it encodes the only complementary stem-loop structure present in both RNAs. 
              Such stem-loops have been shown to be important for RNA-RNA interaction in
              other antisense systems.  The putative par toxin is a small peptide of 33 amino
              acids.  Evidence indicates that the toxin target is involved in chromosomal
              separation and/or cell division.  The objectives of this project are to i)
              determine the molecular mechanisms of regulation of par function, ii) determine
              the nature of the toxin, and iii) identify the molecular target of the toxin. 
              Three experimental approaches will be taken to address the first objective. 
              First, par will be cloned on a conditional replicon and its effects on host
              viability assessed after a switch to non-permissive conditions.  Plasmid loss
              should lead to host cell death.  This experiment will verify the
              post-segregational nature of par-mediated killing.   Second, relative
              stabilities of the antisense antidote and the toxin message will be determined
              in rifampicin-exposed cells.  If par is regulated like other post-segregational
              systems, the antisense antidote should be less stable than the toxin message. 
              Processing intermediates of the toxin message may also be identified by this
              approach.  Third, the interaction between the par RNAs will be reproduced in
              vitro, where the specific elements involved in the interaction will be
              determined.  RNAs will be produced in vitro using templates produced by PCR and
              linked to T7 RNA polymerase promoters.  Interactions will be assessed by
              fractionation on various polyacrylamide gel formulations.  Mutations of
              elements suspected of being required for interaction will be introduced by
              PCR-mediated mutagenesis.  The second objective will be approached from both
              genetic and biochemical directions.  In the genetic approach, the effects of
              mutations in the proposed toxin reading frame but not affecting the RNA
              structure and vice versa will be assessed.  If the peptide is the toxin,
              mutations affecting its coding frame should result in loss of function
              regardless of effect on RNA structure.  In the biochemical approach, production
              of the peptide will be assessed in vitro in the presence and absence of the
              antidote.  In addition, antibody will be produced to peptides related to the
              putative toxin.  These peptides will be produced either synthetically or using
              translational fusion vectors.  The antibodies will be used to visualize the
              toxin in cell extracts by Western blot and may also be used for protein
              purification.  The third objective will be addressed by isolating mutations in
              E. faecalis host cells resistant to the over-production of toxin.  The affected
              gene will be identified by complementation analysis.  Possible effects of toxin
              over-production on other bacterial hosts, such as Escherichia coli and Bacillus
              spp. will also be determined.  This study should make a significant
              contribution to the understandi ng of the maintenance of extra-chromosomal
              genetic elements, particularly in Gram-positive hosts.  Furthermore, the unique
              nature of the complementarity between the two par RNAs suggests that the study
              of their interaction may provide information on the variety of ways in which
              RNAs can interact, information that would be useful in fields ranging from
              evolution to the development of antisense therapeutics.  Finally, the par toxin
              may provide a useful tool for the study of chromosomal separation and/or cell
              division in E. faecalis, a Gram-positive coccus.  Very little data on these
              basic life processes are available for such organisms.
