Title       : Summer Course: Molecular Basis, Physiology, and Diversity of Microbial
               Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9723073

Award Number: 9723073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Robert Tabita tabita.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen E. Kendrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723073  Tabita  Research in microbiology, during the early 1970s, led to
              development of the recombinant DNA technologies that spawned the explosive
              growth of the multi-billion dollar biotechnology industry.  Paradoxically, in
              the 1980s, despite the continued need for research, and for a labor force
              skilled in microbial systems for industry, medicine, agriculture food
              production, environmental control, and renewable-energy, academic programs in
              microbial physiology, metabolism and biodiversity declined rapidly in the
              United States.  By the 1990s, the demand for microbial physiologists to
              develop, exploit or counter-attack novel microorganisms was intense.  In
              response to this problem and expedite the development of a cadre of trained
              microbial physiologists a summer course entitled "Mechanisms of Microbial
              Adaption" was taught at the Ohio State University.  This course was developed
              during 1994 and taught in July '95, '96 and '97.  Funds requested are to allow
              the course to continue, and to be taught in July '98, '99 and 2000.  The course
              will maintain the format of both lecture and laboratory components, and will be
              targeted at beginning-level graduate students more senior scientists who are
              not currently working in the area of microbial physiology and faculty members
              from academic institutes seeking to build/rebuild expertise in microbial
              physiology. The emphasis will continue to be practical training in
              fermentation, enzymology, metabolic pathway biochemistry, molecular regulation,
              and in the growth and handling of anaerobes and anaerobic systems, with
              hands-on experience with a wide range of modern instrumentation.  Lectures will
              be provided by both O.S.U. faculty, and by guest experts who also spend time in
              tutorial discussions with the students.  The guest lectures and informal but
              intense immersions in scientific discussions build a sense of excitement and
              community during the course, and also establish the foundations for long-term
              interactions between the course graduates and senior sci entists.  Each year
              the course will be taught over a two week period, to about 12 students selected
              from an applicant pool, with the goal of providing this unique training
              opportunity to as diverse a cadre of students as possible.    Research in
              microbiology, during the early 1970s, led to development of the recombinant DNA
              technologies that spawned the explosive growth of the multi-billion dollar
              biotechnology industry.  Paradoxically, in the 1980s, despite the continued
              need for research, and for a labor force skilled in microbial systems for
              industry, medicine, agriculture, food production, environmental control, and
              renewable-energy, academic programs in microbial physiology, metabolism and
              biodiversity declined rapidly in the United States.  In response to this
              problem, a summer course entitled "Mechanisms of Microbial Adaption" will be
              taught at the Ohio State University.  The course will have both lecture and
              laboratory components, and will be targeted at beginning-level graduate
              students, more senior scientists who are not currently working in the area of
              microbial physiology, and faculty members from academic institutes seeking to
              build/rebuild expertise in microbial physiology.  The emphasis will continue to
              be practical training in fermentation, enzymology, metabolic pathway
              biochemistry, molecular regulation, and in the growth and handling of anaerobes
              and anaerobic systems, with hands-on experience with a wide range of modern
              instrumentation.
