Title       : Analysis of Galectins as Splicing Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9723615

Award Number: 9723615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Patterson patter13@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723615  Patterson  Galectins are a family of eukaryotic lectins consisting of
              eight family members: galectin-1 through galectin-8.  The galectins are defined
              by two distinguishing characteristics: high affinity for
              (-galactoside-containing glycoconjugates, and conserved amino acid residues in
              the carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) of the polypeptides.  At least two
              galectins (1 and 3) exhibit nuclear as well as cytoplasmic localization. 
              Recent evidence indicates that the nuclear galectins colocalize with both snRNP
              and non-snRNP (SC35) splicing cofactors in HeLa nuclei. Thus, nuclear galectins
              are functionally redundant in splicing activity and exhibit the same
              distribution in nuclei as other splicing factors.  We also have shown that
              galectin-depletion inhibits the formation of active spliceosomal complexes
              which suggests galectins are required at an early step in the splicing pathway.
               This research will determine whether galectin splicing function is due to
              direct association with splicing complexes or an indirect mechanism. Splicing
              complexes will be directly analyzed by two methods to determine whether either
              galectin is stably associated with these macromolecular structures.  Additional
              experiments are designed to determine whether the CRD of the galectins is
              required for splicing activity. Mutations in the conserved amino acid residues
              of the CRD of galectin-1 abolish lactose-binding.  These mutant polypeptides
              will be evaluated for their ability to restore splicing activity to
              galectin-depleted extracts.  Lastly, one further approach to elucidate a
              mechanism of action for galectins in splicing is to identify their
              ligand/partner and determine whether the ligand(s) is a known or new splicing
              factor.  Four candidate molecules are possible as ligands: an unidentified
              (-galactoside-containing glycoconjugate; a protein structurally mimicking
              galactose/lactose that binds to the CRD; a protein that interacts with some
              region other than the CRD; a pre-mRNA splicing substrate or an RNA-conta ining
              splicing factor.  Interestingly, glycoconjugates capable of binding to
              galectins have not been identified in nuclei. We will use the yeast two-hybrid
              system to identify and characterize the ligand(s) for nuclear galectins. 
              Ligands isolated by this sensitive genetic approach will be evaluated by
              biochemical techniques for ligand-galectin interactions and used in
              depletion/reconstitution protocols to determine if they are required for
              pre-mRNA processing.  %%%  Galectins are a family of eukaryotic lectin proteins
              consisting of eight family members:  galectin-1 through galectin-8.  At least
              two galectins exhibit nuclear as well as cytoplasmic localization.  Nuclear
              galectins appear to be functionally redundant in pre-mRNA splicing and exhibit
              the same distribution in nuclei as other splicing factors.  This research will
              determine whether galectin splicing function is due to direct association with
              splicing complexes or an indirect mechanism.  ***
