Title       : Characterization of a Limb Autotomy Factor, LAFpro, that Suspends Molting in
               Crustaceans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9723576

Award Number: 9723576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald L. Mykles don@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723576  Mykles      Crabs and lobsters grow by periodically shedding the hard
              exoskeleton.  This process, called molting, increases interior space for tissue
              growth.  Successful molting requires the precise coordination of organ systems.
               In preparation for molting, the first two layers of the new exoskeleton are
              formed and the innermost layers of the old exoskeleton are broken down and
              resorbed, while lost walking legs are regenerated.    Molting is regulated by
              hormones produced by endocrine organs located in the eyestalks and body. 
              Previous studies, however, indicate that control of molting is more complex. 
              If a regenerating walking leg is removed before the animal molts, molting is
              delayed 2-3 weeks, which allows time for the lost tissue to be regenerated. 
              The PI has recently shown that the regenerating tissue produces a factor,
              termed limb autotomy factor-proecdysis (LAFpro) that suspends molting in land
              crabs.  The primary goal of this project is to purify and characterize LAFpro. 
              The proposal consists of two specific aims:  (1) establish the mechanism by
              which molting is suspended and (2) isolate and characterize putative LAFpro
              from regenerating tissues.    This research has broad application to
              understanding the control of growth in arthropods as a whole.  Suspension of
              molting by tissue regeneration is not unique to crustaceans.  Regeneration also
              delays molting in a variety of insects.  This suggests a common mechanism.  If
              so, the PI hopes to develop entirely new strategies for controlling insect
              pests.
