Title       : Algorithms and Software for Molecular Sequence Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a9723346

Award Number: 9723346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350544             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Gusfield gusfield@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9183,9218,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Comparison of bio-molecular sequences has become essential  in modern molecular
              biology and biotechnology.  This project  will develop and test algorithmic
              techniques to explore DNA  and protein sequences, with emphasis on techniques
              for newer  or less analyzed biological phenomena.  There are several  areas of
              concentration: A fundamental re-examination of the  biological basis for
              alignment models and parameters in  light of  the recently available sequence
              data and the  accumulating understanding of mutation mechanisms; Expansion  of
              parametric alignment methods to apply to a broader range  of sequence analysis
              problems; Development of methods to  organize a large set of alignments, in
              order to present  alternative alignments without overwhelming the researcher; 
              Formalizing notions of repeated substrings containing  variations, and
              exploiting deep theorems from the study of  exact repeats; Connecting the
              problem of protein structure  alignment to a body of efficient techniques from
              Location  Theory.    Molecular sequence comparison is the essential complement
              of  projects, such as the human genome project, that are  obtaining the full
              DNA sequence transcript of various  genomes.  Comparison of sequences inside
              and across species  has tremendously accelerated many tasks in molecular
              biology  and biotechnology.    The potential impact of this project will be in
              the  development of more biologically based alignment models, in  the
              production of novel software, and in the adaptation of  mature mathematical and
              computational techniques to problems  in molecular biology.  Since sequence
              comparison has now  become critical in molecular biology and in many aspects of
               commercial bio-technology and pharmaceutical companies,  improved models and
              software for sequence comparison may  have a significant impact on the way
              disease genes are  identified, on the way newly identified genes are understood
               to function, and on the way new candidate molecular targets  for medicines are
              identified.    This work  is funded by the Computational Biology Activity 
              (BIO) and the program in the Theory of Computing (CISE).
