Title       : Heme Regulation of the DAN1 gene in S. cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9723565

Award Number: 9723565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Lowry cvlowry@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/445-5582

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723565  Lowry  The adaptation to the lack of oxygen from a regulatory point of
              view is the inverse of the adaptation to the presence of oxygen.  The family of
              anaerobic genes is composed of at least three subsets, two of which are
              negatively regulated by heme, and another which is negatively regulated by
              unsaturated fatty acid (both heme and UFA can only be synthesized in the
              presence of oxygen).  This project will focus on the DAN1 anaerobic gene in
              yeast which is regulated in parallel with the members of a fairly well studied
              anaerobic regulon known as the hypoxic genes.   DAN1 and the members of hypoxic
              regulon are all negatively regulated by heme, which serves as a signal for the
              presence of oxygen in yeast.  Preliminary evidence indicates that regulation of
              DAN1 is governed by a different set of proteins than those which control the
              hypoxic genes.  In particular the ROX1 repressor, which controls the hypoxic
              genes is not involved in DAN1 regulation.  In this project three factors,
              encoded by genes designated ROX7, ROX8, and ROX9, which have been identified
              genetically as regulators of DAN1 will be cloned and characterized.  The
              objective will be to discover the mechanism by which heme regulates DAN1.  It
              is apparent that there are at least three different pathways sensitive to heme
              regulation.  Two are well known, involving the regulators HAP1 and HAP2/3/4. 
              Two more have been inferred recently, one which is involved (along with HAP1 )
              in heme induction of ROX1, and another which regulates DAN1.  A significant
              objective of this project will be to place DAN1 in the context of the three
              pathways, with a particular emphasis on the mechanism(s) by which heme is
              sensed at the molecular level.  The mechanism of regulation of DAN1 will be
              studied in terms of the interactions of the identified regulatory factors with
              each other and with the regulatory sites which have been identified in the
              regulatory region of DANI.  The limited objective of this project is to get a
              broad outline of the mechanism  with a view to deeper inquiry in the future. 
              %%%  This project will focus on the DAN1 anaerobic gene in yeast, which is
              negatively regulated by heme in parallel with a fairly well studied family of
              anaeroic genes known as the hypoxic genes.  Heme functions as a ligand in many
              different contexts in biology, both catalytically and also as a regulator.  The
              mechanism of regulation of DAN1 will be studied in terms of the interactions of
              the identified regulatory factors with each other and with the regulatory
              region of DAN1.  The limited objective of this project is to get a broad
              outline of the regulatory mechanism with a view to deeper inquiry in the
              future.  ***
