Title       : Cellular and Molecular Events in Early Leech Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9723114

Award Number: 9723114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weisblat weisblat@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Weisblat  9723114      Glossiphoniid leeches such as Helobdella robusta, are
              useful for in depth analyses of developmental processes for two reasons: first,
              they are relatively simple animals with large, accessible embryos that are
              suited for combined cellular and molecular techniques. Second, since leeches
              belong to the phylum Annelida, an otherwise poorly studied group, the results
              obtained are useful for making interphyletic comparisons. Such comparisons are
              essential to distinguish general developmental processes from phylum-specific
              ones, and also to learn how evolutionary modification of developmental
              processes leads to the appearance of diverse animal types.    For example,
              annelids and arthropods resemble each other (and differ from mollusks) in that
              they both have segmented body plans. In both annelids and arthropods, segmental
              tissues arise from longitudinally oriented, ventrally situated arrays of cells,
              termed the germ band (in arthropods such as the fruitfly Drosophila
              melanogaster) or germinal plate (in annelids). In leech, the germinal plate
              arises in strict head-to-tail (rostrocaudal) progression by repeated divisions
              of specialized embryonic stem cells called teloblasts. Homologs of several
              genes involved in rostrocaudal patterning of Drosophila seem to be expressed in
              homologous patterns during rostrocaudal patterning of leech. This suggests that
              the molecular genetic processes of differentiation and morphogenesis in later
              development will be quite similar in the two phyla.    But the early Helobdella
              embryo is strikingly different from the early Drosophila embryo and strikingly
              similar to molluscan embryos. Thus, the question of how cell fates are
              determined in the early leech embryo is of considerable interest. The first
              part of this proposal contains experiments designed to further previous
              investigations of how distinct fates are assigned to particular cells in the
              developing embryo, with emphasis on the assignment of mesodermal and ectodermal
              fates to individually iden tified cells at fourth cleavage. The focus in this
              work is on characterizing the patterns of expression and development roles of
              leech homologs to evolutionarily conserved regulatory genes from Drosophila,
              such as nanos, dorsal, twist, snail, and numb.    A second area of interest is
              the morphogenetic cell movements leading to germinal plate formation in
              Helobdella. Columns of segmental founder cells coalesce into the germinal plate
              having moved over most of the surface of the embryo; these movements are
              accompanied by the spreading of a squamous epithelium in a process called
              epiboly. The experiments in the second part of this proposal are designed to
              elucidate the cellular processes involved in these movements and to compare the
              mechanisms of epiboly in leech and fish. Specifically, we seek to test the
              hypothesis that the segmental founder cells and epithelium are "towed"
              vegetally by forces originating within the endodermal precursor cells; if so,
              we further seek to distinguish between possible modes of generating the towing
              movements, such as "cortical treadmilling" and "cortical contractile wave"
              processes.
