Title       : Meiotic Homolog Pairing in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1999      
File        : a9723330

Award Number: 9723330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim S. McKim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723330  McKim    To investigate the mechanism of chromosome pairing in D.
              melanogaster, a combined approach of genetics, molecular biology and cell
              biology will be applied.  Several aspects of the problem of initiating meiotic
              chromosome pairing and recombination will be addressed.  Very little is known
              about the gene products that are required for this process.  Two genes with
              important roles in this process, mei-W68 and mei-P22, have recently been
              identified.  The protein product of these genes will be identified and the
              expression pattern of the transcript and protein will be characterized.  One of
              the ways to understand this process is to characterize mutants defective in
              meiotic recombination.  The temporal expression pattern of these genes will
              indicate when they are required. Only one gene involved in this process has
              been cloned and its function remains unknown.  Both genes will be
              characterized.    The object of this proposal is to investigate the mechanism
              of meiotic homolog pairing and recombination in Drosophila melanogaster
              females.  During meiosis, paired homologous chromosomes are held together by a
              structure known as the synaptonemal complex (s.c.). Despite the ubiquitous
              nature of the s.c., there is considerable controversy on how it forms, its
              components, and its relationship to meiotic recombination.  The studies in this
              proposal will enhance the understanding of two crucial issues in meiotic
              chromosome behavior.  First, how do meiotic chromosomes pair and synapse; how
              much is based on DNA sequence similarity, and how much is based on "pairing
              sites".  Second, what gene products have a role in this process, and what is
              the function of those gene products.
