Title       : Molecular Genetics Analysis of Plant Circadian Rhythms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1999   
File        : a9723482

Award Number: 9723482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Robertson McClung Mcclung@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              McClung    9723482  The molecular basis by which time information is generated
              in plants will be investigated in the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana. The
              molecular clock regulates overt rhythms in gas exchange, leaf movement and gene
              expression. Arabidopsis mutants affected in clock function have been isolated
              using the circadian rhythm in resistance/sensitivity to SO2 exposure that
              results from the circadian rhythms in stomatal aperture and gas exchange. If 65
              mutants, 3 flower significantly earlier than wild type and 30 flower
              significantly later.  Six of 21 tested also display a long hypocotyl phenotype.
              Efforts will be concentrated on one mutant, Circadian Timing Defective 1
              (ctd1), which flowers later than wild type, but retains photoperiod
              sensitivity. The mutation is inherited as recessive nuclear gene. Ctd1 shows a
              short period in oscillations in mRNA abundance for four genes, the implication
              being that ctd1 affects a process common to expression of all four genes and
              thus defines a component of a common oscillator or of a common input or output
              pathway. Ctd1 will be characterized both phenotypically and genetically
              followed by cloning and characterization of the gene. Other ctd mutants with
              altered clock properties will continue to be characterized and the search for
              new mutants will also be continued.    Rhythmic biological phenomena which
              recur at approximately 24 hour intervals in the absence of environmental time
              cues are termed circadian rhythms. Their timing is regulated by an endogenous
              biological clock. Such rhythms are ubiquitous and have been described in great
              detail at a phenomenological level. Plants provide excellent systems for study
              of circadian rhythmicity because plants are robustly rhythmic and exquisitely
              sensitive to environmental input, probably reflecting both their sessile growth
              form and their dependence on their immediate environment for nutrition and
              energy. Increased  understanding of plant responses to environmental input and
              to endogenous temporal cues ha s agricultural importance, in particular,
              because both environmental cues and the circadian clock contribute to the
              photoperiodic decision to flower. A genetic and molecular biological analysis
              of mutants identified by a novel screen will be done in Arabidopsis thaliana,
              the model plant.
