Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Cell-Signalling in C. elegans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9723454

Award Number: 9723454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eleanor M. Maine emmaine@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Maine  9723454    This proposal aims to understand the molecular basis of
              inductive cell-signalling during developmental and how the cell-signalling
              process elicits a specific cellular response.  In particular, the proposal
              investigates the mechanism responsible for promoting mitosis in the C.elegans
              germ line.  Currently, it is understood that the somatic distal tip cell (DTC)
              signals the distal germ line, promoting mitosis and/or preventing meiosis. 
              Three components of the signalling pathway are known:  LAG-2, a ligand produced
              by the DTC; GLP-1, a germline transmembrane receptor; LAG-1, a germline
              transcription factor.  This evolutionarily conserved signalling pathway plays a
              general role in development and growth control of metazoans.  Many questions
              remain to be answered about the nature of intercellular signalling mediated by
              GLP-1.  Additional pathway components need to be identified as do targets of
              pathway activity.  To address these questions, genes that interact genetically
              with glp-1 have been identified and studied.  Sog mutations suppress and ego
              mutations enhance the glp-1 mutant phenotype components (e.g., lag-1) and/or
              with each other (e.g., ego-1 and ego-6).  This proposal focuses on three genes
              that promote GLP-1 mediated signalling in the germ line, ego-1, ego-3, and
              ego-6.  Each gene has a pleiotropic mutant phenotype consistent with activity
              in more than one aspect of development.  These gene products also may function
              in GLP-1 mediated signalling in the embryo.  The proposed experiments will
              investigate the specific role of each gene in development.  Genetic studies
              will determine the requirement for each gene during development, whether
              aspects of the phenotype are interdependent, and when each gene product is
              active.  To obtain a broader understanding of ego gene activity in signal
              transduction, tests for genetic interactions with other known or suspected
              signalling pathway components will be performed.  Molecular studies will
              determine the nature of each ego gene produ ct and confirm the time and place
              of gene product activity during development.  Time permitting, possible
              physical interactions between the products of genetically interacting genes
              (e.g., ego-1 and ego-6) will be investigated.
