Title       : Termination of Mammalian mRNA Polyadenylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9723969

Award Number: 9723969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Bear dbear@salud.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U New Mexico Hlth Sci Ctr
	      HSSB - 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  871315041    505/272-6264

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723969  Bear  Polyadenylation of messenger RNA (mRNA) is an essential process
              in gene expression.  The length of the poly(A) tail has been correlated with
              mRNA stability, translation and intracellular transport. This research will
              investigate the mechanism by which the mammalian nuclear poly(A) binding
              protein, PABII, in conjunction with the cleavage/polyadenylation specificity
              factor, CPSF, function to terminate polyadenylation of mRNA.  Poly(A) tails in
              the nuclei of mammalian cells are 200-300 nucleotides long.  Without PABII and
              CPSF, poly(A) polymerase will polymerize tails of more than 1000 nucleotides in
              vitro.  Preliminary electron microscopy studies carried out in our laboratory
              demonstrate that PABII forms a nautilus-shaped 21 nm oligomeric particle when
              bound to synthetic poly(A).  A single PABII particle of similar size and shape
              is found together with CPSF at the 3' end of mRNA in an in vitro
              polyadenylation reaction.  A combination of biochemical and biophysical
              approaches will be used to understand the relationship between the structure of
              the PABII particle and termination of polyadenylation.  The central hypothesis
              that PABII binds in a contiguous array to the nascent poly(A) tail during
              synthesis, eventually forming a nautilus-shaped particle of discrete
              stoichiometry which leads to the dissociation or inactivation of the
              cleavage/polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) and or poly(A) polymerase. 
              The result is a transition from fast processive polymerization to slow 
              dispersive polymerization thereby limiting the length of the poly(A) tail.  The
              quaternary structure of the PABII particle will be studied using a combination
              of fluorescence spectroscopy, nuclease digestion, chemical cross-linking, and
              scanning transmission electron microscopy.  Snapshot blotting and
              immuno-electron microscopy will be used to examine how the PABII particle, CPSF
              and poly(A) polymerase change in size, shape and location during the various
              stages of the polyadenylation reaction.  %%%  Polyadenyl ation of messenger RNA
              (mRNA) is an essential process in gene expression.  The length of the poly(A)
              tail has been correlated with mRNA stability, translation and intracellular
              transport.  This research will investigate the mechanism by which mRNA poly(A)
              tails in the nuclei of mammalian cells is limited to lengths of 200-300
              nucleotides.  ***
