Title       : Regulation of Two Clusters of Nitrogenase Genes of the Cyanobacterium Anabaena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2002   
File        : a9723754

Award Number: 9723754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa Thiel thiel@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Thiel  9723754  Cyanobacteria of the genus Anabaena have evolved specialized
              cells called heterocysts that function exclusively for nitrogen fixation. Some
              strains, notably Anabaena variabilis, have multiple genes that encode different
              nitrogenases. There are three clusters of genes in A. variabilis that encode
              three nitrogenases: a V-dependent nitrogenase (vnf) and two
              molybdenum-dependent nitrogenases, one that functions under aerobic conditions
              (nil1) and one that functions only under strictly anaerobic conditions (nif2).
              These genes are tightly regulated; however, very little is known about their
              regulation except that it is probably not via the (54- NifA system described in
              other nitrogen-fixing bacteria. Thus, an understanding of nitrogenase gene
              regulation in A. variabilis can broaden our understanding of mechanisms of
              procaryotic gene regulation. The goal of this research is to identify the cis
              elements and trans-acting factors that function in the environmental control of
              the nif1 and vnf genes that function under aerobic conditions in heterocysts of
              A. variabilis. The objectives are to 1 ) identify and characterize a putative
              repressor made in Mo-grown cells that controls V-nitrogenase gene expression,
              2) identify the DNA-binding site for the putative repressor and determine the
              nucleotides that are important for repression, 3) identify and characterize a
              putative repressor made in ammonium-grown cells that controls nif1 and vnf
              expression in the presence of fixed nitrogen, and 4) identify the DNA-binding
              site for this regulatory protein.  Nitrogen fixation, the conversion of
              atmospheric nitrogen gas to ammonia by the enzyme nitrogenase, is found
              exclusively in bacteria, including many cyanobacteria. Nitrogen fixation
              sustains the growth of not only these bacteria, but also of many plants that
              receive nitrogen by associations with nitrogen-fixing bacteria. In all
              organisms nitrogen fixation is tightly regulated. Very little is known about
              nitrogen regulation in many agriculturally impo rtant nitrogen-fixing bacteria,
              including the cyanobacteria. The primary objective of this research project is
              to use the tools of molecular genetics to understand how the cyanobacterium,
              Anabaena variabilis, controls two sets of genes, nif1 and vnf, that allow these
              cells to fix nitrogen under diverse environmental conditions.
