Title       : The Genetic and Molecular Basis of Sex Determination in Ceratopteris
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9723154

Award Number: 9723154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564405             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jo Ann Banks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723154  Banks    Technical section  Gametophytes of the fern Ceratopteris
              richardii are sexually dimorphic, either hermaphroditic or male. The
              determinant of sex in this and other ferns is antheridiogen, a gibberellin-like
              pheromone that is secreted by the hermaphroditic gametophytes and which
              promotes male development of other sexually undetermined gametophytes. The
              plant hormone abscisic acid blocks the antheridiogen response. Several key
              regulatory genes involved in sex determination have been identified by
              generating and characterizing mutations that alter the normal sex of the
              gametophyte. A genetic analysis of these mutants defines a regulatory network
              of at least eight interacting genes that are involved in determining sex type.
              Among these are two major sex-determining genes, TRA-1 and FEM-1, whose
              activities are required to promote the differentiation of female and male
              traits, respectively. Each gene also negatively regulates the expression of the
              other such that the sex of the gametophyte ultimately depends on which gene is
              expressed first. Antheridiogen activates a signal transduction pathway defined
              by the HER genes which affects the sex of the gametophyte by regulating the
              activity of TRA-1.This model of sex determination will be tested by continuing
              the genetic and morphological analysis of new and existing sex-determining
              mutants. One such gene, a Ceratopteris homolog of KNOTTED-1 is likely to also
              be involved in meristem development in the hermaphrodite and a target of
              repression by antheridiogen during male development. Several genes that are
              up-regulated in response to exposure to exogenous antheridiogen have also been
              isolated and the functions of these genes will be determined. A final objective
              is to develop an Agrobacterium-mediated transformation system in the fern. If
              successful,  the Ac/Ds transposable elements of maize will be introduced and
              their ability to transpose in the fern will be tested. If they are mobile, 
              mutants induced by transposon tagging will be sought .    Non-technical section
               How sex is determined in plants is an important developmental question whose
              answer may ultimately have practical applications in agriculture and plant
              breeding. The proposed studies will provide a basic understanding of the genes
              involved in sex determination and the signaling pathway for known pheromonal
              and hormonal cues.  ***
