Title       : Arrest of Gene Expression During Invertebrate Quiescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9723746

Award Number: 9723746
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hand   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hand  97-23746             Dormancy in animals provides an important means to
              survive  harsh environmental conditions. This work will investigate how 
              certain cells are able to survive long periods of dormancy that  are induced by
              the removal of oxygen (anoxia). Under anoxia,  energy metabolism and
              development are shut down.         There are three specific research objectives
              for this  project. First, the rate of transcription (synthesis of  messenger
              RNA from DNA) will be measured in nuclei and  mitochondria isolated from active
              animals and dormant animals.  The PI's prediction is that transcription will be
              depressed  under anoxia, which would be consistent with the fact that 
              development ceases under anoxia in our experimental animal (a  shrimp embryo).
              Second, the stability of messenger RNA (mRNA)  under anoxia will measured. The
              PI's hypothesis is that  degradation of mRNA (a normal process in active cells)
              will be  is depressed during dormancy. Conservation of mRNA molecules  during
              dormancy might favor a quick resumption of protein  synthesis as soon as oxygen
              is returned. Third, the PI will  hypothesize that there is an oxygen sensor in
              the mitochondria  of these animals that can control the rate of protein
              synthesis  when oxygen availability is reduced. Experiments will be  performed
              to test whether or not the sensor is a home protein  (i.e., similar to oxygen
              binding proteins like hemoglobin).         The mechanisms by which cells
              withstand long bouts of  dormancy are apt to have important implications for
              numerous  cases where metabolism is unavoidably disrupted -organ and  tissue
              transplantation, acute blockage of blood flow to tissues,  and oxygen
              deprivation. From an ecological perspective, the work  should help explain how
              environmental stimuli that promote entry  into dormancy are linked to the
              required survival responses.                                           ,,. 1
