Title       : Regulation of Manganese Peroxidase Gene Expression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9723725

Award Number: 9723725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Gold mgold@bmb.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Alic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Hlth and Science U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gold  9723725  The lignin degradative system (LDS) of the white-rot
              basidiomycetous fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium degrades the plant cell wall
              polymer, lignin, and a wide range of aromatic pollutants.  The major
              extracellular components of this nonspecific oxidative system are two
              heme-containing peroxidases, manganese peroxidase (MnP) and lignin peroxidase
              (LiP).  The LDS is expressed during secondary metabolic growth, the onset of
              which is triggered by the depletion of nutrient nitrogen.  MnP expression also
              is regulated at the level of gene transcription by Mn ion, by heat shock, and
              by oxidative stress.  The primary goal of this project is to elucidate these
              specific mechanisms of mnp gene transcription at the molecular level.  New mnp
              promoter-gene reporter constructs will be used to examine the regulation of
              individual mnp genes by nitrogen, Mn, and heat shock.  The cis-acting promoter
              sequences involved in mnp regulation using site-directed mutagenesis of
              putative metal response elements, promoter deletion analysis, and synthetic
              promoter elements will be identified.  The putative Mn-responsive transcription
              factor will be identified and purified, and genes encoding the Mn-responsive
              and heat shock transcription factors will be cloned.  Finally, the
              post-transcriptional requirements for MnP synthesis will be examined further. 
              Lignin is the second most abundant natural polymer, constituting 15-30% of
              woody plant cell walls, and forming a matrix that surrounds the cellulose in
              wood.  Thus, the degradation of lignin is a significant step in the global
              carbon cycle.  Furthermore, lignin presents a major obstacle to the industrial
              utilization of cellulose.  White-rot fungi are the only organisms which can
              completely degrade lignin to carbon dioxide and water.  The best studied of 
              these fungi, Phanerochaete chrysosporium, efficiently degrades lignin and a
              wide range of environmental pollutants.  P. chrysosporium and other
              lignin-degrading fungi secrete the enzyme manganese peroxidase (Mn P).  This
              enzyme oxidizes manganese ion (Mn) which, in turn, depolymerizes lignin.  The
              production of MnP is regulated at the level of the gene by  the depletion of
              nutrient nitrogen, by the availability of Mn, and by temperature and chemical
              stresses.  The goal of this research is to understand, at the molecular level,
              the mechanisms by which each of these factors control MnP production.  This is
              the first example of Mn regulation of gene expression to be studied at the
              molecular level.
