Title       : Genetic Analysis of JAK Signaling in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9723944

Award Number: 9723944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Harrison dough@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Harrison  9723944    The coordinated proliferation and differentiation of
              distinct cell types is critical to the proper development and maintenance of
              any multicellular organism.  For this coordination to occur, cells must have a
              means to communicate with one another.  The broad long-term objectives of this
              research are to elucidate mechanisms of cell-cell signaling and to understand
              how different signals are interpreted to regulate developmental events.  Toward
              these goals, the Janus kinase (JAK) signaling pathway will be studied in
              Drosophila melanogaster.  This system will be used because it  is
              developmentally important, relatively simple, and is conserved between flies
              and mammals.  In mammals, the pathway is know to be comprised of the
              non-receptor tyrosine kinases (JAKs) and the signal transducers and activators
              of transcription (STATs).  In flies, one JAK (hopscotch) and one STAT (marelle)
              gene have been recently identified.  The genetic and developmental
              manipulations available in Drosophila make it an ideal model system to further
              study JAK/STAT signaling.  These approaches will complement and extend the
              biochemical analyses of the pathway conducted in mammalian cells.  Mutational
              analysis has already uncovered a new component of JAK/STAT signaling in
              Drosophila, unpaired (upd).  An understanding of the involvement of upd in JAK
              signaling is central to the research proposed here.  Other molecules integral
              to the JAK pathway, or that strongly interact with components of the pathway,
              will be identified and characterized using the genetic tools available in
              Drosophila.    The specific goals of this research are to:    1)  Characterize
              the unpaired locus at the molecular level  2)  Determine the functions of the
              Upd product in JAK signaling  3)  Characterize the roles of Upd function in
              Drosophila development  4)  Identify other components of and factors
              interacting with the JAK pathway
