Title       : Mechanisms and Integration of Signal Pathway: A Role for Calpains?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9723636

Award Number: 9723636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorothy E. Croall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723636  Croall           In order to survive cells must sense and respond to 
              changes in their environment.  Environmental cues trigger a  variety of events
              within cells.  The concentration and  movements of calcium ions are essential
              regulators of many  of these cellular responses.  Proper control of 
              intracellular calcium is essential because at thigh levels  calcium can lead to
              cell damage or death. Calcium  accomplishes it effects through binding to
              specific proteins  such as calmodulin and calpain. Calmodulin, named for its 
              ability to bind calcium and to modulate the activity of  other cellular
              components, is an important mediator of  calcium signals and its mechanism of
              action is relatively  well understood.  The calpains are proteolytic enzymes
              that  are regulated by calcium binding.  Proteolytic enzymes  modify cellular
              proteins such that the target protein is  destroyed or is altered in its
              function. Calpains can modify  those proteins, called pumps or channels, that
              directly  allow calcium ion movement and therefore calpains may be  involved
              directly in helping cells to regulate calcium  signals.  Through its action on
              other key regulator proteins  and enzymes, calpains might also help to
              integrate cellular  responses that involve calcium with other events that do 
              not.  Although the activity of calpain is controlled by  calcium its action may
              be prevented by another protein  (calpastatin) that specifically inhibits these
              enzymes.  Although calpastatin does not bind calcium directly it binds  to
              calpain only when calpain has bound calcium.  Thus the  interactions between
              these two proteins is important in  regulating calpain function.  By comparison
              with calmodulin,  there is little known about how calcium regulates calpain 
              structure, function or its interactions with other proteins.  Thus the
              immediate goals for this proposal are to understand  more about the biochemical
              mechanisms that regulate calpain.  This project aims to answer two major
              questions: 1) how does  calcium binding  to calpain regulate the enzymatic
              activity?  2) can a calpastatin insensitive calpain be generated by  exploiting
              what is known about the interaction between  calpain and calpastatin?  An
              enzyme with this property will  be useful, in future studies, for determining
              the role of  calpains in cells. These goals will be accomplished through 
              techniques of protein chemistry and expression of  recombinant DNA molecules to
              generate modified enzymes or  enzyme fragments for study.  This knowledge will
              provide  information on the role of calpain in critical cellular  processes. 
              %%%        Calcium is important in the regulation of many essential 
              intracellular processes.  Many of the effecPts of calcium  occur after it binds
              to specific proteins.  One of these  proteins is calpain.  Calpains are
              proteolytic enzymes that  are regulated by calcium binding, and in turn modify
              other  cellular proteins in ways which often alter their function.  Little is
              known of the mechanism by which calcium modifies  calpain, and this project
              will study the biochemical  mechanisms that regulate calpain and the role of
              calcium in  these processes.  ***
