Title       : Regulation of Photosynthetic Electron Transport Genes in Chlamydomonas
               Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9723274

Award Number: 9723274
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Stern ds28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Kindle  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Boyce Thompson Institute
	      1 Tower Road
	      Ithaca, NY  148531801    607/254-1225

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723274  Stern  Photosynthetic electron transport is largely carried out by
              multi-subunit complexes, whose constituents are encoded by nuclear and
              chloroplast genes.  The synthesis of these complexes relies on the coordinate
              gene expression in these two organelles.  A particularly intriguing aspect of
              this interdependence is that many of these nuclear genes regulate the synthesis
              of a specific chloroplast gene product.  This regulation is carried out largely
              at the post-transcriptional level, mediating processes such as RNA processing,
              RNA stability, translation, and macromolecular complex assembly.  This research
              will focus on nuclear regulatory genes and their RNA targets in the
              chloroplasts of the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii,
              particularly those that encode subunits of the cytochrome b6/f complex of the
              electron transport chain. The cytochrome b6/f complex mediates electron
              transfer between the plastoquinone pool and plastocyanin, and is subject to
              developmental and environmental regulation.  The specific goals of this project
              are first, to analyze two mutations that impair the stability of the
              chloroplast petA and petD mRNAs, which encode cytochrome f and subunit IV,
              respectively.  Second, chloroplast ribosome recognition elements in mRNA will
              be functionally defined.  The analysis of nuclear gene products and mechanisms
              that control mRNA stability will be carried out simultaneously using molecular
              genetics and biochemistry.  Molecular approaches will be used to investigate
              the mechanism by which degradation occurs in mRNA stability mutants, and to
              clone the gene identified by one such mutation.  Biochemical approaches will
              take advantage of in vitro systems to analyze the details of RNA-protein
              interactions, focusing on the ability of these stability factors to recognize
              specific RNA sequences, and perhaps to carry out other functions, such as RNA
              processing.  The analysis of the subunit IV mRNA stability factor, which we
              hypothesize to encode an mRNA 5' untranslated reg ion-binding protein, will be
              facilitated by using a molecularly tagged allele of this locus to clone the
              nuclear gene encoding this protein.  To analyze ribosome recognition elements,
              two regions of mRNA close to the translation initiation codon will be tested
              for a possible role in ribosomal RNA recognition.  One of these regions is a
              Shine-Dalgarno element whose existence in chloroplast mRNAs is not yet firmly
              established.  The other region consists of the three nucleotides immediately
              upstream of the initiation codon.  Mutagenesis of these elements, and potential
              pairing partners in ribosomal RNA, .will be used to test the proposed
              interaction of these two RNA molecules.  The overall goal of this research is
              to contribute to our understanding of chloroplast gene regulation, in a way
              that may be broadly applicable to photosynthetic eukaryotes.  Some of the
              results may illuminate evolutionary strategies used by the nucleus to seize
              control of this cytoplasmic organelle.  %%%  Photosynthetic electron transport
              is largely carried out by multi-subunit complexes, whose constituents are
              encoded by nuclear and chloroplast genes.  The synthesis of these complexes
              relies on the coordinate gene expression in these two organelles.  A
              particularly intriguing aspect of this interdependence is that many of these
              nuclear genes are regulatory and control the synthesis of a specific
              chloroplast gene product.  Therefore, genes once expressed autonomously in the
              prokaryotic ancestor of this organelle now require specific nuclear gene
              products for their activity.  This research focuses on nuclear regulatory genes
              and their RNA targets in the chloroplast of the unicellular green alga
              Chamydomonas reinhardtii.  The research will contribute to our understanding of
              chloroplast gene regulation, in a way that may be broadly applicable to
              phosynthetic eukaryotes.  Some of the results may illuminate evolutionary
              strategies used by the nucleus to seize control of this cytoplasmic organelle. 
              ***
