Title       : Quantitative Methods for Studying Cell Signaling Mediated by Multisubunit
               Immuno-receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9723897

Award Number: 9723897
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla Wofsy wofsy@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9723897  Wofsy          Methods of mathematics and statistics, in conjunction
              with experimental work in two cell biology laboratories, will be used to
              clarify the early biophysical and  biochemical events that occur when
              extracellular signaling molecules interact with specific receptors on cell
              surfaces, to initiate and regulate cellular responses.  Common  features of
              cell signaling in different physiological systems have emerged from intensive
              experimental work over the past decade.  In general, the extracellular
              signaling molecules induce the aggregation of cell surface receptors, and for
              many receptors, the first detectable cellular response to receptor aggregation
              is the phosphorylation of the amino acid tyrosine on the receptor and other
              cellular proteins.  Intracellular enzymes then interact with the newly
              phosphorylated sites and mediate further biochemical and cellular responses. 
              The proposed work attempts to clarify the initial events in the signaling
              cascade: receptor aggregation and tyrosine phsophorylation, for the
              multi-subunit receptors of the immune system.  Part of the work involves
              analysis of point patterns on newly available cell surface images, reflecting
              the spatial distribution of cell surface receptors.  This project continues a
              collaboration designed to use such images quantitatively to make inferences
              about the mechanisms and effects of receptor  aggregation.  The development and
              application of additional statistical methods of point pattern analysis to
              understand the relationship between different aggregation states and cellular
              responses will also be done.  The second collaboration addresses mechanisms by
              which aggregated receptors mediate the phosphorylation of tyrosine on receptors
              and other substrates.  These studies will provide models for the mechanisms of
              the early events in cell signaling, which should lead to experiments that can
              test them.  %%%    A number of cell surface receptors respond to ligand binding
              by aggregation, which is then followed by phospho rylation of tyrosine residues
              in the receptor and other cellular  proteins.  The research here will use
              mathematical modeling of experimental systems to clarify these initial events
              in the signaling cascade for receptors of the immune system.  ***
