Title       : Cell Interaction-Dependent Neural Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1997  
File        : a9723874

Award Number: 9723874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul J. Linser pjl@whitney.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  ABSTRACT    9723874  LINSER     The central nervous system (CNS) is composed
              of two major and distinct populations of cells: neurons and neuroglia.  In many
              ways, neurons and neuroglia are specialized to perform distinct although
              complementary tasks.  Indeed, it is currently believed that the "functional
              unit" of the nervous system is a neuron and its obligatory associated
              neuroglia.  Although the neurons and neuroglia of the mature CNS are
              functionally and structurally distinct, both cell types come from common
              progenitor cells during neural development.  The cellular and molecular
              mechanisms that control cell differentiation during embryogenesis are the focus
              this research.  Specifically, Dr. Linser's laboratory has identified a unique
              cell-surface glycoprotein that is involved in the final decision of progenitor
              cells in the retina of the eye to differentiate as neuroglial cells.  In the
              current project, they will investigate how this cell-surface protein, called
              the 5A11 antigen, influences glial cell phenotype maturation.  The analyses
              will include the use of engineered retroviral vectors to introduce genetic
              markers as well as to bring about changes in expression of the 5A11 gene.  As
              neuronal and glial cell differentiation seems to be tied to when a cell stops
              dividing, the project has an overriding focus on the events of cell
              differentiation relative to "terminal" or the last cell division.  In addition,
              this study will compare and contrast the role of the 5A11 antigen with that of
              two, well characterized cell-cell recognition molecules, integrin and
              N-cadherin.  The technical approaches to be used rely heavily on current
              state-of-the-art molecular biology, biochemistry, tissue culture and
              immunohistochemistry.  The proposed studies are designed to shed light on the
              fundamental cell-cell recognition processes that provide the driving force for
              neuroglial cell differentiation.  Since neurons and neuroglia are so different
              from one another and yet share a common cell of origin, underst anding the
              mechanisms that give rise to these different cell types will also provide
              insight into the fundamental processes of cell differentiation.
