Title       : Studies of Transcriptional Repression by the Cellular Protein RBP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9723391

Award Number: 9723391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne D. Vales   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723391  Vales  The role of transcriptional activation in regulating gene
              expression in eukaryotes has been amply documented.  In contrast, the
              regulatory role of transcriptional repression in eukaryotes has been
              appreciated only lately based on the identification and role of several factors
              that function to inhibit transcription.  Many important mechanistic studies in
              prokaryotes have revealed that repressors evolved to target almost every
              possible step in the transcription process.  In contrast, given the new
              appreciation for repressors in the eukaryotic field, the mode of action of
              these factors is largely unknown.  The focus of this research is the cellular
              protein RBP, which was originally isolated as a presumed recombinase.  Studies
              of viral gene expression led to the identification of RBP as a transcriptional
              repressor.  Recent studies have demonstrated that RBP targets the adenoviral
              gene encoding polypeptide IX (pIX).  The newly recognized role of RBP as a
              transcriptional repressor presents an unique opportunity to identify the
              target(s) of RBP in repression as well as the mechanism by which repression is
              achieved.  The viral pIX promoter is relatively simple, containing a single
              recognition site for the cellular transcription factor SP1.  RBP binds
              immediately upstream of the TATA box in the viral promoter but does not
              dislodge the adjacent factor; therefore repression does not involve occlusion
              of adjacent factor binding.  On the other hand, repression is dependent upon
              both the presence and the position of the RBP site in the pIX promoter.  The
              goal of this research is to identify the precise target(s) of RBP in repression
              and to determine the molecular mechanism by which RBP mediates repression of
              the pIX gene.  Experiments performed in vitro will identify the target(s) of
              RBP repression and will test if RBP cobinding with TFIID occludes binding by a
              third factor, TFIIA, required for activation.  Possible interaction between RBP
              and SP1 will be examined using GST-pull down and coimm unoprecipitation
              experiments.  If RBP interacts with SP1, the SP1 and RBP protein domains
              involved in this interaction will be identified.  Possible interaction between
              RBP and general transcription factors required for activation will be probed
              for in a similar manner.  Finally, the molecular mechanism by which RBP
              functions to repress transcription will be identified in a reconstituted
              transcription assay.  The results from these studies will lay the groundwork
              for studying the means by which repression is relieved to allow optimal
              activation of viral pIX gene expression.  %%%  The role of transcriptional
              activation in regulating gene expression in eukaryotes has been amply
              documented.  In contrast, the regulatory role of transcriptional repression in
              eukaryotes has been appreciated only lately based on the identification and
              role of several factors that function to inhibit transcription.  The focus of
              this research is the cellular protein RBP, which was originally isolated as a
              presumed recombinase.  The actual functional role of RBP as transcription
              factor was uncovered within the last three years.  This research will exploit
              the viral pIX gene to understand the means by which RBP represses transcription
              in mammalian cells.  The results from these studies will lay the groundwork for
              studying the means by which repression is relieved to allow optimal activation
              of viral pIX gene expression.  ***
