Title       : Water Homeostasis in Dictyostelium Discoideum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1998    
File        : a9723450

Award Number: 9723450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore L. Steck t-steck@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723450  Steck    All cells carefully control their water balance to avoid undue
              swelling and shrinking.  While a variety of mechanisms have been implicated, we
              lack an integrated view of how cytosolic volume is sensed and regulated in
              eukaryotic cells.  An investigation of the molecular basis for water
              homeostasis in the soil amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, is therefore
              proposed.  Of particular interest is the contractile vacuole, a complex
              organelle which gathers cytosolic water and excretes it from the cell. 
              Although conspicuous to cytologists for the past two centuries, this
              intracellular nephron is still enigmatic. Dictyostelium discoideum is an ideal
              organism in which to pursue contractile vacuole complex structure and function.
               While the full scope of this undertaking is vast, the initial pathway is clear
              and feasible.      A genetic approach has been initiated.  Random genes in
              Dictyostelium were disrupted and vector tags bearing selectable markers
              inserted into the genome.  Mutant strains defective in cell volume homeostasis
              were selected by visually screening for a swelling phenotype.  The marked genes
              from these lines were rescued as bacterial colonies. The genomic DNA for one
              such gene, dosA, has been cloned and determination of its sequence is nearly
              complete.  This ~3 kbp open reading frame encodes a putative large,
              water-soluble protein with multiple sites for potential phosphorylation and
              interprotein associations zippered by homopolymer stretches.  It is now
              proposed to analyze dosA in detail. The gene copy number will be determined,
              and the possibility of related forms in a family will be explored.  The
              presence of corresponding genes in other organisms will be examined.  The
              upstream region will be analyzed and compared to other promoter sequences. 
              Putative protein structural features will be predicted by computer analysis. 
              Knock-out mutants (dosA-) will be created and their phenotype explored in
              detail.  Cells will be transformed with dosA constructs tagged at either en d
              with antigens or GFP protein and the subcellular distribution of the expressed
              protein will be analyzed by fluorescence microscopy.  In addition, antibodies
              to the epitope tags will be used to search for associated proteins by
              co-immunoprecipitation.  Finally, the structural basis for the function of dosA
              will be dissected using in vitro mutagenesis and cellular transformation.  The
              relationship of dosA to other water homeostasis genes will be explored as they
              become identified.    Lay abstract:  For simple organisms such as protozoa and
              slime molds (e.g., Dictyostelium discoideum), the maintenance of the proper
              water balance inside the cell is critical.  In severely hypotonic environments
              (e.g., the soil after a heavy rain), these organisms must be able to pump out
              the excess water that has entered via passive diffusion across the cell
              membrane.  The specialized organelle that performs this function is known as
              the "contractile vacuole."  Although the role of the cotnractile vacuole and
              its morphology as determined by microscopy has been known for a long time, it
              is one of the last subcellular organelles whose mechanism of function remains
              unknown.  This project employs a genetic approach to study the mechanism of
              contractile vacuole function and water homeostasis in the model organism,
              Dictyostelium discoideum.  It is likely that a better understanding of how
              water balance is maintained in simple organisms such as D. discoideum will help
              us understand how cells of higher organisms, including man, regulate water
              balance and cell volume.    ***
