Title       : BAC: Complex Predictive Pursuit by the Eye Compared to a Cerebellar Model of
               Pursuit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9723846

Award Number: 9723846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Kettner r-kettner@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1162      COMPUTATIONAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1178,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:  IBN - 9723846    Complex Predictive Pursuit by the Eye Compared to a 
              Cerebellar Model of  Pursuit - R. E. Kettner.   One of the most remarkable
              characteristics of all animal  life is the fluidity and coordination of
              movement that  reaches high levels in skilled athletes and dancers, but is 
              also present in everyday action. This ability is  particularly remarkable given
              the slowness of individual  neurons in the brain. The brain increases its
              effective  processing speed by performing many computations in  parallel, but
              this does not appear to remove long delays in  processing visual information.
              The problem is particularly  acute when one attempts to explain how the eye is
              able to  track a target moving rapidly along a complex trajectory  with
              essentially zero lag. If eye motion were controlled  solely by changes in the
              current location of the target, one  would expect the eye to lag the target by
              the 100 ms delay  required to process visual input. Rather, it appears that 
              the system is able to compensate for delays by predictive  control. That is, it
              predicts how the eye should move based  on highly delayed information. This
              project will conduct  experiments in monkeys to determine the limits of eye 
              movement prediction under a variety of conditions: (1)  motion along circular
              and complex trajectories when target  velocity is either constant or variable,
              (2) motion along a  circular trajectory interrupted by a right-angle change in 
              target direction at either predictable times and locations  compared with
              identical target deviations at unpredictable  times and locations, and (3)
              motion along circular and  complex trajectories when the target is briefly
              turned off.  The project will also continue the development of a 
              biologically-realistic neural-network model of predictive  eye control based on
              regions of the brain's cerebellum known  to be involved in pursuit eye
              movements. This model uses a  much larger number of internal units than other
              pursuit  models (440 input mossy fibers, 6 000 internal granule cells,  2
              Purkinje cell outputs) to generate complex predictive  pursuit. The model
              learns new trajectories in a biologically-  reasonable fashion by modifying
              granule-to-Purkinje cell  synapses using visual error signals (from climbing
              fiber  inputs). The behavioral data, neural response properties,  and
              anatomical connections are all based on experiment. Data  obtained in the above
              experiments will be used to test, and  if necessary, modify the model. In
              addition, model  performance will be compared with results from studies in 
              other laboratories. Random target motions will be tested  that can only be
              performed using visual input. New  simulations will also test how well the
              model performs when  the frequency of a learned trajectory is changed, and 
              whether the model can learn more than one trajectory at the  same time. All of
              this work should provide important  information about the role of prediction in
              motor control,  as well as increase our understanding of how brain systems 
              accomplish predictive control.
