Title       : Temporal Regulation of Gene Expression in Plant Embryogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9723755

Award Number: 9723755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mauricio M. Bustos bustos@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723755  Bustos  The VP1/ABI3 genes from angiosperm plants regulate events
              critical for late embryo and endosperm development.  Analyses of mRNA
              expression patterns in abi3 mutant seeds from  Arabidopsis thaliana have
              suggested that ABI3 activates two distinct temporal programs represented by
              maturation (MAT) and late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) genes. We have cloned an
              ABI3 homolog from the legume Phaseolus vulgaris and showed that transactivation
              is mediated by a conserved DNA motif known as the RY-repeat.  Like its monocot
              counterpart VP1, ABI3 activates transcription in both plant and yeast cells via
              an N-terminal 'acidic' domain, and interacts in vitro with general
              transcription factors TATA-binding protein (TBP) and TFIIB.  We also cloned and
              characterized two bZIP factors, ROMI and ROM2, which repress ABI3
              transactivation of promoters in the MAT class, only when bound to G-boxes
              located upstream of the transcription start site.  These factors are expressed
              at different times of embryogenesis in Phaseolus, and are closely related to
              the Arabidopsis G-box binding factors GBF1 and GBF3, respectively.  Deletion
              analysis of ROM1 has shown that a proline-rich domain near the N-terminus is
              required for repression, and that the same domain interacts with in vitro with
              TFIIB but not with TBP.  This research will focus on the temporal modulation of
              ABI3 transactivation in Arabidopsis.  Recently, we isolated five Arabidopsis
              cDNAs encoding proteins that bind specifically to ABI3 in vivo
              (ABI3-interacting-proteins, AIP1 to AIP5).  One of those, AIp4/HCF, shows
              partial homology to the human host cell factor (HCF) that regulates
              transactivation of early herpes simplex virus genes by VP16.  Specific
              objectives will be to test whether AIP4/HCF modulates AB13 transactivation.  We
              will also analyze the expression pattern and subcellular localization of
              AIP4/HCF, and characterize its ABI3-binding domains as well as the regions of
              ABI3 contacted by each AIP4/HCF.   A major point of interest will be to ascer
              tain whether AIP4/HCF functions in one of the signaling pathways for abscisic
              acid (ABA) or the state of seed hydration (desiccation).  Since the proximal
              promoters of Arabidopsis LEA genes AtEm1 and AtEm6 lack RY-repeat motifs, ABI3
              is likely to activate these promoters by a mechanism different than the one we
              found for genes in the MAT class.  Involvement of certain AIP4/HCF in
              transactivation of AtEtm6 transcription will be explored by transient
              expression and stable transformation strategies.  Finally, we will study the
              role of AIP4/HCF in embryogenesis and plant development by characterizing aip4
              T-DNA insertional mutants of Arabidopsis, and/or constructing transgenic plants
              expressing AIP4 anti-sense RNAs.  %%%  The VP1/ABI3 genes from angiosperm
              plants regulate events critical for late embryo and endosperm development. 
              Analyses of gene expression in abi3 mutant seeds from Arabidopis thaliana have
              suggested that ABI3 activates two distinct temporal programs represented by
              maturation (MAT) and late embryogenesis abundant (LEA) genes.  The central
              question addressed by this research is the mechanism(s) for temporal regulation
              of ABI3 transactivation in embryogenesis and plant development.  ***
