Title       : Genes of Nitrogen Metabolism In Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1999     
File        : a9723003

Award Number: 9723003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Reitzer reitzer@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723003  Reitzer, Lawrence J.  The immediate objectives of this research are to
              characterize the pathways of aspartate and arginine catabolism and their
              function in Escherichia coli. The regulation of the previously undescribed
              arginine succinyl transferase (AST) pathway suggested that it not only degrades
              arginine, but also other amino acids during nitrogen-limited growth. The gene
              for one AST pathway enzyme was identified, and it appears to be the first of a
              five-gene ast operon. The products of this operon will be characterized, the
              genes disrupted and overexpressed, the effects on amino acid catabolism
              determined, and the promoter characterized. If ast mutants still utilize
              arginine, the remaining pathway of arginine catabolism will be genetically
              analyzed. Preliminary results suggest that aspartate is degraded by the AST
              pathway and a previously undescribed pathway. Mutants blocked in the second
              pathway have been isolated, the lesion mapped, and complementing DNA isolated.
              The complementing DNA will be further subcloned, the genes identified, and
              their regulation analyzed.  Analysis of this region's nucleotide sequence
              suggests that it contains only one (54-dependent operon. This operon codes for
              a minor citrate synthase isozyme, which appears to be active. This citrate
              synthase has the potential to coordinate carbon and nitrogen metabolism,
              therefore, its function will be characterized, regardless of its role in
              aspartate catabolism. In summary, this research focuses on nitrogen metabolism
              - specifically, the pathways of arginine and aspartate catabolism, which appear
              to have multiple functions, possibly including the coordination of carbon and
              nitrogen metabolism. When considered within the context of the second phase of
              the E. coli genome project, the analysis of gene function, this research will
              further an understanding of metabolism in E. coli, which will provide a
              framework for the genes and metabolism of other organisms with sequenced
              genomes.    Bacteria and other living organisms c onsist primarily of carbon,
              hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. Nitrogen constitutes about 10% by weight of
              most organisms, and the rate of its acquisition from the environment frequently
              limits growth. The availability of the complete sequence of all the genes of
              some model organisms, such as Escherichia coli, permits the complete analysis
              of certain aspects of metabolism. This research analyzes the means which E.
              coli acquires and uses nitrogen from the environment. It also analyzes the
              specific tasks that are performed when certain sources of nitrogen become
              available. Such basic understanding of metabolism could suggest methods to
              harness bacterial biochemistry to perform useful tasks, such as the synthesis
              of useful chemicals, or to control bacterial growth in some situations.
