Title       : Molecular Code for Cooperative Free Energy Transduction in Human Hemoglobin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9723606

Award Number: 9723606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary K. Ackers ackers@biochem.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jo Holt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723606  Ackers  Hemoglobin (Hb) has long served as a prototype for
              understanding mechanisms of allosteric regulation.  However, the great majority
              of structural and functional data has been limited to the fully-oxygenated or
              deoxygenated end-states, and to the functional properties that are averaged
              among the 8 intermediates along the ligation pathway.  Cooperativity
              contributions by these intermediates using three O2 analogs that were known to
              drive the quaternary structural transition (T ( R) which accompanies
              oxygenation have been determined.  For each analog system, the free energy
              contributions to cooperativity by the 8 intermediates followed a common
              thermodynamic partition function that was also consistent with global O2
              binding properties of the native molecule. A molecular code was deduced from
              other analog systems, and strongly reinforced the findings: (a) the Hb tetramer
              functions as a three-state molecular switch to control O2 affinity; (b)
              cooperativity follows the specific combinations of ligated vs. unligated
              subunits and not solely the number of sites occupied.  A combination of
              techniques, including quantitative low-temperature isoelectric focusing,
              analytical gel permeation chromatography, stopped-flow kinetics, haptoglobin
              kinetics and high-precision O2 binding will be employed.  Mutational mapping of
              the dimer-dimer interface will be conducted to assign quaternary structures of
              key species.    This new stage of the research will provide the first
              unequivocal delineation of the roles played by the intermediates of all
              reaction sequences in the binding cascade of native HbO2 under conditions where
              they are simultaneously regulated by native heterotropic effectors.  The new
              understanding of allosteric behavior that is being developed under this program
              will provide a framework for the more detailed structural and dynamic analyses
              that will eventually comprise an ultimate understanding of the hemoglobin
              mechanism.  Moreover, the general strategy developed for this problem should 
              also be applicable to the 'functional codes" of other protein assemblies that
              are regulated by mulltiple states of ligand binding.  ***
