Title       : Adhesion/Recognition Molecule Contactin in Neural Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a9723934

Award Number: 9723934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harald E. Vaessin                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Ranscht   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Burnham Institute
	      10901 No. Torrey Pines Road
	      LaJolla, CA  92037    629/455-0181

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    IBN-9723934  RANSCHT     Brain function critically depends on the
              wiring of nerve fibers into a complex neuronal network.  This network is
              established during embryonic development as neurons extend processes, called
              axons, that carry on their distal tip a mobile structure, the growth cone.  The
              growth cones of each neuron type sense cues in their cellular environment to
              navigate to, recognize and form functional contacts with specific target cells,
              such as other neurons or effector organs such as muscle, glands or skin.  In
              order to recognize the guidance cues in their environment and seek out the
              proper cells to contact, growth cones explore their surroundings with an array
              of molecular sensors.  Contactin, a cell adhesion/recognition molecule
              discovered by Dr. Ranscht, is one of the molecular sensors exposed on the
              growth cone surface and is therefore a strong candidate to mediate growth cone
              recognition.  To test the function of contactin in the establishment of axon
              connections in developing embryos, Dr. Ranscht's laboratory has recently
              generated contactin-deficient mice by manipulating the mouse genome.  In
              support of the hypothesis that contactin is required for the formation of
              neuronal circuitry, the mutant mice show neurological defects:  Their movements
              are severely uncoordinated and characteristic of those of patients diagnosed
              with ataxia.  The mutant animals die shortly after birth.  As the phenotype of
              contactin mutant mice is indicative of defects in neuronal circuits controlling
              motor behavior, Dr. Ranscht will produce a detail map of contactin distribution
              in brain areas controlling and modulating motor functions.  Specifically, she
              will identify the neuron populations that use contactin for axonal pathfinding
              and clarify which of the identified contactin-binding proteins are distributed
              in the surroundings of contactin-positive neurons.  To understand which
              molecular interactions are disrupted in the contactin mutant mice, the
              distribution and expression levels of  contactin-binding proteins will also be
              examined in these mutants.  Results from this project will contribute to
              understanding the role of contactin and its molecular interactions in neuronal
              circuits controlling motor functions.
