Title       : Molecular Organization in Mutable Collagenous Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9723260

Award Number: 9723260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Trotter jtrotter@salud.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U New Mexico Hlth Sci Ctr
	      HSSB - 102
	      Albuquerque, NM  871315041    505/272-6264

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sea cucumbers and other echinoderms have evolved the unique capacity to modulate
              on a physiological time scale the mechanical properties of their connective
              tissues.  This mechanical modulation is accomplished by neurally regulated
              secretions of cells located within the tissues.  The secreted molecules lead to
              either an increase or a decrease in the mechanical interactions between
              collagen fibrils.  The PI has isolated and characterized native collagen
              fibrils from sea cucumbers, and have identified two macromolecules from the
              same source that cause the fibrils to aggregate ("stiparin") and that inhibit
              aggregation ("stiparin inhibitor").  In addition, the PI has isolated two
              additional macromolecules that cause the tissue to become stiff ("stiffener")
              or plastic ("plasticizer").  The PI's hypotheses are that fibril-aggregation in
              vitro is the test-tube equivalent of tissue stiffening in vivo; that stiffener
              and plasticizer cause their effects through their interactions with stiparin
              and stiparin inhibitor; and that plasticizer and stiffener are localized in
              different secretory cells within the tissue.  The experimental approach uses
              biochemical, physiological and structural analyses.  The ultimate goal is to
              recreate in the test tube, using characterized macromolecules, the same
              modulations of fibril interactions that occur in the tissues.
