Title       : RUI: Genetic and Biochemical Analysis of the TraM Protein, an Inhibitory
               Component of the Agrobacterium tumefaciens Quorum-Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9723837

Award Number: 9723837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247009             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Fuqua   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Fuqua  9723837  Bacteria monitor and respond rapidly to changes in the physical
              and chemical character of their environment. It is now clear that many bacteria
              also have evolved mechanisms by which they measure their own population growth,
              a phenomenon generally described as quorum sensing. A wide range of bacteria,
              often pathogens or symbionts of animals or plants, monitor cell density by
              production and perception of a diffusible bacterial pheromone, an acylated
              homoserine lactone called an autoinducer (AI). The plant pathogen Agrobacterium
              tumefaciens regulates conjugal transfer of its primary virulence factor, the Ti
              (tumor-inducing) plasmid, in response to such an acylated homoserine lactone
              cell density signal. This project is directed towards understanding the
              mechanism of AI-mediated quorum sensing in A. tumefaciens, with the long term
              aim of applying this knowledge towards disrupting or manipulating cell
              density-dependent processes in the diverse and rapidly expanding collection of
              bacteria that employ autoinducers and quorum sensing.  At high cell densities
              A. tumefaciens conjugally transfer the Ti plasmid to recipient agrobacteria.
              Cell density-dependence of Ti plasmid conjugation is mediated by a LuxI-LuxR
              type quorum-sensor and the Agrobacterium autoinducer (AAI),
              N-3-oxo(octanoyl)-L-homoserine lactone. The A. tumefaciens quorum-sensor
              consists of the AAI synthase TraI and the AAI-responsive transcriptional
              activator of Ti plasmid conjugal transfer (tra) genes, TraR. However, in
              contrast to the V. fischeri system, A. tumefaciens cell density responsiveness
              requires an additional regulatory protein called TraM. Tram is an integral
              component of the A. tumefaciens quorum sensor and strains carrying null
              mutations in tram conjugate irrespective of donor density. Tram inhibits
              transcriptional activation of TraR-dependent target genes. Preliminary genetic
              evidence suggests that Tram may interfere with the ability of TraR to interact
              with AAI, the tra gene target promoters, or both.  The go al of this research
              is to understand the role of TraM as a component of the A. tumefaciens quorum
              sensor-specifically how TraM inhibits activation of TraR-dependent target
              genes. Using complementary genetic and biochemical approaches it will be
              determined whether (i) TraM occludes tra promoters from TraR, (ii) degrades
              and/or sequesters AAI, or (iii) physically associates with TraR thereby
              limiting its activity. A related area that is being investigated is the
              regulation of traM expression, and the importance of this regulation for
              control of Ti plasmid conjugal transfer.  In dissecting the TraM mechanism of
              action, insights will be gained into the function of TraR itself, and by
              extension other LuxR-type proteins. Understanding the inhibitory function of
              TraM may provide models for modulating the activity of LuxR-type  proteins in
              general. In a broader sense, this study will contribute to the understanding of
              multicellular behavior in prokaryotic organisms as well as the areas of signal
              transduction and transciptional regulation..
