Title       : What Drives the Group Size Effect in Ant-Predator Vigilance?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9723437

Award Number: 9723437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Lima lslima@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter A. Bednekoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9723437  Lima  This research is directed at a new understanding of a  widespread
               behavioral phenomenon: the vigilance group size effect, in  which 
              socially-feeding animals engage in less vigilance  (alertness) with  an
              increase in group size.  Despite the fact that this is  one of the most well 
              established results in the study of animal behavior, many  important issues
              remain unaddressed and even unrecognized.  The  proposed experiments are
              designed to help remedy this  situation, and in doing so, will shed light on
              the reasons  why so  many types of animals are social in the first place.  The 
              proposed  research focuses first on an assumption fundamental to all 
              explanations  of the group size effect: that an animal cannot detect  predators
               while it is actively feeding with its head down.  Recent  work  suggests that
              apparently non-vigilant (feeding) birds can  detect  approaching predator
              attacks at a considerable distance.  A  main goal is thus to characterize this
              ability in birds (as  represented by the dark-eyed junco, Junco hyemalis) under
               realistic situations, and then explore its consequences for  the  group size
              effect itself.  This proposed work will determine  whether the group size
              effect represents a previously  unrecognized interaction between poor quality
              vigilance  (while  actually feeding), and high quality vigilance (while overtly
               alert).  The proposed research also explores two unorthodox  explanations for
              the group size effect.  The first is based  on  theoretical developments which
              suggest that the group size  effect  occurs only because group sizes change
              frequently over time  (as  animals come and go from the group).  This idea will
              be  tested by  allowing captive juncos to feed in constant group sizes or  in 
              groups that vary over time.  If the new theory is correct,  only  those birds
              experiencing the variable group sizes should  exhibit  the basic group size
              effect.  The second unorthodox  explanation  for the group size effect concerns
              the effect of competition   for  food on vigilance.  This view does not deny
              that animals are  vigilant for predators, but maintains that they decrease 
              their  vigilance in larger groups because competition for food is  more 
              intense as group size increases.  If this view is correct,  then  the group
              size effect should be much more pronounced when  animals  are feeding on a
              limited food supply; this prediction will  be  tested in flocks of house
              finches (Carpodacus mexicanus).  Results  from this research will allow a
              better understanding of  group behavior  and the evolution of sociality.
