Title       : Regulation and Function of Genes Expressed in the Accessory Gland of Drosopnhila
               Melanogaster Males
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1999      
File        : a9723356

Award Number: 9723356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mariana F. Wolfner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Goldberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wolfner  97-23356        When animals mate, receipt of seminal fluid from the
              male often triggers changes in the female that influence fertility. This is
              particularly well-documented in insects. In D. melanogaster, post-mating
              changes in the female include the stimulation of egg-laying and sperm storage,
              a decrease in the female's lifespan, and a decrease in a female's receptivity
              to subsequent mating Most of these changes are caused by secreted products of
              the male's accessory gland.  To how understand how accessory gland products
              (Acps) cause these changes in mated females, Dr. Wolfner will define the
              targets and modes of action of three Acps that she has shown to be important in
               postmating responses:    1. For Acp26Aa, a prohormone-like protein that
              stimulates egg-laying in mated female, she will use germline transformation
              rescue and ectopic expression assays to determine how proteolytic processing,
              and particular amino acid regions, mediate its activity.  She will use
              biochemical and genetic approaches to determine whether Acp26Aa acts directly
              on reproductive tract targets or indirectly via neuroendocrine targets reached
              from the circulatory systems.    2. The glycoprotein Acp36DE is the first
              molecule having a genetically  -proven and -manipulatable  role in the
              widespread and important process of sperm storage.  She will define functional
              domains  of Acp36DE and determine whether Acp36DE's action depends on its
              demonstrated ability to  simultaneously bind to sperm and to cells in the
              female genital tract.    3.  She will use genetic and transgenic methods to
              determine the post-mating effects on lifespan and fertility of Acp62F, a new
              Acp with strong sequence similarity to a neurotoxin that affects sodium
              channels.  She will also determine whether Acp62F affects sodium channels in
              neuromuscular preparations.    In addition, she will continue to characterize
              nine other Acps in our collection to identify those with important functions,
              for future study. Understanding the triggers of post-m ating changes at the
              molecular level addresses important developmental questions about hormone
              action, reproductive physiology, behavior and fertility (including related
              evolutionary questions). In the long-term, it may provide information useful in
              designing biological pest controls.
