Title       : Development of a Computerized Metabolic Map
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9723709

Award Number: 9723709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $455761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond S. Ochs oray@worldnet.alt.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bill Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James V. Vorbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint John's University
	      8000 Utopia Parkway
	      Jamaica, NY  11439    718/990-6236

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will develop a World Wide Web site and  database that will
              allow users to view and analyze metabolic  pathways.  It will be developed from
              their existing stand  alone system which allows pathway selection, display, and
               assignment of reactions to different biological species.  Their prototype Web
              site (http://pathways.stjohns.edu)  allows viewing and editing biochemical
              reactions. Beyond  incorporating all features from the stand-alone system into 
              the new Web site, proposed extensions will provide new  database and pathway
              analysis tools. The investigators will  implement several new features such as
              variable hierarchies,  a resolution of the polymer problem, and generalized 
              compound classifications. Moreover, they will establish  mathematical analysis
              modules for constructed metabolic  pathways; these modules will allow the Web
              site users to  employ Metabolic Control Analysis as well as standard enzyme 
              kinetics calculations. In research concerning uncertain  pathways, the
              Metabolic Control Analysis module will analyze  for the possibility of
              branching, for channeling, and for  moietyconserved cycles (e.g., NAD/NADH). 
              This work will serve three communities:  1  the experimenter  who may not be
              expert in the analysis itself, or who may be  interested in a different pathway
              than the one that is  usually under consideration;  2  the theoretician who
              wishes  to verify hypotheses rapidly beyond pencil and paper  calculations and
              to study much larger pathways, thereby  leading to more critical thinking about
              metabolic  regulation; and  3  the student who would not be able to use  such
              analyses in the absence of an established and easily  accessed system. User
              interaction will include construction  of the pathway, updating the database,
              and a forum for  discussion with other users. It will be possible to conduct 
              many separate analyses on the pathways, using either  existing data that may be
              found within the system, or data  provided by the user.  The graphical
              presentation of the  pathways as well as the  results of the mathematical
              analysis will greatly benefit  both theoreticians and experimental scientists,
              expanding  their scientific intuition as unforeseen possibilities are 
              rigorously examined within the framework of metabolic  pathways. The graphical
              display of chemical structures of  metabolites (e.g., substrates, cofactors,
              and inhibitors)  will allow atom-by-atom isotopic tracing.       The
              applications of the proposed database and WWW site  to biochemical education
              are manifold. Within a formal  classroom structure, students of many biological
              disciplines  may generate or access important known metabolic pathways. 
              Students may also extend their knowledge of metabolism  through independent
              study on the Web site, whether by  verifying laboratory data for known pathways
              or by  investigating hypothetical pathways. It is conceivable that  textbooks
              in Metabolic Control Analysis may be written,  utilizing this Web site as an
              instructional module.
