Title       : Interpreting Optical Signals from the DNA Fluorescence Probe2-Aminopurine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9723278

Award Number: 9723278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Nordlund nordlund@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723278  Nordlund  Optical spectroscopy of the high-fluorescence nucleotide, 2AP
              (2-aminopurine), is a relatively new biochemical tool for monitoring  DNA
              conformation, DNA-protein binding and photophysical processes in DNA.
              Absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy, with 2AP replacing specific adenines,
              can provide site-specific, detailed structural information, with Raman
              spectroscopy poised to give even more.  2AP is sensitive to H-bonding, water
              exposure, molecular motion, protein binding, DNA unwinding and DNA melting and
              premelting transitions.  Intrastrand interaction between 2AP and other bases
              results in new bands which distinguish A and G bases from each other and from C
              and T.  Efficiency and sequence dependence of energy transfer in DNA can be
              measured; identification of an anomalous nearest-neighbor interaction between G
              and 2AP, protein binding to particular DNA bases and other detailed
              characterizations can be done.  What is now needed is to organize and interpret
              the variety of observations into a guide by which a researcher can plan a
              simple set of experiments to convincingly answer structural questions.  The
              central objective of this work is to assemble a set of major questions of DNA
              structure and interactions which can readily be answered by 2AP optical methods
              and further, to determine the best spectroscopic approach.  The systems to
              which the method will be applied: oligonucleotides and complexes with Eco  RI
              endonuclease, CAP and/or T7 RNA polymerase.    Interaction of DNA with proteins
              and other cellular components lies at the heart of all reproduction and
              adaption of organisms to the environment.  Once believed to exist only in two
              forms, either the highly uniform Watson-Crick double helix or a disordered
              random coil, it is now clear that DNA forms a large variety of overall
              structures, with local DNA irregularities playing a central role in signaling
              and guiding the "traffic flow" of proteins as they bind and translate DNA
              information into cellular activity.  Well-develo ped methods such as x-rays
              crystallography and magnetic resonance (NMR) can characterize these local
              structures in detail, but at great cost of equipment, time and quantity of
              sample.  This project will develop a guide to the use of a new optical method
              for quantitating local and overall DNA structural changes.  The structure will
              not be determined in as great a detail as with x-ray or NMR, but clear
              advantages will be gained in sensitivity, cost, time and needed equipment.  The
              approach is to insert a modified structural component into the DNA, which will
              emit characteristic, structure-and environment-sensitive fluorescent light when
              excited with a laser or other light beam.  ***
