Title       : Collaborative project: Coat Protein-Whitefly Protein Interactions Necessary for
               Geminivirus Transmission.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9723744

Award Number: 9723744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250948             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Bisaro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Bisaro   9723744  The subgroup lII geminiviruses (Geminiviridae) are
              transmitted by a single species of whitefly, Bemisia tabaci, in a persistent,
              circulative fashion. The transmission pathway requires that virions, taken up
              during insect feeding along with plant sap, enter the insect gut and cross the
              hindgut epithelium into the hemocoel. Virions then pass through the hemocoel in
              the hemolymph, and must traverse both the basal lamina and plasmalemma of the
              accessory salivary gland secretory cells to reach the salivary canal.
              Transmission to the host plant phloem occurs through saliva delivered by the
              stylet. This complex journey through the vector demands that virions be taken
              up and released by insect cells, and that several transmission barriers be
              crossed. Each of these barriers involves a specific interaction between viral
              coat protein (CP) and whitefly proteins (transmission factors/receptors). At
              this time, CP sequences that participate in key recognition events have not
              been identified, and there is no information concerning whitefly proteins
              involved in transmission.  In a collaborative project with Dr. Judith Brown of
              the University of Arizona, a powerful combination of molecular biology,
              biochemistry, and yeast genetics will be employed to address these questions.
              In addition, a novel and sensitive PCR-based bioassay for monitoring virus
              acquisition and transmission by the whitefly will be used.  The specific
              objectives of this research are:  1. To identify specific amino acids in
              geminivirus CP that are necessary for whitefly-mediated transmission. These
              studies will employ the transmissible squash leaf curl virus (SqLCV) and the
              non-transmissible Abutilon mosaic virus (AbMV). Defined sequence exchanges and
              amino acid substitutions will be introduced into the AbMV CP gene in an effort
              to restore transmissibility (gain of function), and into the SqLCV CP gene to
              abolish transmissibility (loss of function). These experiments should identify
              CP amino acids involved in transmission, an d in particular those responsible
              for the loss of AbMV transmissibility.  2. To identify whitefly-encoded cDNAs
              specifying proteins which interact with geminivirus CP to potentiate virus
              acquisition and transmission. The yeast two-hybrid system and expression
              cloning in COS cells will be used to identify cDNAs encoding whitefly proteins
              capable of interacting with geminivirus CP. Genetic analysis will be carried
              out to identify CP domains involved in specific whitefly protein interactions,
              and to examine the relevance of the interactions to transmission.
              Immunolocalization of interacting whitefly proteins will also be performed as a
              prelude to functional analysis.  The whitefly-transmitted (WFT) geminiviruses
              (Geminiviridae; subgroup III) are important pathogens of vegetable and fiber
              crops. The dissemination of these pathogens through agroecosystems depends on
              three interacting components: the geminivirus pathogen, the whitefly vector,
              and plant species that serve as hosts for both the virus and the vector. In
              this project experiments are described which are designed to extend the current
              understanding of the molecular mechanisms of transmission, and the molecular
              basis of transmission specificity. Defining the molecular mechanisms of
              geminivirus transmission by whiteflies has broad implications for understanding
              the interactions that occur between biological vectors and vector-borne
              pathogens and animals and plants, which in most cases are poorly studied.
