Title       : Post-Transcriptional Regulation of Cholinergic Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9723216

Award Number: 9723216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Toshihiro Kitamoto tkitamot@coh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beckman Res Inst Cty Hope
	      1500 E. Duarte Road
	      Duarte, CA  910103000    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9723216  Post-transcriptional regulation of the  Drosophila cholinergic
              genes   PI: Toshihiro Kitamoto         Neurons use a variety of molecules as 
              neurotransmitters to communicate with their target cells.  Specification of
              particular neurotransmitter phenotypes  (enzymes required for transmitter
              synthesis and release) is  a  fundamental process for orderly construction and 
              operation of neural  circuits, and requires coordinated  expression of a
              particular set of  neurotransmitter-specific  genes.  The objective of this
              proposed  research is to  understand the regulatory mechanism for two
              cholinergic  neuron-specific genes, encoding choline acetyltransferase  (ChAT)
              for  biosynthesis of acetylcholine and vesicular  acetylcholine transporter  
              (VAChT) for packaging  acetylcholine into synaptic vesicles.  It has  recently
              been  demonstrated that the ChAT and VAChT genes are organized  into a
              "cholinergic" locus where the latter gene is nested  within the  former.  This
              unique organization of the  cholinergic locus, conserved  among distantly
              related  species, suggests that novel  post-transcriptional  mechanisms are
              involved in coordinated regulation of these  two genes.  The project will thus
              specifically focus on mRNA  processing and translation mechanisms of the ChAT
              and VAChT  genes using Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism.  First,
              transgenic animals  that carry appropriate reporter  genes will be created
              using P-element mediated  transformation technology available for Drosophila. 
              The  mechanisms for ChAT and VAChT production will be  investigated by 
              qualitative and quantitative analyses of  reporter gene expression in  the
              nervous system of the  transformants.  Second, Drosophila VAChT mutants will be
               isolated and their phenotypes will be carefully  characterized.  VAChT mutants
              together with already  available ChAT  mutants will be used to examine the
              effects  of altered acetylcholine metabolism on regulation of the  cholinergic
              genes.  The proposed  research using molecu lar  and classical genetics will
              provide a clearer  picture of  interesting new mechanisms regulating
              coordinated expression  of the two cholinergic genes.
