Title       : Studies of the Plant Cyanide-Resistant Alternative Oxidase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9723197

Award Number: 9723197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Siedow jsiedow@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Siedow  The cyanide-resistant "alternative" oxidase of plant mitochondria
              catalyzes the reduction of oxygen to water using electrons derived from the
              mitochondrial ubiquinone pool. No energy is conserved in this reaction, and
              thus the function of the alternative oxidase in plant metabolism has been
              puzzling. Much progress has recently been made in discovering how the activity
              of the enzyme is regulated in mitochondria. The alternative oxidase has been
              shown to be dimeric, and its activity is decreased when the two monomers are
              connected by a disulfide bridge. When this disulfide pair is reduced, the
              enzyme becomes more active and is able to be stimulated by (-keto acids. The
              site of action of (-keto acids is likely to be at a sulfhydryl residue, also.
              Study of the mechanisms of regulation in conjunction with sequence analysis,
              have provided clues to important structural features of the enzyme. The
              alternative oxidase is predicted to have a diiron catalytic site, and various
              residues that may be involved in binding the ubiquinone substrate have been
              identified. This research project will continue investigation into the nature
              of the regulatory and structural features of the oxidase. Because Escherichia
              coli cells grown in cyanide will functionally express the plant alternative
              oxidase, this bacterial system offers a convenient way to observe the effects
              of various mutations introduced into the alternative oxidase protein.
              Site-directed mutations in the cysteines believed to be involved in the
              redox-sensitive disulfide/sulfhydryl system and interaction with (-keto acids,
              respectively, will be examined to confirm the function of these residues. Also,
              a random mutagenesis approach coupled with selection on inhibitors that are
              presumed to act at the quinol oxidation site will be used to uncover residues
              involved in quinone binding. To verify the presence of a diiron catalytic site
              in the alternative oxidase, the protein will be purified from plant
              mitochondria and used in spectroscopic studies. Final ly, the alternative
              oxidase from fungi will be studied to determine the presence or absence of the
              regulatory features described for plants.    Although the "alternative oxidase"
              of plants occurs in the mitochondria where cellular energy is normally
              produced, the reaction it catalyzes actually wastes some of this energy.
              Consequently, the alternative oxidase would appear to be harmful to the plant,
              and its activity might be expected to decrease plant productivity. However, the
              fact that all plants have this enzyme implies that the alternative oxidase is
              important to plant survival, and evidence has pointed to a role for the oxidase
              in plant responses to a wide range of biological and abiological stresses.
              Better characterization of how alternative oxidase activity is regulated will
              help in understanding the role the alternative oxidase plays in plant
              metabolism, and may eventually lead to greater plant productivity for
              agriculturally important crops.
