Title       : Regulation of Myosin Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9723922

Award Number: 9723922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry F. Epstein hepstein@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723922  Epstein     The central focus of the proposed project is to
              characterize the molecular interactions of P28,  a protein associated with the
              cores of muscle thick filaments in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. A key
              hypothesis for the functions of P28 is that it acts as a "paramyosin coupling
              protein;" that is, that P28 binds to and cross-links paramyosin
              stoichiometrically during thick filament assembly and in the final structure. 
              Paramyosin is the homologue of myosin heavy chain rod domains and is the major
              protein of the thick filament cores in C. elegans and many other invertebrates.
               Myosin and paramyosin are members of the superfamily of coiled-coil proteins
              which includes cytoskeletal myosin II motors, intermediate filament proteins,
              and nuclear lamins.  Understanding the interactions among these proteins may
              serve as a model for functionally analogous interactions with structurally
              homologous myosin rods in vertebrate thick filament assembly and structure. 
              The following Specific Aims will be pursued in order to accomplish these
              objectives:  1, to establish the functional significance of P29 in vivo,
              deletions will be induced in the chromosomal locus encoding this protein and
              will be detected in genomic DNA from mutagenized nematode clones by PCR-based
              screening methods.  The new alleles will be characterized genetically, and the
              mutant phenotypes will be examined.  In order to establish possible broader
              significance, searches in vertebrates and other invertebrates for genomic DNA
              and cDNA sequences homologous to P28 will be performed in future experiments. 
              2, to localize P28 protein within the thick filaments of C. elegans body-wall
              muscles by immunofluorescence and immuno-electron microscopy in wild-type and
              specific mutant strains.  3, to analyze the interactions of recombinant P28
              protein with purified paramyosin and myosin in vitro in terms of binding,
              dynamics of assembly, and structural properties of the in vitro assemblies. 
              The successful accomplishment of these goal s will advance our understanding of
              the structure and assembly of thick filaments.    The subcellular machinery of
              muscle cells that allows them to carry out their contractile function consists
              of two sets of complex filaments, termed thick and thin filaments, which are
              arranged in parallel arrays within a larger structure termed the myofibril.  In
              fully "relaxed" muscles, these parallel arrays only partially overlap each
              other  Contraction occurs when the thick and thin filaments slide over each
              other in a coordinated manner to increase the extent of overlap, thereby
              shortening the myofibrils (and thus shortening the cell), a process which
              requires hydrolysis of ATP.  The "motor" which transduces the energy of
              hydrolysis of ATP into movement is myosin, the major component of the thick
              filaments.  In order to fully understand how muscle cells function, it is
              necessary to understand the fine molecular structure of the myofibril. 
              Recently, a new protein, termed P28, has been discovered as a component of
              thick filaments in a model invertebrate, the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.  
              This project will explore the role that this newly-discovered thick filament
              protein plays in the assembly and function of myofibrils, and will undoubtedly
              lead to new insights into those processes.   ***
