Title       : Non-catalytic Neurotrophin Receptor Expression and Function During Embryonic
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9723990

Award Number: 9723990
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esther F. Wheeler ewheeler@lonestar.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9723990    PI:  WHEELER  The developing nervous system is dependent on many
              regulatory signals to insure that the different parts of the body will become
              well integrated with the central nervous system.  Neurons that develop in the
              central nervous system, or in its associated ganglia in the peripheral nervous
              system, must send out long processes, called axons, that grow into a "target
              tissue" such as the face, hand or nasal passages.  The growth of axons into
              target tissues is dependent on certain molecular signals that serve as guidance
              cues.  The molecular signals that will be studied in this project, called
              neurotrophins, foster the growth and survival of growing neurons.  Previous
              research suggests that the availability of neurotrophins, which are made by
              target tissues, is a factor that determines whether subpopulations of
              developing neurons survive, and also whether they establish appropriate
              attachments to their target tissues.  The production of neurotrophins by target
              tissues is limited in both time and quantity, and their concentration is
              believed to directly influence the successful innervation of designated
              targets.  Dr. Wheeler and her colleagues will investigate the time of
              expression and the levels of a class of receptor molecules (the "non-catalytic"
              neurotrophin receptors) that potentially bind and sequester the neurotrophins
              to prevent axons from becoming misdirected and establishing connections with
              inappropriate targets.  The researchers will also test whether the ability of
              these receptors to sequester neurotrophins promotes the death of certain neuron
              populations, using the neurons that innervate the face and nasal passages of
              rodents as their test system.  The results of this research will provide
              important insights into the causes and consequences of precise control of
              neurotrophin availability during development, when axons are growing into their
              target tissues.
