Title       : Mutational Analysis of Photosystem I Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a9723001

Award Number: 9723001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Myers ammyers@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Parag R. Chitnis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723001  Chitnis  1. Technical  Photosystem I, the light-driven
              plastocyanin-ferredoxin oxidoreductase, is a heteromultimeric pigment-protein
              complex in the photosynthetic membranes of cyanobacteria and chloroplasts.
              Based on X-ray crystallographic, spectroscopic and genomic information, the
              investigator proposes to characterize molecular recognition during interprotein
              electron transfer and binding of quinone cofactors by photosystem I proteins.
              On the reducing side of photosystem I, PsaD is essential for docking of
              ferredoxin. Using molecular genetics and protein chemistry, the investigator
              has identified basic residues that are exposed on the ferredoxin-interacting
              surface of PsaD. He will use site-directed mutagenesis and biochemical studies
              to examine the role of these basic residues in interaction with ferredoxin.
              Photosystem I contains two phylloquinone molecules, one of which serves as the
              redox center A1 which transfers electrons from the A0 chlorophyll a to the FX
              iron-sulfur cluster. Based on the available structural and spectroscopic
              information, the investigator proposes that the conserved YW sequences  in the
              last stromal loop of the PsaA and PsaB proteins are essential components of the
              phylloquinone-binding sites. Mutations in these residues will be generated to
              identify the A1 binding subunit. The investigator will manipulate the
              phylloquinone biosynthetic pathway using molecular genetics. He will delete the
              menB gene that encodes naphtholate synthase. The resulting mutants will be used
              to examine phylloquinone in vivo  2.  Non Technical  Electron transfer
              reactions are crucial steps in photosynthesis, respiration, and many other
              biochemical pathways. Energy generation in a cell is dependent on electron
              transfer across membranes. The investigator will study the molecular basis of
              protein interactions and function during photosynthetic electron transfer. This
              research will attempt to unravel the mechanisms of efficient capture of light
              energy and its storage by living systems. Ox ygenic photosynthesis in plants,
              algae and cyanobacteria is the major source of biological energy and oxygen on
              the earth. The investigator's work will increase the knowledge of
              photosynthesis and will provide information that can potentially be used for
              genetic manipulation photosynthesis in crop plants
