Title       : RUI: Early Stages in Levivirus Infection of Caulobacter Crescentus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1997    
File        : a9723157

Award Number: 9723157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne S. Poindexter jpoindexter@barnard.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9723157  Poindexter    The objectives of the proposed studies are to identify
              cell components of the Gram-negative bacterium Caulobacter crescentus that
              participate in the entry of spherical ssRNA viruses (Leviviridae
              bacteriophages) into susceptible cells.  The investigation will examine the
              hypothesis that pilin, in association with a specific outer membrane (OM)
              protein, provides adsorption sites for infecting virions, that
              lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or a protein(s) of the OM effect uncoating of the
              virion, and that the liberated viral RNA penetrates to the cytoplasm through
              OM-cytoplasmic membrane adhesion zones.    To test this hypothesis with respect
              to adsorption and uncoating, a battery of phage-resistant mutant clones of the
              bacterium will be isolated and characterized with respect to their respective
              abilities to adsorb virions, to uncoat them so that viral NA is freed and
              becomes infectious for spheroplasts of susceptible cells, and themselves to be
              penetrated by viral RNA when converted to spheroplasts.  The mutants will be
              employed in comparative studies of protein and LPS components of cell envelopes
              prepared from susceptible and from resistant C. crescentus cells.  In a
              separate type of experiment, the influence on phage infectibility of various
              levels of plasmolysis, which disrupts adhesion zones, will be determined with
              phage-susceptible strains.    Leviviruses share a greater number of genetic and
              structural properties with certain plant and animal viruses than do any other
              bacteriophages.  It is anticipated that elucidation of the role of the cell in
              the entry of this type of bacteriophage will reveal further similarities among
              ssRNA viruses and thereby enhance both the understanding of infection by such
              viruses in diverse cell types, and the usefulness of Levivirus infections as
              prokaryotic experimental models of these infections in eukaryotic systems.  The
              results may also provide evidence of adhesion zones as a path for entry of
              exogenous nucleic acid into Gram-negative bacte ria, with implications for both
              transformation and conjugative transfer of genetic material.  Because phage
              receptors appear only transiently in the cell cycle of C. crescentus,
              identification of participants in phage entry could further eludidate the
              reorganization of the cell envelope that occurs during this unique,
              endogenously-regulated prokaryotic cellular differentiation.    Lay abstract: 
              This project addresses the question of how bacterial viruses (bacteriophages)
              infect susceptible host bacterial cells  The entry of viruses into
              Gram-negative bacteria is a formidable biological challenge, since these
              bacteria are surrounded not only by a plasma membrane but also by a rigid cell
              wall and an outer membrane.  The studies will proceed as projects conducted by
              undergraduate student-scientists and will provide for them a technically
              diverse and sophisticated, but intellectually accessible and stimulating
              introduction to experimental cell biology.  ***
