Title       : Blue Light Photoreception and Guard Cell Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9723605

Award Number: 9723605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eduardo Zeiger zieger@lbes.medsch.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723605  Zeiger    This research proposal focuses on blue light perception and
              transduction in guard cells, and its role in   stomatal function.  Guard cells
              sense internal and external signals in the leaf environment and integrate  
              them into regulated stomatal apertures that control leaf gas exchange.  The
              blue light response of guard   cells belongs to a large family of blue light
              responses which are central to plant adaptations and   acclimations to their
              environment. The identity of the chromophore(s) mediating blue light sensing in
                higher plants remains unknown.  Recent work with hy4 and nph1, two
              Arabidopsis mutants for blue light-  dependent inhibition of stem elongation
              and phototropism, has provided evidence for a flavoprotein   mediating blue
              light photoreception.  Both mutants however are reported to have normal
              stomatal   responses to blue light, indicating that guard cells might have a
              distinct blue light photoreceptor.  Recent studies have identified the
              carotenoid, zeaxanthin, as a  putative blue light photoreceptor in guard  
              cells.  The blue light sensitivity of guard cells increases with their
              zeaxanthin content, and inhibition of   zeaxanthin formation by dithiothreitol
              (DTT), inhibits blue light-dependent stomatal opening, without   altering
              opening stimulated by guard cell photosynthesis.. In the proposed experiments,
              the blue light   responses of guard cells from wild type Arabidopsis leaves
              will be characterized, and compared with that   of the zeaxanthin-less mutant,
              npq1.  This mutant has a defective violaxanthin de-epoxidase and is unable   to
              accumulate zeaxanthin.  Since the de-epoxidase gene appears to be a single copy
              gene, it is anticipated   that npq1 guard cells will also lack zeaxanthin.  We
              have recently confirmed that guard cells from npq1   are devoid of zeaxanthin.
              Gas exchange experiments with intact wild type and npq1 leaves will be used to 
               establish whether Arabidopsis stomata have a typical response to blue light
              and whether the response has   been  altered by the lack of zeaxanthin in npq1.
               Guard cells in enzymatically cleaned epidermis will be   used to study the
              stomatal response to blue light in isolated guard cells.  Initial experiments
              have just   shown that npq1 guard cells fail to open in response to blue light
              under a red light background. If detailed   studies support this initial
              funding,  the mutant will be used to test whether the inhibitor of zeaxanthin  
              formation, DTT can mimic the genetic lesion in npq1. Other experiments will
              investigate a possible role   of Ca2+ as a second  messenger transducing blue
              light sensing at the guard cell chloroplast to a H+   ATPase at the guard cell
              plasma membrane.  Patch clamp experiments in the whole cell configuration will 
               be used to measure blue light-induced electrical currents at the guard cell
              plasma membrane, over a range   of intracellular Ca2+ concentrations shown to
              alter proton pumping activity in guard cells.  Isolated guard   cell
              chloroplasts will be used to test whether blue light elicits Ca2+ fluxes across
              the chloroplast envelope   that could account for in vivo changes in cytosolic 
              Ca2+ concentrations.  We will also investigate   whether transgenic Arabidopsis
              plants expressing the Ca2+ indicator, aequorin, can be used to   characterize
              Ca2+ fluxes between the chloroplast and the cytosol. The proposed research has
              significant   potential for the conclusive identification of a blue light
              photoreceptor in guard cells and a mutant for   stomatal responses to blue
              light, and for the detailed characterization of the sensory transducing cascade
                of an important blue light response.    Plants perceive light in several
              wavelengths that control growth, orientation and development. Blue light  
              perception and how it is signaled to mediate downstream effects has been a
              controversy. At the heart of   the controversy is what pigment absorbs the
              perceived light and transmits the information downstream.   Dr. Zeiger has
              obtained mutants of the pigment zeaxanthin synthesis and the mu tants exhibit
              effects that   indicate that this pigment is responsible for perceiving blue
              light. With this award Dr. Zeiger will use   mutant and wild type plants to
              analyze how zeaxanthin blue light photoreception signals opening response   of
              guard cells mediating gas exchange in leaves. Other studies will focus on how
              zeaxanthin   photoreception induces calcium fluxes in cells that mediate
              intracellular signaling. This research is   important because it addresses one
              of the most basic aspects of how plants function by responding to light   in
              its environment.    ***
