Title       : Ovarian Follicle Morphogenesis in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a9723350

Award Number: 9723350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire R. Cronmiller crc2s@VIRGINIA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Cronmiller  IBN-9723350        During reproduction in most animals, oogenesis is
              a multicellular process that appears to require complex patterns of
              intercellular communication to promote the growth and differentiation of the
              mature egg. Basic follicular form in a wide diversity of animals consists of a
              germlinederived oocyte surrounded by a somatically-derived epithelium. The
              actual assembly of these sometimes complicated multicellular configurations is
              not at all understood; however, it is likely that processes such as
              intercellular communication, cell migration, differential cell/tissue adhesion
              and regulation of cell proliferation play important roles, and that the study
              of such cellular mechanisms of morphogenesis during gonadogenesis, and
              especially the genetic networks that direct them, will lead to new insights
              into similar events in other tissues and at other stages of development.   
              Oogenesis in Drosophila melanogaster provides an ideal system for elucidating
              basic cell biological and genetic regulatory mechanisms that mediate the
              derivation, assembly and function of multicellular follicles. Indeed,
              functional roles in follicle formation have been described for a number of
              genes that also have essential roles in developmental processes outside of
              oogenesis, including neurogenesis and sex determination. The goal of this
              project is to discover how one of these genes, daughterless, functions during
              ovarian follicle formation and maturation.    This project includes three
              specific aims. First, to test whether daughterless protein function during
              ovarian follicle morphogenesis is regulated by phosphorylation via the MAP
              kinase signal transduction pathway. Second, to test whether daughterless gene
              function regulates somatic cell proliferation and/or the maintenance of
              multicellular organization during ovarian follicle formation and maturation.
              And third, to define the roles of new genes that participate with daughterless
              in its somatic ovary function.
