Title       : Primary Electron Transfer Processes in Photosynthetic Bacterial Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9723008

Award Number: 9723008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dewey Holten holten@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine R. Kirmaier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723008  Holten  The bacterial reaction center (RC) is the membrane-bound
              pigment-protein complex where light energy is converted into chemical potential
              energy.  This conversion occurs via a series of fast and highly specific
              electron transfer reactions that separate charge across the membrane with a
              quantum yield of (100%.  The ultimate goal of this work is to arrive at a
              comprehensive understanding of the primary charge separation process at the
              molecular level.  To this end, transient absorption spectroscopic measurements
              spanning the femtosecond to seconds time scales as well as other spectroscopic
              techniques will be used to directly probe the intermediate states of charge
              separation and the rates of their formation and decay.  The research will focus
              on site-directed mutants containing one or more mutations near the cofactors. 
              Numerous unresolved issues will be addressed, including the involvement of
              specific chromophores in the   pathway of electron transfer, the origin of the
              directionality of electron transfer via one of two parellel transport chains (L
              and M), and the factors that ensure the favorable balance between the rates of
              charge separation and the rates of competing charge recombination processes.   
              The overall goal of this research is to understand the molecular mechanisms of
              the primary charge separation process in bacterial photosynthesis.  The
              principles uncovered by this research should also apply to the primary
              photochemistry in reaction centers from other organisms, including PSII in
              plants.  Finally, the research should positively impact broader topics in
              biophysics including biological electron transfers and the role of a protein,
              both static and dynamic, in modulating the functional properties of its
              cofactors.  ***
