Title       : Genetic Analysis of Id in Mouse Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9723522

Award Number: 9723522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Benezra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Benezra  97-23522    The main objective of the research being proposed is to
              determine the function of the Id gene family during mammalian development using
              a genetic approach. The Id genes (Id 14) have been demonstrated both
              biochemically and in tissue culture models to be negative regulators of the
              basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of transcription factors controlling cell
              fate decisions in such diverse processes as hematopoiesis, adipogenesis,
              myogenesis, osteogenesis and others. By analyzing the phenotypes of mice that
              harbor deletions in two of the Id genes (Idl and Id3) which are known to be
              expressed in similar patterns during development, the role of these proteins in
              controlling differentiation in vivo will be determined. In addition, it will be
              determined if disruption of the Id genes can compensate for the loss of the E
              protein family of bHLH proteins known to be targets for Id mediated repression
              biochemically. In this way, a direct genetic link between the Id and E protein
              families can be established genetically.    Preliminary experiments indicate
              that indeed Idl and Id3 are required for post natal viability since double
              homozygous null mice developed in our laboratory usually die within one day of
              birth. These mice display evidence of proliferative and/or differentiation
              disorders in multiple tissue types and also a dramatic sex ratio distortion.
              These observations will be expanded by detailed molecular analyses both on
              tissue samples and fibroblasts derived from the mutant mice in order to define
              more clearly the role of the Id gene family during mammalian development. In
              addition, it has been observed that disruption of the Id genes can compensate
              for some of the defects observed in the E protein knockout mice. In particular,
              whereas homozygous disruption of the E proteins leads to postnatal lethality in
              a majority of mice, loss of both an E protein and Idl restores the postnatal
              viability of these mice. This observation will be extended to determine the
              cause of the lethali ty in the E protein knockout mice as well as the mechanism
              of rescue by the loss of Idl.    These experiments will thus increase our
              understanding of the mechanism of action of the Id gene family and define more
              precisely the nature of the Id/ E protein interaction in viva.
