Title       : Collaborative, Distributed Database for Brain Viewing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1997      
File        : a9723816

Award Number: 9723816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519992             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Carlis   (Principal Investigator current)
              John Riedl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Elde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Konstan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Distributed Collaborative Database for Brain Viewing This project  will develop
              a distributed database system and the collaborative  viewing tools necessary to
              overcome the difficulties inherent in  imageintensive neurobiological research
              that is accomplished by  collaborations between geographically separated
              researchers.  Images containing morphological information either are, or have 
              recently become, a primary form of data in many fields of  biological research.
              For an individual laboratory, the iceberg  metaphor is true. Published images
              are the tip, whereas the ever-  expanding collection of raw image files stored
              on hard disks and  removable media is the hidden body of the iceberg.
              Neuroscience  is particularly image intensive. From the perspective of a single
               laboratory, managing the magnitude of the data collected in  recent years is
              daunting. Neuroscientists often wish to compare  images of brains from
              experimental groups with those from control  animals. It is oftentimes a
              challenge to identify and understand  the spatial relations of a brain region
              identified by a staining  or labeling procedure. Furthermore, collaborations
              among  researchers in the same or different institutions are impeded by  lack
              of image viewing tools.    This goals of this project present challenges for
              computer  scientists, including the design and development of: (i)  additional
              file header information that represents biological  variables and is generated
              at the microscope during the capturing  of the image using speech-to-text
              technology; (ii) viewing tools  needed for collections of images that give
              perspective, while  retaining the pristine data captured from the digital
              camera;  (iii) multipleresolution image-handling techniques integrated  with a
              DBMS to meet data intensive image requirements; (iv)  collaboration support for
              on-going research discussion centered  around images, across time and space
              boundaries; (v) techniques  for integrating audio and text within the same
              discussion. This  research wi ll yield two kinds of results: a) artifacts,
              software  and databases, that will be demonstrated and made available to 
              others, and b) reports in the literature on studies of a variety  of research
              questions on the impact of these on neuroscientists'  activity.
