Title       : Control of Organelle Inheritance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  2001   
File        : a9723970

Award Number: 9723970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ursula W. Goodenough ursula@biology.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723970  Goodenough  Like most sexual eukaryotes, the green alga Chlamydomonas
              reinhardtii transmits its organelle DNA to its sexual progeny in a uniparental
              fashion, with all 4 products of meiosis inheriting the chloroplast DNA
              contributed by the mating-type plus (mt+) parent and all 4 inheriting the
              mitochondrial DNA contributed by the mating-type minus (mt-) parent.  These
              non-Mendelian patterns, first noticed by Sager over 40 years ago, have been
              shown to be the result of the selective degradation of minus chloroplast
              genomes and plus mitochondrial genomes in the early zygote, but nothing is yet
              known about how the selection or the destruction process occurs at a molecular
              level in this or any other system.  Most studies have focused on the
              uniparental inheritance of chloroplast DNA.  The dominant Protector/Destroyer
              model for the operation of this system proposes that the mt+ locus encodes
              Protector(s) which binds to and/or modifies chloroplast DNA in the plus gamete.
               A Destroyer function then degrades all non-protected, minus-derived genomes in
              the zygote.  Key to this model is the observation that when mt- gametes also
              carry an mt+ locus, they differentiate as minus gametes, but, when they are
              mated, their chloroplast DNA is not degraded in the zygote, the result being
              uniparental (BP) inheritance of chloroplast markers.  This observation
              indicates that the mt+ locus encodes gene(s) involved in protecting chloroplast
              DNA from degradation, and documents that these genes can be expressed even when
              the cells undergo minus gametic differentiation.. We have recently cloned the
              mt+ (and the mt-) locus and have, we believe, identified the one gene in the
              locus that is necessary for plus gametes to mate.  There remain blocks of DNA
              with no identified function.  The working premise of this proposal is that
              these sequences contain genes involved in chloroplast DNA protection.  The goal
              of the proposed research is to identify and characterize these genes and hence
              better understand how protection i s achieved.  We propose a two-stage screen.
              1) Plus-specific genes in the cloned mt+ sequences are first identified by
              northern analysis.  2) The genes are then transformed into mt+ recipients, and
              the transformants are tested for their capacity to engage in BP inheritance.  
              The first state of this screen has been carried out successfully in pilot
              experiments.  A mt+- linked gene with plus-specific expression has been
              identified in northern blots and its cDNA has been sequenced.  The gene product
              has features several suggesting that it is a transcriptional regulator.   
              Animal and fungal lineage's have devised uncharacterized mechanisms to monitor
              their mitochondrial genomes; plant lineage's keep track of both mitochondrial
              and chloroplast chromosomes. During the first few hours of zygote development
              formed by the fusion of gametes of plus and minus mating type cells of
              Chlamydomonas, the chloroplast genomes contributed by the mt-  parent are
              destroyed and the mitochondria genomes contributed by the mt+ are destroyed.
              The results of this work will allow greater insight into this remarkable
              process of genetic discrimination.
