Title       : US-India Cooperative Research: Two-Phase Flow Instabilities in Boiling and
               Condensing Flow Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9723997

Award Number: 9723997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27344              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sadik Kakac skakac@eng.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9723997  Kakac  Description:  This award is for a joint project in mechanical
              engineering  entitled "US-India Cooperative Research: Two Phase Flow
              Instabilities in  Boiling & Condensing Flow Systems".  The co-investigators are
              Sadik  Kakac of the University of Miami and P.K. Sarma of Andhra University  in
              Visakhaputnam.  The investigations on two-phase flow instabilities and  heat
              transfer in horizontal in-tube boiling and condensing systems are  
              experimental and theoretical.  The main objectives of the research are to 
              study the fundamental mechanisms of various boiling and condensing two-  phase
              flow instabilities, the parametric effects on these instabilities, the 
              interaction between heat transfer and these instabilities, and to model these 
              complicated phenomena mathematically.  By combining their expertise, the 
              investigators expect to be able to reveal the similar fundamental physical 
              mechanism of both boiling and condensing flows dynamics and heat  transfer, and
              to further clarify the differences between the two physical  phenomena.      
              Scope:  This joint project developed from an INT supported workshop  held at
              Andhra University in 1995.  The research is complementary and  mutually
              beneficial.  The US PI has extensive research experience in the  study of
              boiling flow instabilities and oscillations; while the Indian PI has  extensive
              experience in the study of condensing heat transfer and  dynamics. 
              Accordingly, experiments in boiling two-phase flow  instabilities will be
              conducted at Miami, while the two-phase flow  condensation instabilities and
              heat transfer experiments will be done at  Andhra.  Research teams at both
              universities will participate in each  other's experimental investigations, and
              in the theoretical model  development.  As a new collaboration and involvement
              of students in the  research, this project supports INT objectives.      ***
