Title       : Interactive Regulatory Networks Controlling Metabolic Adjustments in de novo
               Pyrimidine Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9723129

Award Number: 9723129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324060             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Wild   (Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda E. Wales  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723129  Wild  The management of intracellular pyrimidine pools via the
              regulation of de novo biosynthesis involves one of the most delicate
              physiological balancing systems in cellular metabolism. While it is necessary
              to maintain specific nucleotide levels in order to sustain RNA synthetic
              capacity, all of the nucleoside triphosphate pools are interdependent and
              energetically costly to maintain. In response to these basic needs, there is an
              intricate, synergistic network of controls which have developed at the level of
              gene expression and allosteric modification of individual enzymatic steps.
              However, as has been observed with other metabolic pathways, the detailed
              description of individual regulatory components does not adequately describe
              metabolic/growth responses at the pathway (much less organismal) level. The
              classical concept of a primary regulatory control point, which for the
              pyrimidine pathway has traditionally been considered to be the aspartate
              transcarbamylase (ATCase), does not adequately predict pathway responses to
              metabolic perturbations. However, the wealth of information and the variety of
              genetic constructs which are now available for most of the individual steps of
              the pyrimidine pathway have prepared the way for development of a system-level
              understanding of its metabolic role. This project addresses four specific
              aspects of the regulation of pyrimidine nucleotide metabolism in Escherichia
              coli: 1) Evaluation of the genetic and metabolic regulatory features of
              arginine/pyrimidine metabolism in mediating responses to
              environmental/nutritional shifts. 2) Integration of the various control
              processes, genetic and biochemical, through in vivo studies with genetic
              constructs which selectively modify individual components; leading to 3)
              Pathway modeling in the analysis of the biological regulatory network. Given
              the central role that pyrimidine biosynthesis plays in cellular metabolism, and
              the regulatory relationship of this pathway with other central pathways, an
              appropriate un derstanding of the regulatory logic at an integrated
              physiological level rather than an isolated, mechanistic one is important.   
              Nucleic acids are the "informational molecules" of living organisms and as such
              contain the information necessary for cell growth and division. Nucleic acids
              are constructed from a set of smaller components (nucleotides) which are
              identical in all living species. These nucleotides fall into two classes:
              purines and pyrimidines. This project studies the biochemistry and metabolism
              of the pyrimidine nucleotides, the details of which are critical for an
              understanding of DNA and RNA synthesis and regulation of gene expression and
              cell growth. The wealth of knowledge available on the genetics and regulation
              of the individual steps in pyrimidine metabolism in the bacterium E. coli makes
              it a model system for studying these complex issues. As knowledge is gained
              from the simpler, bacterial systems, application to the more complex and
              inter-woven pathways of eukaryotic systems becomes possible.
