Title       : Aerodynamics, Wing Biomechanics, and the Evolutionary Diversification of the
               Chiroptera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9723736

Award Number: 9723736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73032              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon M. Swartz sharon_swartz@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Swartz  9723736     The origin and elaboration of evolutionary novelty comprise 
              one of the most fundamental areas of evolutionary inquiry. In  this light, the
              structure of vertebrate wings, their derivation,  and their function during
              flight have attracted the attention of  biologists and engineers for many
              years. However, the accurate  estimation of the forces developed within the
              structural  components of the wing, and the full understanding of the 
              mechanical, aerodynamic, and energetic significance of the wing  form and wing
              movement patterns have been neglected. As a  consequence, knowledge of the
              evolutionary origins and history  of diversification of flight apparatus
              remains primitive     In this study, we will model the flight of a large bat to
               analyze aerodynamics, mechanics, and energetics. A bat has been  selected as
              our study organism because bats are characterized by  an anatomical
              organization (rigid bony elements interconnected  by an elastic wing membrane)
              that is relatively simple to model  in a biologically realistic fashion. The PI
              will the use our  computer simulation to ask: 1) what are the magnitudes of the
               joint forces and moments in the wing during flight? how large  are the skin
              and bone stresses developed within the wing?; 2)  how do small-scale variations
              in wing morphology and kinematics  affect the joint forces and moments and the
              skin and bone  stresses developed within the wing? 3) what features of wing 
              morphology and kinematics affect the maneuverability, structural  stability and
              aerodynamic performance of the wing, and the  mechanical power of flight?    
              These questions will be answered by accomplishing a series of  interrelated
              objectives. A mechanically and biologically  realistic computer model of a
              flying bat will be developed,  based on Pteropus poliocephalus, the gray-headed
              flying fox, a  species from which a great deal of functional and anatomical 
              information has already been obtained. Inputs into the model  will include
              anatomical information, dat a concerning the  mechanical properties of wing
              tissues, and three-dimensional  descriptions of the movement patterns of the
              wing. A detailed  computer model will be constructed, and then used to generate
               information about the forces developed at the wing joints, the  stresses in
              the wing bones and skin, the mechanical power of  flight, the ability of the
              bones to withstand buckling, and the  stability and maneuverability of the
              wing. Sensitivity analyses  will be carried out to determine the relative
              influence of body  size, wing shape, flight speed, and biomechanical properties
              on  the model outputs. The results of this study will be able to  serve as the
              foundation for future studies concerning the  origin, diversity, and adaptation
              of flight among bats.
