Title       : DNA Triplexes and Replication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9723924

Award Number: 9723924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergei M. Mirkin mirkin@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723924  Mirkin  This research will focus on the role of DNA triplexes in DNA
              replication.  In previous studies, we found that DNA triplexes formed prior to
              or during in vitro DNA polymerization severely block this process.  The
              mechanism of this phenomenon lies in DNA polymerase's inability to untangle
              triplex regions in DNA templates, while being perfectly capable of untangling
              the corresponding duplex regions.  Thus, DNA triplexes can form a stable
              barrier to DNA polymerases under physiological conditions.  We hypothesize,
              that DNA triplexes might also inhibit DNA replication in vivo.  Supporting this
              hypothesis, we recently found that a particular triplex-forming DNA sequence,
              d(G)n(d(C)n, blocks replication fork movement in E. coli cells.  This effect
              depends on the length of the repeated sequence and its orientation relative to
              the replication origin, and is not abolished by a protein synthesis inhibitor. 
              These results are very suggestive of an unusual structure formed by d(G)n(d(C)n
              in vivo that may be responsible for the replication arrest.  The specific aim
              of this research is to obtain direct proof that the triplex structure of the
              d(G)n(d(C)n repeated sequence causes replication arrest, and to expand these
              studies to include different triplex-forming repeats.  We will accomplish
              detailed mutational analysis of the d(G)n(d(C)n repeat combined with analysis
              of replication intermediates to distinguish between the numerous structural
              opportunities known for this sequence.  To provide direct insight on the
              structure formed by this repeated sequence in vivo, we will carry out chemical
              probing of (G)n(d(C)n-containing plasmids in E. coli cells using the
              structure-specific chemical chloroacetaldehyde.  We will also analyze the
              effects of triplex-forming repeated sequences of various length and composition
              on plasmid DNA replication in E. coli cells using two-dimensional
              electrophoresis of replication intermediates.  The long term goal of this
              research is to understand how triplex-forming DNA  repeated sequences affect
              the regulation of DNA replication in vivo.  %%%  DNA triplex structures conform
              a stable barrier to DNA replication under physiological conditions.  The long
              term goal of this research is to understand how triplex-forming repeated DNA
              sequences affect the regulation of DNA replication in living cells.  ***
