Title       : RUI: Social Regulation of Reproductive Behavior and Neuroendocrine Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9723817

Award Number: 9723817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218215             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Grober   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Grober, M.  IBN-9723817  The long term goal of this research is to
              understand social regulation of reproductive function.  In the bluehead wrasse,
              social interactions regulate the expression of a wide range of reproductive
              options, specifically the transformation of both females and males into a
              'supermale' reproductive morph; i.e., gender change.  This unique fish provides
              a model system for understanding social regulation of reproductive
              neuroendocrinology for several reasons: 1) the precise timing of reproductive
              transitions can be experimentally controlled, 2) behavioral changes occur
              within minutes of the social trigger and total gender reversal can be completed
              in eight days, 3) gender transitions result in permanent changes in
              reproductive behavior, and 4) these differences in behavior result from and/or
              cause permanent changes in the brain and endocrine system.  To approach our
              long term goal, one central hypothesis will be addressed: Changes in social
              status induce changes in forebrain Arginine Vasotocin (AVT) centers and gonadal
              hormone levels, which in turn generate changes in the social and reproductive
              behaviors that are a necessary component of gender change.     This project
              will focus on AVT because brain centers that produce this peptide hormone
              exhibit several key characteristics: 1) in many vertebrate species, males and
              females show dramatic differences in these cells, 2) these cells are sensitive
              to social modulation and gonadal hormone levels, 3) this peptide regulates
              social and mating behavior in association with levels of specific gonadal
              hormones, and 4) these cells undergo rapid and directional changes during
              gender reversals in the bluehead wrasse.  This proposal addresses four specific
              aims:  1.  The precise timing of changes in gender-specific behavior must be
              determined.  2. These results will be used as a timeline for examining the
              timing relationship between changes in behavior and changes in the brain cells
              during gender change.  3.  Determination of changes  in gonadal hormones that
              accompany gender change before, during and after gender change.  4. 
              Determination of the affects of gonadal hormones on forebrain AVT cells.  
              Recent changes in average testosterone levels in men and infertility in women
              are associated with changes in our own social associations. A general
              understanding of these processes may be gained from the investigation of the
              social control of reproduction in a range of vertebrates; the bluehead wrasse
              is a good model system for such studies.  This work will provide a detailed
              picture of how social interactions regulate reproductive behavior, neurobiology
              and endocrinology.     As an RUI proposal, this project will foster the
              participation of undergraduates in an integrative research program.  Students
              will learn to critically read scientific literature, generate hypotheses and
              methods for testing these hypotheses, predict possible outcomes, and analyze /
              discuss their results.  In addition, students will get experience with
              state-of-the-art technologies in biological sciences increasing the range of
              future opportunities for these students, and their ability to succeed in these
              fields.  Our program caters to undergraduates with non-traditional backgrounds
              and the goal of this project is to make these students competitive for openings
              in top quality graduate and professional programs.
