Title       : RUI: Genetic and Molecular Polymorphism in Microbotryum Violaceum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9723623

Award Number: 9723623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj P. Sinha RP-Sinha@csu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caroll E. Henry  (Principal Investigator former)
              Edward D. Garber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Manfred Ruddat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago State University
	      95th Street at King Drive
	      Chicago, IL  60628    312/995-2000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Henry  9723623  This project provides minority students at Chicago State
              University with opportunities to participate in current research projects at
              the University of Chicago.  The goal is to instruct students in specific areas
              of genetics to the level that they will be competent to conduct a research
              project, to guide them to achieve success in their work and to experience the
              excitement in current genetic biology.  Students should come to feel
              comfortable and confident at a major research university.  The experience
              should stimulate students to consider and to explore careers in the biological
              sciences.  The projects should help students, through their research
              archievements, to build the necessary self-confidence to enter a graduate
              degree program.  To this end, students will participate in the research on the
              genetic and molecular evidence of polymorphisms in fungi.  The specific
              organism for this purpose is the anther-smut fungus Microbotryum violaceum. 
              The choice of this species is predicted by ongoing research in the Principal
              and Co-principal Investigators' laboratories.  They have familiarity and long
              experience with the species.  Background work is expected to lead to
              experiments that challenge students to engage in hands-on and minds-on
              experience.  All projects are selected to provide students with real, rather
              than contrived, problems.  The six projects on transmission gentics focus on
              testing the hypothesis that the highly mutable loci in M. violaceum may be
              explained by assuming the activity of a transposible element (TE). 
              Polymorphism in colony color and auxotrophy were selected because the relative
              ease in experimental manipulation and the accumulation of appropriate
              collections.  Polymorphisms detected by RAPDs is the basis for two projects
              that may provide molecular markers for the detection of linkage with color,
              morphology, nutritional requirement and mating type loci.  The result of these
              experiments will also provide information to construct a physical map of the M.
              vio lacum and other Ustilaginales.  It could yield a map of the mitochondrial
              genome and provide important information on the phylogenetic relatedness
              between and among the fungi that infect dicot and monocot plants.
