Title       : A Novel Mechanism of Calcium Efflux and Signal Decay in Adrenal Chromaffin Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9723676

Award Number: 9723676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250676             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan S. Schneider schneia@mail.amc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/262-5181

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723676  Schneider     Nerve cells communicate with each other by the release of
               chemical messengers or neurotransmitters, which then act on  neighboring cells
              to complete transmission of the message.  The release of the chemical neuro-
              transmitter is regulated  by a brief rise and decay in cell calcium in the
              nerve  endings or terminals. Whatever regulates the calcium levels  in the
              nerve terminals will in turn regulate the rate,  amount and duration of release
              of the  chemical  neurotransmitter. The objective of the present project is to 
              clarify  the mechanisms regulating the calcium signals for  neurotransmitter
              release using a model nerve cell system  known as adrenal chromaffin cells.
              Chromaffin cells derive  from the interior of the adrenal gland and like
              nerves,  secrete their neurohormones, adrenaline and noradrenaline,  in
              response to a rise in cell calcium. While the cellular  mechanisms regulating
              the rise in cell calcium  are well  understood, those regulating the buffering
              and decay of the  calcium signal for secretion are not well defined. Such 
              mechanisms are important since they in turn will regulate  the strength and
              duration of communication between nerve  cells. The present project will test a
              novel mechanism for  regulating  calcium signal decay which uses a sodium- 
              dependent calcium transport protein to  remove calcium from  the cell. Such
              transport proteins are known as sodium-  calcium exchangers and may exist in
              several different forms  in different cellular compartments. The role and
              nature of  the sodium-calcium exchange proteins in calcium signal decay  will
              be determined. The project should result in an improved  understanding of the
              cellular mechanisms regulating the  calcium signal for neurotransmitter release
              and the  identitiy of the calcium transport proteins involved in  cellular
              calcium clearance and signal decay.
