Title       : The Role of Meristem-Identity Genes in Floral Patterning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9723818

Award Number: 9723818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Detlef Weigel weigel@salk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Salk Inst for Bio Studies
	      10010 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371099    858/453-4100

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Weigel  9723818    Flowers give rise to fruits and seeds, which include all
              cereals, and thereby provide the majority of calories consumed by humans.
              Understanding the mechanisms of flower development is therefore interesting
              both from a scientific and from an economic point of view. This proposal
              focuses on the particular problem of how the pattern of organs within flowers
              is generated. The specific problem to be investigated is how a global
              regulator, LEAFY, which encodes a master switch for the initiation of
              individual flowers, controls the activity of a homeotic gene, APETALA3, whose
              expression is limited to the areas of the flower that will give rise to petals
              and stamens. While LEAFY is formally an upstream regulator of homeotic genes,
              it remains unclear how the transition is made from ubiquitous expression of
              LEAFY RNA and protein to region-specific expression of downstream genes. During
              the previous funding period, Dr. Weigel has developed several tools to address
              this problem. First, he has shown that activation of APETALA3is mediated by
              LEAFY in conjunction with a partially dispensable co-regulator, UFO. Second, he
              has shown that LEAFY is required for the proper expression pattern of UFO
              itself within flowers, which is normally activated after LEAFY, but before
              APETALA3. Third, he has shown that modifying the transcriptional activation
              potential of LEAFY in transgenic plants changes the expression patterns of
              downstream homeotic genes, suggesting that LEAFY encodes a transcription factor
              that acts directly on these target genes. He now proposes to investigate in
              detail how LEAFY and UFO cooperate to activate APETALA3, with the following
              specific aims: 1. Can an activated version of LEAFY bypass the requirement for
              UFO activity? 2. Does LEAFY protein, alone or together with UFO, interact
              directly with APETALA3 sequences? 3. How in turn is the expression pattern of
              UFO regulated and is LEAFY an activator of UFO in flowers, or does LEAFY merely
              refine the UFO expression pattern in flo wers? The conclusions drawn from these
              experiments will have not only implications for scientists interested in flower
              development, but should be applicable to the problems of pattern formation in
              any multicellular organism.
