Title       : Photoperiodic Effects on Immune Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9723420

Award Number: 9723420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy J. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory F. Ball  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1096,1305,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9723420  Ball  Winter is energetically-demanding; energy requirements for
              thermoregulation and other winter-coping adaptations typically increase when
              food is scarce. Physiological and behavioral adaptations, including termination
              of breeding and growth, have evolved among nontropical animals to cope with
              winter energy shortages.  Presumably, selection for the mechanisms that permit
              physiological and behavioral anticipation of seasonal ambient changes have led
              to current seasonal breeding patterns in many populations.
              Energetically-challenging winter conditions can directly induce death via
              hypothermia, starvation, or shock; surviving these demanding conditions likely
              evokes significant stress responses.  Winter conditions can also indirectly
              affect health; the stress of coping with energetically-demanding conditions may
              increase adrenocortical steroid concentrations and compromise immune function.
              Individuals would enjoy a survival advantage if seasonally- recurring stressors
              could be anticipated and countered by shunting energy reserves to bolster
              immune function.  The proposed laboratory studies of seasonal changes in
              mammalian immune function will test the hypothesis that immune function is
              enhanced in short days to counter the immunosuppressive effects of winter. 
              Melatonin secretion patterns change seasonally and may affect the shunting of
              energy into different physiological processes. If the hypothesis that short
              days ameliorate the energetic demands of immune function is true, then several
              testable predictions  emerge.  In contrast to previous studies of the energetic
              costs of immune function, the proposed studies will examine direct measures of
              immune and endocrine function.  Finally, the direct energetic costs of immune
              responses will be assayed in mice housed under various environmental
              conditions.  Taken together, the results of the proposed studies will provide
              insight into the interaction among neural, endocrine, and immune functions.
