Title       : Enzymatic Studies on the Initial Steps of Anaerobic Toluene and Xylene
               Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2001    
File        : a9723312

Award Number: 9723312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. Kent Peters                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred M. Spormann spormann@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,9187,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723312  Spormann  This research will investigate novel enzymes catalyzing the
              first step in anaerobic degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. Recent work
              showed that the inital step in degradation of the methyl-benzenes toluene and
              m-xylene is the addition of the methyl carbon to the double bond of fumarate.
              Benzylsuccinate synthase, which catalyzes the addition of toluene to fumarate,
              will be studied as the prototype for this reaction. This enzymatic addition
              represents a novel biochemical reaction to activate aromatic hydrocarbons.
              Further, the activity may also define a novel class of enzymes that catalyze
              the formation of carbon-carbon bonds by a heretofore unknown reaction
              mechanism. Benzylsuccinate synthases may be of primary importance in anaerobic
              mineralization pathways in a range of different bacterial species. Research in
              this proposals directed towards gaining a better understanding of these unusual
              enzymatic reactions. This project will include purification of benzylsuccinate
              synthase and investigation of the enzyme's reaction mechanism. In addition to
              characterizing a novel class of enzymes, the results of this research will have
              important implications for our understanding of anaerobic pathways used by
              petroleum hydrocarbon-mineralizing bacteria. Because of the absence of
              molecular oxygen under typical conditions in fuel-contaminated aquifers,
              anaerobic bacteria capable of degrading petroleum hydrocarbons, such as toluene
              and the xylene isomers, are of key importance. Investigations of the key
              enzymes of these pathways may lead to the development of molecular tools that
              may assist in monitoring file abundance and activity of relevant microbes in
              situ.     This research will investigate novel enzymes catalyzing the first
              step in anaerobic degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons. These compounds are
              significant environmental pollutants. Until recently it was thought that
              degradation of such compounds required oxygen. Recent work showed that the
              inital step in degradation of toluene and  m-xylene, novel. In addition to
              characterizing this novel class of enzymes, the results of this research will
              have important implications for our understanding of anaerobic pathways used by
              petroleum hydrocarbon-mineralizing bacteria. Because of the absence of
              molecular oxygen under typical conditions in fuel-contaminated aquifers,
              anaerobic bacteria capable of degrading petroleum hydrocarbons, such as toluene
              and the xylene isomers, are of key importance. Investigations of the key
              enzymes of these pathways may lead to the development of molecular tools that
              may assist in monitoring the abundance and activity of relevant microbes in
              situ, and aid in bioremediation.
