Title       : Homeotic Regulation of Decapentaplegis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9723681

Award Number: 9723681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Botas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Botas  9723681       The goal of this proposal is to understand the molecular
              mechanisms by which genes control the development of organs and body parts. The
              proposed work focuses on Hox genes because of their fundamental role in pattern
              formation and their extraordinary conservation during evolution. Hox genes are
              used by animals as diverse as worms and mice to control the sizes and shapes of
              body parts along the major body axis. These master regulatory genes encode
              homeodomain proteins that regulate the activity of target genes that are mostly
              unknown. To investigate how Hox genes control pattern formation requires to
              define the target genes and regulatory sequences recognized by Hox proteins in
              the developing embryo.    One target of Hox regulation in Drosophila is
              decapentaplegic (dpp), a gene encoding a member of the TGF-(  family of
              proteins. A small (674 bp) enhancer in dpp was defined that mediates direct
              positive regulation by the Hox gene Ultrabithorax (Ubx) and direct negative
              regulation by the Hox gene abdominal-A (abd-A).    The objectives of the
              present proposal are: 1) To understand the molecular basis of posterior
              prevalence. We will investigate whether differences in intrinsic binding
              affinities or competition for unknown co-factors underlay posterior prevalence.
              2) To identify factors required for dpp homeotic regulation. A concerted series
              of genetic and molecular experiments will be conducted to identify factors
              conferring Hox specificity in viva. 3) To understand the mechanisms by which
              ABD-A activates and represses transcription. ABD-A directly represses
              transcription from one portion of the dpp674 enhancer, but it is able to
              activate transcription from another portion. Experiments are designed to
              distinguish these two possibilities: a) ABD-A is both a repressor and an
              activator depending on the context of the binding sites. b) ABD-A is a
              repressor that indirectly activates transcription through intermediary
              proteins.    These studies on the molecular mechanisms of Hox func tion will
              lead to a better understanding of the genetic control of morphogenesis.
