Title       : Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Beta-Glucosidases and Alpha-Hydroxynitrile
               Lyases Involved in Cyanogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9723302

Award Number: 9723302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan E. Poulton jonathan-poulton@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Poulton  Rosaceous stone fruits (Prunus spp.) are among many commercially
              important crops that cause cyanide poisoning in humans and livestock through
              release of hydrogen cyanide from cyanogenic glycosides by endogenous
              beta-glucosidases and alpha-hydroxynitrile lyases.  Black cherry
              (P.serotina)seeds are highly cyanogenic because they are rich source of the
              cyanogenic diglucoside ( R )-  amygdalin and its catabolic enzymes amygdalin
              hydrolase (AH), prunasin hydrolase (PH) and ( R )-mandelonitile lyase (MDL).  A
              major objective of this research is to improve our understanding of the spatial
              and temporal regulation of cyanogenesis in plants, thereby contributing toward
              the long-term goal of reducing the toxicity of these plants to animals
              including man.  The Prunus cyanogenic system is complex in that all three
              enzymes exist as multiple forms, the exact nature and physiological
              significance of which require clarification.  Whether individual isoforms of
              each catabolic enzyme carry out different functions or exhibit differential
              expression, either temporally or spatially, remains largely unclear.  To
              address these questions, additional AH, PH and MDL genes will be obtained by
              RT-PCR and screening of black cherry cDNA and genomic libraries.  Sequencing
              these genes will provide basic information about their structure and also
              identify unique regions for use as isoform-specific probes in analyzing the
              expression of individual genes by Northern analyses, ribonuclease protection
              assays, and in situ hybridization.  The second goal of this project is to
              generate important information about the functioning of beta-glucosidases and
              FAD-containing alph-hydroxynitrile lyases, thus facilitating future efforts to
              engineer the substrate specificities of these enzymes for biotechnological
              purposes.  After expressing recombinant AH and PH in the Pichia pastoris
              expression system, amino acid residues that confer substrate specificity upon
              these hydrolases will be identified by domain swapping and site-directed mut
              agenesis.    Many important food plants, including cherries, cassava, lima
              beans and sorghum, liberate the respiratory poison hydrogen cyanide when
              ingested or mechanically damaged.  Each year, this phenomenon of cyanogenesis
              accounts for numerous cases of acute and chronic cyanide poisoning of animals
              including man.  A major objective of this research is to better understand the
              factors that control cyanide production, thereby contributing toward the
              long-term goal of reducing the toxicity of these plants.  Genes encoding three
              enzymes that release cyanide in black cherry will be isolated and
              characterized.  Analysis of their DNA sequences will reveal unique regions that
              will be used to study where and when each gene is active within this species. 
              A second objective is to investigate how beta-glucosidases, a class of enzymes
              which breaks down sugar-containing compounds, distinguish between substrate
              molecules upon which they can potentially act.  Two of the black cherry enzymes
              under study here are beta-glucosidases.  Although closely related to each
              other, these enzymes degrade different substrates, presumably due to subtle
              variations in their protein structures.  Beginning with the above DNA
              sequences, this research will use molecular methods to elucidate these
              structural differences.  This will facilitate future efforts to engineer the
              substrate specificities of these and other beta-glucosidases for
              biotechnological purposes.
