Title       : The Genetic Specification of Neuron-target Interactions: The Role of LOLA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9723376

Award Number: 9723376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99961              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Giniger eginiger@fred.fhcrc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : F Hutchinson Canc Res Ctr
	      1100 Fairview Ave. N.
	      Seattle, WA  98109    206/667-4868

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    IBN-9723376   GINIGER    During the development of the brain and
              nervous system, a nerve cell often must extend its axon over a long distance to
              find a particular target.  In the development of a limb, for example, each
              muscle must become innervated by a specific set of motor neuron for the limb to
              function properly.  During the course of its growth, the tip of a neuron's axon
              makes a whole series of decisions about where and which way to turn, and about
              when to stop and form a synaptic connection.  We know that the neuron responds
              to a complex constellation of external signals at each of these decision
              points.  We do not understand, however, what mechanism coordinates the
              expression of all of these signals, and what ensures that the nerve cell has
              the proper machinery to recognize the appropriate set of signals at a
              particular time.   Previous work has identified a single gene in the fruitfly
              Drosophila that seems to coordinate particular neuron guidance decisions.  In
              the absence of this gene (called lola), specific nerves fail to recognize their
              targets, whereas in animals that make too much lola, these same nerves seem to
              interact too strongly with their targets.  The structure of the LOLA protein
              suggests that it works by turning on and off the expression of other genes,
              perhaps the genes whose products are directly responsible for neuron-target
              recognition.  The goal of Dr. Giniger's experiments is to understand what
              properties of lola provide specificity to nerve-target interactions.  In
              particular, these experiments will test the idea that the matching of nerve to
              target occurs because one form of lola is made in target cells and causes them
              to produce signal molecules, while a second form of lola is made in nerve cells
              that causes them to produce signal-receivers.  These experiments will also test
              the idea that lola can coordinate several different growth decisions because,
              in each case, it works together with a different partner protein.   The brain
              is the most complex stru cture in biology, and we understand little about how
              its organization is established.  These experiments will test a simple model
              for the mechanism by which genes determine brain structure.  It is likely that
              the principles tested here in the fly will be equally applicable to the
              development of the brain in all animals.
