Title       : Evolution of Developmental Processes Governing Head Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9723660

Award Number: 9723660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans R. Bode hrbode@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1080      EVOLUTION OF DEVELOP MECHANISM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bode  9723660      During the last 10-15 years a great deal has been learned
              about the genes and processes  that regulate the development of an embryo into
              a functioning animal. One of the most interesting aspects of the accumulating
              knowledge is that a common set of regulatory genes   involved in a common, or
              related, set of mechanisms underlie many of the developmental processes of the
              metazoans studied so far. These common features raise interesting and important
              questions as to how early during evolution did these genes arise? Were they
              already present in the Ur-metazoan? What developmental mechanisms and
              developmental processes  did they participate in? And, to what extent were the
              mechanisms and processes invented early and conserved through animal evolution?
                     One approach to these issues is to study these genes and their functions
              in organisms that belong to groups of animals that arose very early during
              metazoan evolution, such as the cnidaria, whose members include jellyfish, sea
              anemones, and the freshwater hydra. Of these, hydra, is particularly useful
              since the developmental processes (pattern formation, control of the
              proliferation and differentiation of the several cell types) are
              well-understood. Further, a number of genes known to regulate developmental
              events in many vertebrates and invertebrates have also been isolated, and in
              part, characterized in hydra.      The overall aim of the proposed work is to
              determine if the genes and mechanisms underlying the development of the head of
              hydra are similar to those found in the development of the heads of vertebrates
              and insects. One such gene has already been found. Cnotx a hydra homologue, of
              the members of the Otx family has been characterized and shown to be involved
              in the development of the tentacles, a particular structure of the hydra head.
              There is also evidence that homologues of the Dlx and Emx families exist in
              hydra, or a close marine relative.   Genes of these families play important
              roles in the patterning of the  head in vertebrates and arthropods. The
              detailed aims are two. One is to examine in the role of the Coots gene in
              patterning of the hydra head in detail as well as to investigate its role in
              cell cycle traverse, a  role that preliminary evidence suggests it has. These
              efforts will be pursued with a variety of approaches including examining
              alterations of expression patterns during tissue manipulations and functional
              studies. The other is to isolate and characterize the role of other genes
              involved in head development in hydra. The focus will be on genes of the
              families mentioned above.
