Title       : The National Bryophyte Information Service: Implementation of a Scalable,
               Community Testbed for Botanical Collections Data Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9723478

Award Number: 9723478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Magill bob.magill@mobot.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schnase  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mo Botanical Garden
	      2345 Tower Grove Ave
	      Saint Louis, MO  63110    314/577-5100

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This award will establish the National Bryophyte Information  Service (NBIS),
              a distributed, Internet-based information service  and testbed facility for the
              botanical research community. The  mission of the NBIS is: (1) to provide
              immediate support for  bryophyte collections data access that is urgently
              needed by  several biodiversity projects and (2) to create a long-term, 
              sustainable testbed for continuing research on biodiversity  database and
              information system interoperability and scalability.    This initiative is a
              multi-disciplinary and inter-institutional  collaboration. Missouri Botanical
              Garden (www.mobot.org), the New  York Botanical Garden (www.nybg.org) and the
              Bishop Museum  (www.bishop.hawaii.org) will partner on research focussed on 
              hybridizing Web and database technologies to improve access,  interoperability,
              and scalability of biodiversity information  systems.  In order to provide
              simultaneous, integrated access to  bryology research data in multiple systems
              we will design and  implement a multidatabase federation. In addition, we will 
              develop policies and mechanisms to support community curation of  the databases
              and will deploy an individualized Web interface  configuration service for
              researchers.  The project will also  participate in the Biological Collections
              Schema Library Project  (www.bishop.hawaii.org/asc-cnc) and will, in part,
              utilize the  Object Protocol Model database software from Lawrence Berkeley 
              National Laboratory.    These activities address an identified need to improve
              the  social, access, and content scalability of biological databases.  It also
              addresses one of the most important "Grand Challenge"  problems facing
              bioinformatics, the problem of information-  resource interoperability. We
              propose straightforward and  effective solutions that can yield short-term
              benefits to the  bryology community and, in the long term, complement and
              extend  related theoretical and empirical bioinformatics research.      This
              project is being jointly supported  by the National Science  Foundation and the
              US Geological Survey Biological Resources  Division as part of the development
              of the National Biological  Information Infrastructure (www.nbs.gov/nbii).
