Title       : RUI: Transbilayer Lipid Movements in Apoptotic Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9723572

Award Number: 9723572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald A. Berkowitz                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Williamson PLWILLIAMSON@AMHERST.EDU(internet)  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Schlegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amherst College
	      
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/542-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9723572  Willliamson and Schlegel          During the developent of
              the lymphocytes of the immune  system, some cells are created which are
              nonfunctional, and  others which react to normal body components.  These
              lymphocytes  are removed by a process of programmed cell death called 
              apoptosis, a series of changes which can be triggered by a wide  variety of
              circumstances, but which finally occurs by a common  pathway using machinery
              which is ready and waiting to be  activated in virtually all cells.  This
              pathway includes one step  in which the surface of the apoptotic cell is
              altered, and after  this surface change has occurred, the cell can be
              recognized as q  doomed cell by its neighbors.  Their response is to engulf and
               consume the apoptotic cell before it has a chance to die and fall  apart
              (which can result in tissue damage).  The critical step in  the alteration of
              the apoptotic cell surface is a change in the  membrane which surrounds the
              cell.  This membrane is a two-  layered structure made up of phospholipids. 
              One of these,  phosphatidylserine or PS, is normally kept in the inner layer of
               the membrane bilayer, facing the interior.  In apoptotic cells,  PS appears in
              the external layer of the membrane because the  membrane enzyme which normally
              keeps it inside is turned off, and  a new enzyme is activated which allows it
              to move to the cell  surface.  This project will study these events in
              lymphocytes  which grow in culture and in which apoptosis can be triggered. 
              The object of these studies will be to try to understand how the  changes in
              the arrangement of PS are induced.  Other studies have  suggested that
              degradative enzymes (the ICE proteases), changes  in the energy producing
              organelles (the mitochondria), or changes  in the amount of calcium inside the
              cell may be necessary for  apoptosis to occur.  These studies will determine
              whether these  factors must be involved to change the distribution of PS in 
              apoptotic cells.   In addition, these studies will investigat e  how other
              kinds of cells recognize the PS on the surface of the  apoptotic cells after it
              has appeared there.  %%%    This research is looking at changes that occur in
              the cell  membrane during apoptosis, programmed cell death, and the  mechanisms
              responsible for these changes.  ***
