Title       : The Role of MAP Kinase in Neural Specification in Xenopus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2000   
File        : a9723183

Award Number: 9723183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy K. Sater asater@jetson.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. A. Uzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sater  97-23183      The renewed investigation of molecular mechanisms
              underlying neural induction in Xenopus has identified both positive and
              negative regulators of neural fate. These include the neural repressor Bone
              Morphogenetic Protein-4 (BMP-4) and its antagonists, the neural inducers noggin
              and chordin, which are thought to act by binding and sequestering BMP-4.
              Moreover, several studies have shown that basic Fibroblast Growth Factor (bFGF)
              can induce posterior neural ectodemm. Since FGF signals are transduced
              primarily by the Mitogen-Activated Protein Kinase (MAP kinase) pathway, these
              results implicate MAP kinase in the response to neural induction. Despite these
              advances, the molecular mechanisms underlying the establishment of neural fate
              and anteroposterior neural pattern remain poorly understood.  Preliminary
              results from this laboratory provide provocative evidence that the MAP kinase
              pathway regulates commitment to neural fate in gastrula ectoderm. Previous work
              has shown that ectoderm cells undergo an increase in intracellular pH (pHi) in
              response to endogenous inductive signals. More recent results indicate that
              this alkalinization is necessary and sufficient for the initiation of anterior
              neural-specific gene expression in gastrula ectoderm (Uzman et al., submitted).
              Moreover, both neural induction and artificial alkalinization of uninduced
              ectoderm lead to an increase in MAP kinase phosphorylation and activity over
              that observed in uninduced ectoderm at the same stage. Preliminary data further
              show that neural-specific gene expression is greatly reduced or absent in
              induced ectoderm overexpressing MAP Kinase Phosphatase-1, which
              dephosphorylates and inactivates MAP kinase in vivo. These findinga, together
              with the earlier studies on the inductive effects of bFGF, suggest the
              following two hypotheses: 1) MAP kinase plays a key role in neural
              specification during gastrulation; and 2) increasing levels of MAP Kinase
              activity in newly induced neural ectoderm lead to an increasingl y posterior
              positional identity.  The proposed work addresses the role of MAP kinase in the
              establishment of neural fate and anteroposterior pattern in Xenopus. The first
              set of experiments will determine whether there is a correlation between neural
              fate and MAPK activity by quantifying MAP kinase activity in uninduced ectoderm
              treated with known regulators of neural fate. The second set will test for a
              requirement for MAP kinase activity in neural induction by examining neural
              specification in ectoderm in which the MAP kinase signals are disrupted by
              overexpression of MKP-1. The third study will investigate whether activation of
              MAP kinase in gastrula ectoderm is sufficient to bring about neural
              specification, and whether elevating MAP kinase activity in newly induced
              neural ectoderm leads to a posterior shift in positional identity. Finally, the
              fourth study will determine whether the MAP kinase pathway underlies the
              activation of anterior neural-specific gene expression in response to
              intracellular alkalinization. This work will reveal intracellular regulatory
              mechanisms that underlie the establishment of neural fate.
