Title       : Comparison of Developmental DNA Elimination in Tetrahymena Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9723034

Award Number: 9723034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Piroska Huvos 6184535721  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723034  Huvos    The evolution of two genomic regions which are known to
              contain segments of DNA that undergo developmental DNA deletions in T.
              thermophila will be examined. One region contains a single developmentally
              eliminated segment, the other region contains two such segments. The three
              segments have different characteristic features, i.e. are likely to belong to
              different classes of rearrangements. A comparison will be made of these two
              regions between T. thermophila and two or more of its close relatives.
              Preliminary analysis of the two regions has been undertaken using the Southern
              hybridization technique. Results from this analysis indicate that in these
              regions a variety of evolutionary scenarios are possible in the species
              intended for study. Comparative analysis of homologous regions where there is a
              rearrangement in T. thermophila, but not in its relative (or vice versa) is the
              major target of this work. Examination of such regions will lead to the
              understanding of the molecular events that generate or disrupt developmental
              rearrangement sites during evolution, and will indicate whether these evets are
              associated with insertion of developmentally eliminated sequence elements.
              These results will be compared to recent studies on the evolution of DA
              deletions in a distantly related group of ciliated protozoans which contain
              different types of developmentally eliminated sequences. Rearrangements
              homologous to those found in T. thermophila will be used to identify conserved
              features of the developmentally eliminated sequences that may be involved in
              the process of rearrangement and to examine the sequence heterogeneity
              generated at the deletion junctions. The results will be experimentally tested
              by manipulating the sequences.     Programmed DNA rearrangements occur as part
              of normal development in a variety of organisms, including the mammalian immune
              system. Unprogrammed rearrangements are an important force in the evolution of
              genomes and are associated with pathological states, suc h as oncogenesis.
              Development in ciliated protozoans involves extensive programmed genome
              reorganization which makes these organisms good models for investigating such
              rearrangements. The study of evolutionary changes of programmed elimination
              events in these organisms provides an opportunity to explore the relationship
              between programmed and unprogrammed rearrangements.
