Title       : Structural Determinants of G Protein Coupled Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  1998  
File        : a9723143

Award Number: 9723143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Lambright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-0011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723143  Lambright  Monomeric and heterotrimeric GTP-binding proteins (G
              proteins) mediate critical steps in a variety of signaling and regulatory
              pathways.  The function of GTP-binding proteins in such diverse biological
              processes as sensory perception, hormone action, and growth control depends on
              their ability to cycle between inactive (GDP-bound) and active (GTP-bound)
              conformations in a precisely regulated manner.  The overall objective is to
              understand the detailed molecular mechanisms underlying the function of
              GTP-binding proteins.  The experimental approach will combine high resolution
              structural studies by X-ray crystallography with biochemical and mutational
              experiments in order to identify the principal stereochemical determinants that
              govern the nucleotide dependent interactions between GTP-binding proteins and
              the structurally diverse factors to which they are coupled.  The work will
              focus initially on: (1) combined mutational and structural studies on the
              mechanism of heterotrimeric G protein coupled signaling.  The experiments will
              examine the significance of conserved interactions predicted on the basis of
              previous structural work to be important for stabilizing the active or inactive
              conformation of the   G( subunit.  Alanine and homologue substitutions will be
              introduced at specific amino acid residues.  The ability of the mutant G((
              subunits to interact with the G( subunits and undergo the conformational
              changes associated with activation will be assessed using a variety of well
              established biochemical assays.  To characterize the effects on the structure,
              the mutant proteins will be crystallized in the GDP-bound, GTP-bound and
              heterotrimeric forms and the corresponding structures determined by the
              molecular replacement method.  The second objective is to (2) develop suitable
              systems for structural and biophysical studies of the interaction between
              monomeric GTP-binding proteins and their cognate exchange factors.  These
              studies will focus initially on the 13 kDa exchange fac tor Mss4 and its
              cognate G protein Rab3a which functions in the regulation of neurotransmission.
                This study concerns a large and physiologically important family of
              GTP-binding proteins (known as G proteins) that play a fundamental role in
              diverse biological processes including sensory perception, hormone action,
              neurotransmission, and growth control.  The function of these proteins in such
              diverse cellular processes depends on their ability to cycle between two
              distinct forms, an inactive form in which GDP is bound to the protein and an
              active form in which GTP is bound.  The switch from the inactive form to the
              active form is controlled by a family of proteins known as GDP/GTP exchange
              factors.  The initial objective is to identify structural elements that are
              required to stabilize the active or inactive form and distinguish these from
              features that modulate the interaction with proteins which specifically
              recognize one form or the other.  Molecular biological methods will be used to
              alter specific amino acid residues in transducin, the G protein that mediates
              vision in the rod cells of the eye.  The effects on the structure of both the
              inactive and active forms will be determined by X-ray crystallography and
              correlated with changes in functional properties assessed by a variety of well
              established biochemical experiments.  .   ***
