Title       : Physiology and Biochemistry of Microaerophilic Iron- oxidizing Bacteria Growing
               at Neutral pH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9723459

Award Number: 9723459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Emerson demerson@ib3.gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Type Culture Collect
	      10801 University Boulevard
	      Manassas, VA  201102209    703/365-2700

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723459  Emerson  Because of past difficulties with isolating iron-oxidizing
              microbes at circumneutral pH, it has been difficult to prove that prokaryotes
              have the capacity to grow lithoautotrophically on iron at neutral pH. 
              Recently, pure cultures of bacteria that appear to grow lithotrophically by
              Fe-oxidation at pH 6 have been isolated by the PI. This research will focus on
              using one of these, strain ES-1, as a model organism to study the physiology
              and biochemistry of iron oxidation at neutral pH. The goals are to establish
              that this microbe is a chemolithoautotroph, and to begin to dissect the
              metabolic pathways by which it conserves energy from Fe-oxidation, and fixes
              CO2 .  Studies will be aimed at developing a continuous culture system for
              determining molar growth yields of cells growing on Fe2+, determining limits
              for Fe2+ and O2 tolerance, and for growing enough cell biomass for in vitro
              biochemical and molecular studies.   Further studies will be aimed at purifying
              an Fe-oxidoreductase enzyme that could be responsible for Fe-oxidation, and
              identifying other components of the electron transport system.  Two components
              of the electron transport chain of the acidophilic chemolithoautorophic 
              Fe-oxidizer Thiobacillus ferrooxidans will be used to initiate a search for
              analogous proteins in strain ES-1.  These are rusticyanin, a putative
              periplasmic electron transport protein and the enzyme that serves as the
              initial Fe-oxidase.  We will search for the genes for these proteins in strain
              ES-1 by using molecular techniques, and will attempt to purify the proteins, if
              present, using conventional biochemical techniques.  A molecular approach will
              also be taken to establish whether or not the key CO2 fixation enzyme, ribulose
              1-5, bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBPC/O), is present in strain ES-1;
              both hybridization studies and PCR amplification of genes for RuBPC/O gene
              subunits will be performed.  Together these studies will lay the groundwork for
              future investigation of the metabolic bi ochemistry of a unique type of
              prokaryotic metabolism.    Iron is the fourth most abundant element in the
              Earth's crust; it is also perhaps the most important trace element for all
              living organisms.  We understand very little about the role that microorganisms
              play in oxidizing iron at  neutral pH.  The signficance of this research is
              that it will increase our fundamental knowledge about the role life plays in
              controlling the iron cycle.  Due to the great abundance of iron its cycling
              influences other important elemental cycles including carbon oxygen and sulfur.
               Iron-oxidizing bacteria are often found in industrial and municipal water
              distribution systems where they can cause fouling of pipelines and
              discoloration of domestic water supplies with significant economic impact. 
              Thus understanding the fundamental metabolic processes of these organisms will
              help in our efforts to exert positive or negative control over them.
