Title       : Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methodology for Phylogenetic Inference from Genetic
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1997 
File        : a9723799

Award Number: 9723799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185637             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bret R. Larget larget@mathcs.duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald L. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 9184,9218,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Gaining an understanding of the evolutionary history among a  group of species
              is a fundamental problem in biology.  The  ease with which biologists obtain
              and disseminate genetic  information and the resultant desire to analyze this
              data  necessitates a valid statistical methodology which is  computationally
              feasible for reconstructing large  evolutionary trees and assessing the
              associated uncertainty.  Other existing methods for reconstructing trees with
              may  leaves depend on the computationally-intensive bootstrap  method of
              resampling, whose validity in this context has  been criticized by several
              authors.  The investigators are  developing Bayesian methodology and software
              implementing a  novel Markov chain Monte Carlo alorithm for searching a tree- 
              indexed parametric space, providing evolutionary biologists  with a
              computationally feasible and statistically valid  method of assessing
              uncertainty in reconstructed trees.  This methodology is substantially superior
              on computational  and theoretical bases to existing bootstrap methods.    This
              project provides a new sophisticated computational tool  for understanding
              evolutionary relationships of species on  the basis of genetic information via
              a collaboration of the  fields of statistics, computer science, and biology. 
              The  methodology the investigators are developing uses high  performance
              computing in a novel manner to greatly improve  the analysis of genetic data 
              to elucidate evolutionary  relationships.  The methodology is general and may
              prove to  be useful in wide-spread applications quite unrelated to 
              evolutionary biology.  This work is funded by Computational  Biology
              Activities.
