Title       : Functional Group Interactions in DNA-Protein Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9723844

Award Number: 9723844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry W. McLaughlin larry.mclaughlin@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9723844  McLaughlin   Recognition events involving enzymes, proteins or even
              simple ligands and sequences of  single or double-stranded DNA are, in the
              simplest analysis, the result of specific ionic, hydrogen  bonding and
              hydrophobic interactions present at the macromolecular interface.  This
              research will determine the nature and the contribution of such intermolecular
              interactions to the observed  high-affinity binding in such complexes by
              probing individual functional group contacts.  Isosteric nucleoside analogues
              will be employed to introduce incremental changes in functional group character
              by what amounts to "atomic mutagenesis", and the effects of such incremental
              changes  upon binding affinity, catalytic activity or simple structural
              parameters will be determined..  The analogues involve the "deletion
              modification" of a native nucleoside in which a specific functional group -
              amino, carbonyl, imino or methyl - is excised and replaced with a hydrogen
              atom.  The most useful analogues are those which do not otherwise alter native
              inter-strand hydrogen bonding or other helix-stabilizing effects. This research
              will expand the current repertoire of  analogues available to probe
              macromolecular recognition processes by developing analogues to  probe contacts
              to functional groups present in the minor groove of a B-form DNA duplex as well
              as those to the internucleotide phosphodiester residues.  These analogues also
              will permit the study of critical structural parameters such as the importance
              of the minor groove spine of hydration for the stability of B-form DNA
              duplexes, and the relation of this spine of hydration to the DNA curvature
              effect present in oligo A-T sequences.  Three sequence-specific protein-nucleic
              acid complexes will be examined during the course of this project.  The
              important eukaryotic transcriptional pre-initiation TBP-TATA box complex in
              which protein interacts with the A/T rich recognition sequence by binding
              solely through the DNA minor groove will be investigated using  newly developed
              minor groove base analogues.  The Gene-4 proteins responsible for the RNA
              primase activity in bacteriophage T7 will be examined with respect to the
              nature of recognition and catalysis by the T7 primase enzyme at the CTG
              recognition site on single-stranded DNA, as will the functional group
              requirements on the conserved but non-transcribed C residue and the transcribed
              T and G residues of the template.  A new study of the integrase protein of (
              bacteriophage will begin with a probe of the mechanistic details using
              5'-phosphorothioate linkages as suicide substrates for the recombinase enzyme. 
              These studies will help to further the understanding of DNA structure as well
              as sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic acid interactions
              by elucidating the location and relative importance of functional group
              interactions that contribute to overall specificity and affinity in such
              complexes.  %%%  Recognition by enzymes, proteins and even simple molecules of
              (ligands) sequences of single or double-stranded DNA are, in the simplest
              analysis, the result of specific ionic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
              interactions.  This research will help to further the understanding of DNA
              structure as well as sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic
              acid interactions by elucidating the location and relative importance of
              functional (atomic) group interactions that contribute to overall specificity
              and affinity in such complexes.  ***
