Title       : Proposal to Design a Program in Engineering Ethics for Doctoral Engineering
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9124001

Award Number: 9124001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline A. Whitbeck   (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Marks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              To exercise leadership, science and engineering educators need to               
                                                                                            
              provide their students with the tools to identify and respond                  
              appropriately to professional problems with ethical dimensions.                
                                                                                             
              This project involves four to eight undergraduate engineering                  
              students in the identification of promising sources of ethical                 
              questions and problems that can provide the basis for a                        
              curriculum                                                                     
              in engineering ethics for graduate students.  Under the                        
              supervision                                                                    
              of the principal investigator, in association with a group of                  
              collaborating faculty, the students will gather information about              
                                                                                             
              current dissertation topics that are promising sources.  They                  
              will                                                                           
              meet with the faculty and students working on these topics to                  
              obtain information about how the ethical issues are being                      
              handled.                                                                       
              They will also consider ethical issues that arise in engineering               
                                                                                             
              more generally.  As the results from their research and                        
              interviews                                                                     
              are developed, they will be incorporated and tested in a graduate              
                                                                                             
              course in engineering ethics to be taught at MIT in the spring.                
                                                                                             
              Research will continue over the summer and fall, to identify new               
                                                                                             
              issues and examine those previously identified more deeply.                    
              Results will be incorporated into graduate engineering as well as              
                                                                                             
              other programs at MIT, and be reported on widely at meetings and               
                                                                                             
              in engineering publications.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This proposal focuses on an important area in Ethics and Values                
              Studies.  The investigators are very well qualified; the plan is               
                                                                                             
              thoughtful and feasible; university support is good.  Results are              
                                                                                             
              likely to improve the teaching of engineering ethics on this                   
              campus                                                                         
              and in graduate curricula nationwide.  Support is highly                       
              recommended.
