Title       : Legume Cell Cycle Genes to Monitor Stress (Salinity and HighTemperature)
               Response During Early Nodulation, U.S.-Pakistan Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9413248

Award Number: 9413248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Gresshoff jcrocket@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9413248  Gresshoff    Description:  This project supports a joint  project by
              Dr. Peter Gresshoff, of the  University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and Dr. 
              Kauser Malik, Director of the National  Institute of Biotechnology and Genetic 
              Engineering (NIBGE) in Faisalabad, Pakistan.   The research aims at
              understanding the  mechanisms affecting the nodulation in legumes  planted
              under stress conditions such as heat  and salinity.  The work is to seek more 
              information concerning the cellular targets of  these stresses.  As nodulation
              is a  prerequisite of symbiotic nitrogen fixation,  the work will focus on this
              initial step.   Nodulation starts through cell division  possibly induced in G2
              arrested cortical cells.  Plans call for using molecular probes and PCR 
              primers for two cell-cycle genes (namely  cyclin-B and cdc2) which were
              recently isolated  from soybean in Gresshoff's laboratory.  Focus  will be on
              non-radioactive PCR techniques to  define how stresses modulate the expression
              of  these critical genes.  The objectives of this  cooperative project are: to
              transfer technology  from soybean to the mungbean system; train the  research
              team in Faisalabad to use molecular  probes and primers to evaluate the impact
              of  heat and salinity stress on early nodulation of  mungbean; determine the
              degree of evolutionary  divergence between the soybean and mungbean  gene
              arrangements; and further develop the  knowledge base of cell cycle involvement
              in  meristem initiation and maintenance.    Scope:  This project meets a number
              of  important objectives of the Division of  International Programs: it allows
              cooperation  of two respected scientists, with complementary  capabilities, to
              do important scientific work;  it allows a foreign scientist in a developing 
              country to build the experience necessary to  continue this useful research
              beyond this  project; and it helps understand the causes of  a problem that
              affects productivity in marginal  lands around the world.  The Pakistani 
              scientist is one of that c ountry's most  distinguished researchers in the
              field, with an  impressive  record of scientific publications.   As a result of
              his work, the NIBGE was recently  established, with him as its first director. 
              ***
