Title       : Acquisition of X-Ray Diffraction Equipment for Macromolecular Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1994  
File        : a9413715

Award Number: 9413715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl W. Volz kvolz@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Introduction. X-ray structure analysis is a critical tool  for a
              large group of major researchers at the University of  Illinois at Chicago
              (UIC), a group whose annual research  funding currently totals 4 million(Sec
              III).  Seven  laboratories are engaged in ten different macromolecular 
              structure projects that require area detector technology.  There is now a
              campus wide effort for  establishing  a  comprehensive, centralized x-ray
              diffraction facility at UIC  to serve the many needs of these basic science
              research  projects.  As part of that larger plan, this proposal if for 
              acquisition of a state-of-the-art area detector and related  equipment for
              macromolecular crystallography.    Proposed Instrumentation.  The equipment to
              be procured from  this proposal consists of five main components:    1) a
              rotating anode x-ray generator, the strongest in-house  source of x-ray photons
              available;  2) an area detector, for the most efficient measurement of  the
              thousands of diffraction data;  3) a low temperature device, for lifetime
              extension of the  radiation sensitive samples;  4) a host computer, for
              detector operation, and primary data  collection and processing; and  5) a
              graphics workstation and software, for calculation of  structures from the
              data, and display and analysis of the  results.    Price quotes and product
              information for the x-ray equipment  have been received from four different
              suppliers. Although  the detailed budget (Appendix V, p.20) is written for one 
              specific supplier, the other quotes are at an equivalent  total amount.  The
              actual make of the equipment and type of  area detector to be procured
              (fluorescent screen vs. imaging  plate vs. multiwire) will be finalized after
              detailed  performance comparisons if an award is made.    Research and Training
              to be Conducted.  The research  activities to be conducted with the proposed
              x-ray equipment  will be three-dimensional structural determination of 
              molecules.  Structures of biological macromolecules will  consti tute the
              majority of the work.  These include the  protein crystallography projects
              described in the research  activities section (pp. 4-11)  The non-biological 
              macromolecule projects (metallocluster compounds) require  are detector
              technology in that their cell dimensions,  solvent content, and radiation
              sensitivity rival those of  standard protein crystallography work.  The
              training will be primarily for doctorate level graduate  students from the
              participating departments.  The structural  aspects of their research will be
              supervised by a core of  three principal investigators with expertise in x-ray 
              structure determination, who will closely interact with the  interested
              laboratories.  The training will concentrate  on the application of x-ray
              structure analysis to their  basic science research projects.  An important
              feature of the planned x-ray facility will be  in its relationship to the
              Molecular Biology training  program initiated this year at UIC.  The program
              includes  three of the six departments participation in this proposal 
              (Microbiology & Immunology, Biochemistry, and Physiology &  Biophysics).  The
              structural biology component of the  training program will be substantially
              enhanced by the  presence of the x-ray facility.  In turn, this arrangement 
              will increase the pool of potential graduate students for  structural biology,
              and thus promote utilization of the x-  ray facility to its maximum potential. 
                Activity Resulting from Funding.  An x-ray at UIC will have  a significant
              impact on research performance on our campus  by providing the necessary
              crystallographic tools for the  ongoing structural projects.  This will improve
              the success  rate of our many laboratories in securing external agency  funds. 
              Because the facility will bring a focus to  structural analysis for our
              multidisciplinary group of basic  science researchers, it will also foster
              interaction and  further collaboration among the participants.
