Title       : Equipment to Improve the Capabilities of the Center for Ecological Research &
               Education (CERE) Environmental Analytical Laboratory (EAL) & Controlled
               Environment Facility (CEF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1994  
File        : a9413531

Award Number: 9413531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy J. Huntly huntnanc@isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay E. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Inouye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              G. Wayne Minshall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      
	      Pocatello, ID  83209    208/236-3277

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              We request support to acquire equipment needed to enhance  our program of
              environmental research, which emphasizes  interactions of organisms and
              ecosystem function. The  equipment will significantly upgrade and expand two 
              interactive facilities used by the six PIs in our separate  and collaborative
              research: an environmental analytical  chemistry laboratory (the CERE EAL) and
              a controlled  environment facility (the CERE CEF). The capabilities of  these
              two facilities are intimately linked; the laboratory  components of most of our
              field-based studies require  controlled environment chambers, and both the
              field and  laboratory aspects require determinations of various  nutrients and
              ions.    Our group includes plant, animal, and microbial ecologists  with
              expertise in aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems, whose  work ranges from the
              level of organismal behavior and  physiology to community and ecosystem
              dynamics. Our group  is highly collaborative, and our individual and 
              collaborative research is relevant to many issues of  conservation and
              management importance in the Intermountain  West. We provide significant
              research training  opportunities at the undergraduate, graduate, and 
              postdoctoral levels. Collectively, we are the major  advisors for 44 graduate
              students, 5 postdoctoral research  associates, and numerous undergraduate
              research assistants  or independent study students.    We will replace obsolete
              equipment and add new pieces of  state-of-the-art equipment with improved
              capabilities over  those we currently have. We request two major pieces of 
              equipment that will greatly improve the sample processing  capacity and data
              quality obtainable from our analytical  laboratory, an Alpkem FLOWSolution
              autoanalyzer (model  3590, base system A001280) and a Carlo Erba NA1500 CHNS 
              combustion analyzer. These models are necessary to increase  the sample number
              we can process and, also importantly, to  improve our abilities to accurately
              determine low  concentrations of nutrients and ions, especial ly nitrate, 
              ammonium, and total nitrogen.    We also request two walk-in, four reach-in,
              and four small  benchtop environmental chambers to replace obsolete  equipment
              and add additional controlled environment space.  These chambers will equip a
              controlled environment facility  that Idaho State University will build as part
              of a new  greenhouse complex, with construction scheduled to be  completed in
              January 1995. Although we understand that  building cannot contribute to the
              match for this proposal,  this greenhouse complex has a building cost of
              greater than  $300,000 and is being built largely to support the research  and
              research training of our group. The controlled  environment room was added to
              the building plans in direct  support of this proposal, at an estimated
              additional  floor-space cost of $19,200.    If this proposal is funded, we will
              be able to conduct our  research more effectively, to undertake more
              collaborative  research and more sophisticated research, to collect better 
              quality data in a shorter time, and to expand our research  programs. This will
              provide increased number and quality of  research training opportunities to
              postdoctoral associates,  graduate students and undergraduate students.
