Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Study of Electronic Materials and
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9413899

Award Number: 9413899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abraham Clearfield clearfield@mail.chem.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wiley P. Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald G. Naugle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raghvendra K. Pandey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Main Campus
	      
	      College Station, TX  77843    409/845-3211

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The research of this materials-oriented group of  experimentalists is focused on
              1) the development of nanometer  fabrication and processing through molecular
              beam epitaxy,  scanning tunnel microscopy etching and chemical vapor 
              deposition, and electrochemical underpotential dep-osition, 2)  the study of
              metallization and  contact regions to semicon-  ductors, 3) development of
              passivation layers such as metal  nitrides and oxides and 4) development of new
              materials  relevant to electronics applications which include high  critical
              temperature superconducting films, thin magnetic  films, ferroelectric films
              and bulk crystals, wide bandgap  oxide semiconductors, electrically conductive
              polymers, and  monomolecular layers and nanowires of metal alloys and 
              intermetallics precipitated from soluble metal precursors. The  Academic
              Research Infrastrusture Program funds will be employed  to  acquire additional
              instrumentation to augment the present  capabilities and to initiate a central
              materials  characterization and fabrication facility. The new instruments  will
              include: 1) Laser Ablation Thin Film Deposition System, 2)  AC Susceptometer/DC
              Magnetometer, 3) Environmentally Controlled  Large Sample Scanning Microprobe,
              4) Atomic Force/ Scanning  Tunneling Microprobe for Elecrochemical Studies, 5)
              Coin-  cidence Counting Mass Spectrometer, 6) High Resolution Electron  Energy
              Loss Spectrometer. Item 5) will be custom built from in  house designs.    This
              research is concerned with the fabrication and  characterization of new
              electronic materials and devices, in  addition to developing an understanding
              of the fundamental  mechanisms associated with their properties and processes.
              The  research spans a broad range of materials from thin films 
              superconductors, ferroelectric and magmetic materials to wide  bandgap
              semiconductors to monomolecular layers and nanowires of  metal alloys and
              intermetallic compounds.
