Title       : Acquisition of Laboratory Equipment for Research in Biological Anthropology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1994 
File        : a9413891

Award Number: 9413891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Weiss kmw4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Stoneking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry C. Harpending  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Weiss    With support from the National Science Foundation, Pennsylvania  State
              University will purchase a DNA synthesizer, automated DNA  sequencer, gel
              documentation system and biological microscope for  work on molecular and
              developmental genetics. The Biological  Anthropological Laboratory (BAL) where
              the instrumentation will  be housed, plays a leading role in anthropological
              genetics.  However since the laboratory was established in 1986-87,  sequencing
              instrumentation has changed enormously and new systems  are necessary to permit
              the BAL to conduct effective research.  New instrumentation will allow the
              laboratory to address  questions on a much larger scale, both in terms of the
              numbers of  samples processed and the amount of information obtained per 
              sample. Many of the BAL's projects require large sample sizes;  the facility
              recently received for example a priceless collection  of over 12,000 South
              American Indian blood samples.    The BAL focusses on molecular genetic
              questions which are of  anthropological significance. It examines the evolution
              of  evolutionary-interesting phenotypes including, for example, the  genetic
              basis of susceptibility to diabetes and obesity in  Amerindians, the evolution
              of genetic susceptibility to  tuberculosis and the genetics of variation in
              olfaction among  individuals. The laboratory also attempts to reconstruct
              various  aspects of evolutionary history. Currently, for example it is 
              investigating the colonization of the South Pacific through the  analysis of
              patterns of molecular genetic variation in Asian and  Pacific populations. The
              BAL also places strong emphasis on the  training of students at all levels and
              the instrumentation  provided will not only help to maintain the high research 
              standards of the research group, but also provide students with  the training
              and facilities necessary to ensure productive  graduate and post-graduate
              careers.
