Title       : Enhancing and Linking Spatial Analysis and Modeling Facilities for Natural
               Resources and Environmental Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9413896

Award Number: 9413896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin E. Bauer mbauer@mercury.forestry.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Bell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Tester  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dietmar W. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Grigal  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT                Enhancing and Linking Spatial Analysis and  Modeling
              Facilities for                     Natural Resources and Environmental 
              Sciences Research       Over the past decade there has been growing recognition
               of the importance of quantitatively  understanding natural resources,
              ecosystems, and environment  at landscape to regional, continental, and global
              levels.  Geographic information systems (GIS), with their  capabilities for
              spatial analysis and modeling of diverse  datasets, provide a means of
              understanding and dealing with  issues such as biodiversity, habitat
              fragmentation, effects  of climate change, soil erosion, water quality, and
              impacts  of urbanization, to name only a few of many resource and 
              environmental issues that have a spatial dimension. GIS  provides a means to
              organize and analyze the myriad of  spatial data associated with these
              problems.       GIS has become an important tool for scientific research,  as
              well as resource management, and it has become an  essential research tool for
              many faculty and graduate  students on the St. Paul Campus of the University of
               Minnesota. Presently, there is GIS activity and varying  degrees of capability
              in six departments in the Colleges of  Agriculture, Biological Sciences, and
              Natural Resources. A  growing number of faculty and graduate students are
              making  increased use of our current facilities for GIS and image  processing.
              The present facilities, which reside in  individual and departmental
              laboratories, range from  beginning level to advanced; but all need access to
              more and  better facilities than are now available or affordable from 
              individual departments and research grants. The technologies  of GIS and
              related areas are advancing very rapidly.  Equipment that was state-of-the-art
              several years ago is  rapidly becoming obsolete. At the same time the scale of
              the  problems being addressed, and therefore the volume of needed  data, is
              rapidly growing and overwhelming the capacity of  our present computer 
              systems.       This proposal is to develop and link state-of-the-art 
              facilities for spatial analysis and modeling of natural  resources and
              environment in six departments on the St. Paul  campus. A distributed system
              linked by network among the  various departments is recommended. We would
              maintain  facilities within our individual departments, but centrally  manage
              the operating system, major software and databases,  and selected peripherals.
              Concurrently we would add expanded  and enhanced hardware-software to our
              campus capability.       The equipment requested in this grant proposal would 
              improve the productivity of our faculty and graduate  students by: (a)
              expanding the range and depth of analysis  and modeling capabilities available
              for research  applications, (b) increasing access to GIs capability for 
              faculty and student researchers, as well as advanced  graduate-level courses
              which incorporate spatial analysis  approaches, by providing additional
              workstation terminals,  (c) enabling us to work on landscape to regional scale 
              issues and problems that require the analysis of large  volumes of soil,
              terrain, and vegetation data, (d)  consolidating GIS hardware and software
              costs and management  tasks that are currently being replicated by several 
              research groups on the St. Paul campus will enable us to  devote more resources
              to analysis, (e) alleviating current  data storage and access problems by
              providing additional  magnetic disk and read/write optical devices, and (f) 
              providing capability for high quality output that is  currently not available. 
                   Additionally, we believe this project will bring together  researchers
              from several disciplines to use spatial analysis  techniques and that it will
              foster interdisciplinary  approaches to research problems by standardizing
              certain  aspects of our GIS operations and facilitating sharing of  data and
              analytical techniques. Preparation of this proposal  has already served to
              bring together the various researchers  from several discip lines with both
              existing and potential  capability to use GIS technology in their research    4
