Title       : Utilization of Instrumentation in a Biotechnology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9413986

Award Number: 9413986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38767              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan D. Youngren FAC-YOUN@WPMSGSVR.VJC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hildagarde K. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villa Julie College
	      Green Spring Valley Road
	      Stevenson, MD  21153    301/486-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The funds requested in this proposal will be used to  implement a Biotechnology
              course at Villa Julie  College. The course will be designated as an 
              upper-level course for undergraduates majoring in  Biology, or related fields,
              leading to a Bachelors  degree. The acquisition of the state-of-the art 
              equipment, including a laminar flow hood, Co2  incubator, ultrafreezer, 
              ultracentrifuge,  spectrophotometer, and equipment for protein  electrophoresis
              will allow the students access to  more modern instrumentation and enhance
              their skills  and knowledge of  current technologies. Presently  the Science
              Department offers upper level courses in  Molecular Cell Biology, Genetics, and
              Biochemistry.  The development of a Biotechnology course will  complement these
              courses and prepare the students  for graduation and their future endeavors.
              Students  completing this course will be able to use their  knowledge and
              skills to help them obtain employment  in biotechnology and life sciences
              fields upon  graduation with a baccalaureate degree, or they may  wish to
              pursue a Masters or Doctoral degree.    The Biotechnology course will include
              both the  theory  and practical use of the following: a)  centrifugation, both
              low and ultra speed, b)  isolation and electrophoresis separation of proteins 
              and nucleic acids, c) Recombinant DNA Technology;  specifically plasmid
              isolation, restriction enzyme  analysis, cloning, and analysis of foreign DNA 
              expression, d) the growth and maintenance of  bacterial, yeast, and animal cell
              cultures, e) the  propagation and isolation of viruses, and f) the use  of
              antibodies to identify specific proteins by ELISA  and Western Blot procedures.
                                                    3
