Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for Computer Analysis of Discourse Prosody
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413823

Award Number: 9413823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44489              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hundraj S. Gopal hsgopal@ucsbuxa.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gopal    Through its Academic Research Infrastructure competition, the  National
              Science Foundation provides funds to permit Dr. Hundraj  Gopal to purchase
              instrumentation for linguistic analysis. The  equipment centers around several
              personal computer-based  workstations which are networked. Each of the
              workstations will  be configured to perform acoustic analysis of speech for
              prosodic  information and playback/recording of conversations for auditory 
              analysis. Each of the workstations includes a portable digital  tape recorder,
              condenser microphone, a high-powered PC equipped  with a 16-bit sound card, 16
              MB RAM, 1 GB of hard disc, a math  co-processor, headphones and loudspeakers.
              The software required  for discourse prosody, including word processing,
              database  processing and speech analysis is also provided.     Prosody
              constitutes a distinctive feature of spoken language. The  term refers to the
              melody or rhythm with which it is spoken.  Every language has distinct pitch,
              stress and timing patterns.  While linguists have focussed on smaller segments
              of speech for  many years, only recently have they turned to such larger units 
              which are amenable to prosody analysis. Only recently has the  relevant
              technology developed to the point where this aspect  naturally-occurring speech
              can be examined.    This work is important for several reasons. It will
              increase  scientific understanding of human speech. It will aid in the 
              training of students and it may have important implications for  such practical
              issues as computer recognition of speech.
