Title       : Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1994  
File        : a9413906

Award Number: 9413906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197959             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Bastiani bastiani@bioscience.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal requests funds toward the purchase of a JEOL model             
                           JEM-1210 Transmission  Electron Microscope (TEM) equipped with a
              high resolution video camera,  a digital image  archiving system, and image
              processing software. Equipment that will  directly support the  operation of
              this TEM is also requested. This instrument will replace  an aging Philips 201 
              microscope currently housed in the Biology Microscopy Facility at the 
              University of Utah.  Although the Philips 201 TEM was a capable microscope in
              its day, it is  now 16 years old and  suffers from continual mechanical and
              electrical breakdowns. Components  are no longer  manufactured to support this
              instrument making it a challenge to keep  the microscope  operational. It is
              likely that the Philips 201 microscope will fail  permanently in the near
              future.      The requested TEM will have a dramatic impact on the research 
              programs of many faculty at the University of Utah. A minimum of  thirteen
              faculty in the Department of Biology alone are pursuing  research programs that
              focus on structure/function relationships at the  cellular or subcellular
              level. For example, the microscope will be used  by researchers in the Biology
              neuroscience group to 1) analyze  connectivity changes in C. elegans mutants
              defective in neurite  outgrowth, synaptic specificity or synapse formation, and
              2) to study  the cellular contacts among developing neurons in grasshoppers and
               flies. Other research groups in Biology will use the microscope in 
              immunogold-labeling studies to examine the structure and localization  of
              molecules involved in cell adhesion, neuronal differentiation, 
              neurotransmission, cytoskeletal function, cell division, development of  cell
              polarity and bacterial flagellar motility. In addition, a number  of
              investigators use a genetic approach to study the early development  of
              multicellular plants and animals. These investigators need a  transmission
              electron microscope to perform morphological analyses on  mut ants arrested in
              specific developmental stages. Many of the projects  listed above will require
              specialized features that are only available  on a state-of-the-art
              transmission electron microscope like the JEOL  JEM-1210. The research needs of
              our existing faculty, staff, and  students simply cannot be met by the antique
              Philips 201 microscope  currently available in the Biology Microscope Facility.
                   The University of Utah has committed 50% in matching funds toward the 
              purchase of a transmission electron microscope. This commitment  indicates the
              high degree of institutional priority for our request. In  addition, the
              Biology Department has guaranteed 1) full salary support  for the facility
              manager, Dr. Edward King, 2) 50% support for a full  time microscopy technician
              for two years, and 3) funds for a four year  service contract. Together, these
              contributions represent an  institutional commitment of greater than 50%.     
              The JEOL JEM-1210 will be part of a core facility used by faculty,  staff,
              graduate and undergraduate students in the Biology Department  and by
              researchers from other departments and colleges on the  University of Utah
              campus. The Biology Microscopy Facility already  maintains a heavily used laser
              scanning confocal microscope and a  scanning electron microscope. The addition
              of a modern transmission  electron microscope to the facility will enhance
              campus wide research  efforts addressing a variety of basic biological
              questions.
