Title       : Acquisition of a Controlled Environmental Facility for Plant Biology at the
               University of Vermont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9413916

Award Number: 9413916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128380             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Tierney mtierney@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan R. Cumming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Research in plant biology at the University of Vermont focuses on both 
              fundamental aspects of plant growth, development and ecology as well as  the
              effects of environmental factors on these processes. A consortium  of
              scientists from the Departments of Botany and Zoology and the School  of
              Natural Resources have formed an interdisciplinary research core  which seeks
              to advance opportunities for research in plant biology at  the University of
              Vermont. The expertise of these researchers extends  from the gene to the
              ecosystem level, presenting a well-balanced  foundation from which to foster
              research in plant biology. Ongoing  collaborative ventures among scientists
              within this core and active  student and post-doctoral participation in their
              laboratories attest to  their commitment to interdisciplinary research and
              education in the  plant sciences.    While each of the core faculty within this
              proposal has established a  productive research program at the University of
              Vermont, individual  and collaborative research is limited by the availability
              of growth  chambers that allow precisely controlled environmental conditions.
              This  restriction is not limited to any branch of plant biology but impacts 
              productivity and competitiveness in plant molecular biology, plant  physiology
              and metabolism, plant environmental biology and plant  evolution. A Controlled
              Environmental Facility for Plant Biology at UVM  brings together a cadre of
              scientists across units who are actively  collaborating or envision potential
              interdisciplinary interactions  stemming from a facility designed to provide
              controlled environments  for research in plant biology. Externally-funded
              research programs in  Botany, Zoology, and the School of Natural Resources
              highlight the  vitality of the research core.    The goal of this proposal is
              to establish a facility comprised of eight  growth chambers that allows maximum
              flexibility and breadth in research  opportunities in plant biology.
              Acquisition of this facility will  greatly en hance the research and
              educational opportunities that  currently exist at the University of Vermont
              This facility will provide  environmental conditions needed for the generation
              of transgenic  plants, for analyzing a plant's response to contrasting
              environmental  conditions, and for studying principles of group selection in
              large  plant populations under controlled conditions. The proposed facility 
              will also foster new avenues of experimentation, especially  collaborations
              that are currently impossible due to the lack of  adequate controlled growth
              facilities. Lastly, the facility will  enhance the quality of undergraduate and
              graduate education at the  University of Vermont by providing students studying
              plant molecular  biology, physiology and genetics with a state-of-the-art
              growth  facility necessary for their research.
