Title       : Establishing a Multipurpose Scientific Imaging Facility at Ohio University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1994 
File        : a9413419

Award Number: 9413419
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gar W. Rothwell rothwell@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Salick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Gulino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin E. Kordesch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Matching funds support is requested from the National  Science Foundation to
              defray approximately 45% of the cost  to acquire instrumentation that is vital
              for the development  of a state-of-the-art scientific imaging facility at Ohio 
              University. The facility is to be located in space that has  been newly
              renovated for this purpose. It will upgrade and  replace aging and obsolete
              light, transmission-, and  scanning electron microscopy equipment, and utilize
              the  newly emerging generation of digital and video technology to  resolve,
              capture, store, process, transmit and print high  quality scientific data. The
              facility will be used  extensively by the authors of this proposal, and by
              numerous  additional senior personnel and their graduate research  groups to
              expand the parameters of present research programs  and to initiate new
              projects that are possible only with the  support of this multiplicity of newly
              emerging technologies.  The proposed facility will be available to researchers 
              throughout Ohio University and to their collaborators. We  currently have no
              facility with the resources and  flexibility to satisfy the specialized
              requirements of such  a diverse array of research programs, and the combined 
              capabilities of the proposed facility are presently not  available at Ohio
              University or elsewhere in the  southeastern Ohio region. By bringing together
              in a single  centrally-located laboratory all of the imaging requirements  for
              a broad spectrum of productive research programs, we  will be able to establish
              a center for the support of  ongoing research, for the development of
              innovative new  research initiatives, and for the comprehensive training of 
              future generations of scientific researchers.
