Title       : National High Field FT-ICR Mass Spectrometry Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9413008

Award Number: 9413008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan G. Marshall marshall@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Eyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shenheng Guan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                               ABSTRACT    PROPOSAL:  9413008  PI:  MARSHALL,
              A. G.               INSTITUTION:  FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY    This award from
              the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program will aid in the 
              development of FT-ICR-Mass Spectrometry Facility in the National High Magnetic
              Field Laboratory  at Florida State University.  The research to be performed
              with this instrumentation include the  following:  direct sequencing, chemical
              reactivity, and shape analysis of gas-phase proteins up to  antibody size
              (150,000 Da); direct optical absorption spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic
              resonance  of mass-selected trapped ions; and routine direct identification of
              unseparated components of mixtures  as complex as crude oil.  This Facility
              will have the highest-field ICR mass spectrometers in the world.   The
              technological development in FT-ICR will have major impact in biological and
              analytical chemistry,  and the NSF center will enhance the spread of these
              development to a broad community of users.   Methods Development at the
              facility will include research on:        a)  internal and external ionization
              techniques,      b)  ion Sources for thermolabile and/or solid compounds,     
              c)  IR laser desorption (LD) and      d)  vaporization of high boiling point
              mixtures.    In-house core group research will be concerned with applications
              of FT-ICR-mass spectrometry  to:         a)  peptide and protein sequencing,   
                 b)  hydrogen-deuterium exchange in proteins,       c)  phospholipid
              identification and structural analysis,       d)  EPR spectroscopy of
              mass-selected trapped ions       e)  glow discharge FT-ICR for elemental
              analysis and depth profiling in semiconductors, and       f)  optical
              spectroscopy of trapped ions.    User Facility:  In the first year 50% of
              instrument time will be available to users outside Florida State  University,
              increasing to 80% in subsequent years.    Education Outreach:  The facility
              will provide an outstanding training ground for st udents and other  scientists
              in academic and industry.  The program will include a large number of graduate
              and  postdoctoral student, and visiting professors and industrial scientists. 
              Intern programs will reach high  school and undergraduate students and
              teachers.  Representation by female and minority groups are  specifically
              included.    Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT-ICR) mass
              spectrometry is the most versatile technique  for unscrambling and quantifying
              ion-molecule reaction kinetics and equilibria in the absence of solvent  (i.e.,
              the gas phase).  Applications, range from protein structure to crude oil.
