Title       : Purchase of Equipment for Integrated Research on Plant Responses to
               Environmental Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9413726

Award Number: 9413726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfredo J. Huerta   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry W. McClure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9157,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT        This project seeks funds to purchase instrumentation  that
              will be used to conduct research specifically in the  area of "plant responses
              to environmental stress".  The  funds requested will not only provide our 
              "plant  stress"  research program with modern instrumentation,  but will also 
              strengthen our capabilities for training  graduate  and  undergraduate 
              students  in  the  most  contemporary techniques in plant stress physiology. 
              The  focus of the research to be conducted within the scope of  this proposal
              is somewhat  broad  in  the  sense  that  it  will  encompass  several
              different research projects.  However, all of the research projects that will
              be enhanced  by this project  fall  into the general  category of plant 
              physiology and metabolism as a response to environmental  stress.   One of the
              projects that will use the requested  instrumentation  centers   on  the  
              development   of  physiological selection criteria for breeding drought 
              resistant  genotypes of grain sorghum.  This continuing international  research
              program with Mexico which has received federal and  state support, has
              developed into a fruitful collaboration  which is now involving several
              researchers and students from  both Miami University and the Autonomous
              University of  Tamaulipas in northeastern Mexico.  In a second   research 
              program   that   will   use   the   requested  instrumentation, we are studying
              the role of epidermal  flavonoids  as W-B  response molecules and W-B
              protection mechanisms  in  plants.  We have synthesized (only one of two labs
              in the  world to do this), a specific inhibitor of plant phenolics  that is
              capable  of  completely  inhibiting  the  synthesis  of  flavonoids.  This
              inhibitor has uniquely enabled us to test the  hypothesis that epidermal
              flavonoids are important W-B  screens in plants.
