Title       : Acquisition of Equipment for Molecular Engineering and Investigation of Selected
               Organic and Organometallic Materials with Potential Applications in Photonic
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1994    
File        : a9413557

Award Number: 9413557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. C. George mgeorge@uwf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chandra S. Prayaga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of West Florida
	      Alternate 90
	      Pensacola, FL  32514    904/474-2000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9157,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Academic Research Infrastructure Program funds will be employed  to acquire
              equipment for the molecular engineering and  investigation of selected organic
              and oarganometallic materials  with potential applications for photonic
              devices. The equipment  will in include a neodymium yttrium aluminum garnet
              (Nd:YAG)  laser with a 5 nanosecond pulse width with substantial output  at the
              second and third harmonics; a pulsed dye laser with  substantial wavelength
              tunability to be pumped by the YAG  laser; a optical isolator; a fast digital
              oscilloscope; various  optical components such as mirrors, beam splitters,
              polarizers,  etc; a Langmuir-Blodgett trough for the preparation of Langmuir- 
              Blodgett molecular films; and an interface and control  computer. The research
              will be on photorefractive and other  nonlinear optical and electro-optical
              properties of  organometallic materials and doped organic materials and 
              polymers. These materials will be studied to investigate their  suitability for
              applications such as phase conjugate mirrors,  light modulators, optical
              switches etc. The photorefractive  studies will be studied by four-wave mixing,
              optical phase  conjugation, beam coupling, and diffraction efficiency 
              approaches. Doping with different metal complexes or donor-  acceptor groups
              and changing the length of the pi-electron  chains will be used to yield large
              nonlinear and electro-  optical responses.    Several lasers and associated
              optical equipment will be  acquired for the purpose of studying the
              photorefractive  properties of organic and organometallic materials. The study 
              of these materials will determine their suitability for use in  optical devices
              such as phase conjugate mirrors, light  modulators, and optical switches.
