Title       : Research Equipment Grant-Development of Testbed for Ultra- Fast Opto-Electronic
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9413393

Award Number: 9413393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elsa Garmire   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony Levi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Chemla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Milton Birnbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1501,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               7 #                                                                 $     $   $
                  $     $     2     D     D     D     D     N     X     X $   | x   D        
                      6 *   `     $         6     *     6     6     ` *   6     6     6     6
                  6     6    9413393 Garmire  This proposal is to develop a testbed to
              advance the state of the art in 10-90 GHz optoelecetronic devices for fiber and
              wireless communications as part of the emerging national information highway. 
              The tested will enable study of the high speed switching capabilities of
              functional, mode-locked semiconductor laser.  Monolithic  mode-locked devices,
              in the range form 10-90 GHz, and achieve functionality by digitally switching
              mode-locked frequencies.  To minimize switching time and optimize efficiency,
              it is necessary to understand the interplay between nonlinear gain and the
              cavity resonance structure.  Ultra-fast optical pump-probe experiments are
              needed on multi-functional RF-modulated lasers, with time resolution much
              faster than the modulation rate.  The 1.3 um and 1.5 wavelength regions are
              needed because of their application to local area network and long-haul
              communications.  Development is needed for this testbed because there is no
              system in existence that combines ultra-short pulse generation at wavelengths
              of interest for optical communications with the electrical timing required to
              study modulated semiconductor lasers.  One developed, the proposed testbed will
              provide the basis  for collaboration between investigators at University of
              California, Berkeley and University of Southern California.  These researchers
              combine expertise in optical pump-probe studies and expertise in advanced
              semiconductor lasers and cavity dynamics.  Also involved in the development
              will be experts in tunable solid state lasers.  A single mode-locked Nd:YAG
              laser will be used to pump both a Cr4+:Forsterite laser near 1.3 um and a
              Cr4+:YAG laser near 1.5 um.  New crystals and new approaches will also be
              sought to active greater wavelength  tuning and greater ease of operation. 
              Mechanisms for timing synchronism between the optics and electronics will be
              designed and built; the aim is to achieve the most practical and reliable
              systems to use in opto-electronic device studies.  If sufficient funds can be
              found,  a synchronously pumped mode-locked optical parametric oscillator will
              also be built and its performance compared to tunable mode-locked lasers.  The
              outcome will be a unique testbed, located primarily at the Center for laser
              Studies at USC,  with complementary facilities at UC Berkeley, designed for
              study of opto-electronic devices.  This testbed will be made available to
              researchers form other universities, industry, and government laboratories. 
              Research using the testbed  should result in new functional opto-electronic
              laser designs, along with definition and demonstration of performance measures
              in multi-GHz communication systems.  This testbed will be made available to
              researchers from  other universities , industry, and government laboratories. 
              Research using the  testbed should result in new functional opto-electronic
              laser designs, along with definition and demonstration of  performance measures
              in multi-GHz communication  systems.  This testbed will also further the basic
              science of carrier dynamic as a function of time and position within functional
              semiconductor lasers.  Matching support will come form several compainies,  the
              Center for Laser Studies Industrial Affiliates Program, and from USC's gift
              program for  research.  u le study of the hig                   Z              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                @                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              !         !    
                  !         !         !                                                      
                                                                             !      9 :~    
              H H       (       F G (       H H       (     d            '                   
                      @                          = /             R       B      H  
              -:LaserWriter             Times                           J   e   J   S   *
              gar.abs  Alicia Harris   Alicia Harris
