Title       : Ultracentrifugation and Membrane studies at Grand View College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1994 
File        : a9413479

Award Number: 9413479
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand View College
	      1200 Grand View Avenue
	      Des Moines, IA  503092938    515/263-2800

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The primary objective of this proposal is to obtain  funding that will be
              used to purchase a refrigerated,  ultracentrifuge. Purchasing an
              ultracentrifuge will enable  Grand View College: 1) To train undergraduate
              students in  membrane isolation protocols and a variety of techniques  commonly
              used in cell biology, molecular biology, and  biochemistry laboratories. 2) To
              conduct research to  identify the biochemical and molecular factors associated 
              with ethanol-induced impairment of central nervous system  development in
              chicks. This research project is currently  studying how ethanol alters
              embryonic chick brain membranes  and how such alterations may impair cellular
              responses to a  number of morphogens required for neuron differentiation. 3) 
              To conduct further collaborative research with Dr. Norman  Paradise (lowa
              Methodist Medical Center, Director of  Surgical Research) and Dr. LaRhee
              Henderson (Drake  University, Assoc. Prof. of Chemistry). This collaborative 
              project is directed at identifying the biochemical  relationships between
              obesity and cardiac dysfunction in the  Zucker rat. We are currently
              characterizing Zucker rat  cardiac membrane lipids and studying how signal
              transduction  is impaired in Zucker rat cardiac membranes as compared to  lean
              rats.       Both projects described in this grant proposal are  currently
              underway and utilize lipid biochemistry techniques  and molecular biology
              protocols. The lipid biochemistry  techniques attempt to define how membranes
              mediate genetic  and biochemical response to stress. The purchase of a 
              refrigerated ultracentrifuge would enable us to fractionate  cells, isolate
              plasma and sarcolemma membranes, and to  measure the biochemical composition of
              membranes. Since  these research projects utilize undergraduate students from 
              Grand View College (Fall, 1993 full time enrollment =1025),  and collaborative
              students from Drake University and Iowa  Methodist Medical Center (the largest
              hospital in Des  Moines), the purchase of an ultracentrif uge would strengthen 
              the cell biology and biochemical education of a number of  students.
