Title       : Instrumentation for Dating and Stratigraphic Assessment of Archaeological Sites
               Using Amino Acid Diagenesis in Carbonate Fossils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9413554

Award Number: 9413554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88659              (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Edgar Hare Hare@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison S. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Von Endt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn A. Goodfriend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hare    This grant provides partial support to permit the Carnegie  Institute of
              Washington to purchase a high-performance liquid  chromatograph, gas
              chromatograph, combined gas chromatograph/mass  spectrometer and an autosampler
              for an amino acid analyzer. These  instruments will be used by Dr. P Edgar Hare
              and his colleagues  to expand their research into the chemical changes in
              organic  matter in fossil mollusks and ostrich egg shell. For a number of 
              years these researchers have worked to use such reactions as a  chemical clock
              to date sites of archaeological significance. The  methods they have developed
              are particularly important for sites  too old (older than ca. 45,000 years) and
              too young (younger than  ca. 400 years) for radiocarbon dating. In particular
              the group  will focus on the development and application of amino acid 
              racemization and other digenetic reactions in ostrich eggshell  for dating
              African and Asian archaeological sites. They will  attempt to develop
              simultaneous equations for both age and mean  temperature history. They will
              also study digenetic changes other  than racemization for the dating of very
              old sites and continue  to improve the use of aspartic acid racemization for
              dating  recent occurrences. The techniques will be applied to a number of 
              sites including late Holocene cores from Lake Titicaca, Bolivia, 
              archaeological sites in central Texas as well as Nile Delta  cores.    Accurate
              dates are crucial in archaeological as well as  climatological, geological and
              other environmentally related  sciences. Although a number of techniques such
              as radiocarbon and  argon/argon dating are available, these and others have 
              limitations both in the kinds of materials they require and the  time range
              they cover. Ostrich eggshell and many types of mollusc  shell are present in a
              wide range of archaeological sites. They  also occur naturally in a wide range
              of geological situations.  The potential to obtain accurate dates from such
              materials has  widespread significance acr oss a range of disciplines.
