Title       : Development of a Core Facility for DNA Sequencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9413486

Award Number: 9413486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald F. Shields ffgfs@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bert B. Boyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott T. Smiley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Academic Research Infrastructure equipment proposal requests funds  to
              establish a Core Facility for DNA sequencing by purchasing (1) an  Applied
              Biosystems model 373 automated DNA sequencer, (2) GeneAmp PCR  System 9600
              thermal cycler, (3) Tektronix Phaser 200e printer, (d~)  Genescan 672 software
              kit, (5) Genotyper software and (6) Sequence  Navigator Software (7) Power Mac
              8100. The Applied Biosvstems model 373  DNA sequence is a state-of-the-art
              instrument for many primer based DNA  analyses including DNA sequencing, sizing
              and quantitation. The machine  will be used by research faculty at the
              University of Alaska Fairbanks  and will augment productivity of our molecular
              genetics sequencing  group in addition to graduate and undergraduate teaching.
              The molecular  genetics sequencing group (MGS) has seven core and seven
              affiliate  faculty. All projects within the MGS use some form of primer based
              DNA  analysis. The development of a Core Facility for DNA Sequencing will  have
              a major impact on research productivity. Because manual sequencing  of DNA is
              highly labor intensive, molecular biologists, who use DNA  sequencing, have
              generally limited themselves to relatively few ongoing  research projects and
              even fewer collaborations with colleagues whose  important biological questions
              might be elucidated by sequence  analyses. Development of a Core Facility for
              DNA Sequencing can only  reduce the labor expenditure of technician time and
              thus allow for  larger numbers of cross-disciplinary and international
              collaborative  projects.    The MGS core faculty include three molecular
              systematizes and four  molecular biologists. The seven affiliate faculty
              members have a wide  range of research interests including physiology, wildlife
              biology and  marine sciences. The common denominators among all members of the
              MGS  faculty is that they work on biological research projects in the Arctic 
              or Subarctic and acquisition of DNA sequence or size information is a 
              significant component of their research  programs. Research excellence  is
              evident from the past and ongoing research activities of the  individual
              investigators within the MGS group. Development of the Core  Facility for DNA
              Sequencing will foster continued growth and research  excellence by enhancing
              existing research projects and providing  additional opportunities for new
              projects. Below we describe the use,  application, and overall impact of a Core
              Facility for DNA Sequencing.
