Title       : Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1994     
File        : a9413692

Award Number: 9413692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344177             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor L. Hsu hsuv@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested for purchasing a multinuclear 500 MHz  nuclear magnetic
              resonance spectrometer to be shared by  twelve research groups in various
              biochemical, biological  and chemical research projects.  These users represent
               various departments on campus (Biochemistry and Biophysics,  Chemistry,
              Agricultural Chemistry, and Pharmacy), making the  requested instrument a truly
              interdisciplinary resource.  The research groups are divided into two groups: 
              (1) Major  Users (six) who have research projects that require a  commitment of
              instrument time on a 500 MHz spectrometer to  study aspects of solution-state
              dynamics, kinetics and /or  structure function relationships of biologically
              interesting  molecules; (2) Minor Users (six) who have research projects  in
              which NMR spectroscopy is not a primary research tool,  but can be used to
              provided valuable data and insight that  is not easily obtainable by other
              methods.  The projects  that require this new instrumentation include: 
              structural  and dynamics studies of DNA-binding proteins and their 
              interactions with DNA; determining the solution structures  of DNA uracil
              glycosylase, its inhibitor, and the enzyme-  inhibitor complex; detailed
              structural studies of marine  natural products and antibiotics; identifying
              specific sites  of covalent modification of enzymes by highly specific 
              inactivators; and using oxygen isotope- induced carbon  resonance frequency
              shifts to study the extent of repair in  aging proteins.    The 500 MHz
              instrument requested in this proposal will  complement the existing equipment
              in the Departments of  Biochemistry and Biophysics, Chemistry, Agricultural 
              Chemistry, and Pharmacy.  As a physical method used to  characterize molecular
              structure and dynamics, NMR  spectroscopy is uniquely suited for the detailed
              study of  biomacromolecules.  The availability of a 500 MHz  spectrometer at
              OSU, as well as the expertise to train users  in the collection and analysis of
              NMR data, represents an  important resource and opport unity for researchers to
              pursue  an exciting, state-of-the-art method vital to biophysical  research.
