Title       : Survival Skill Training for Emerging Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9413145

Award Number: 9413145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Zigmond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Success in science requires a solid background in a scientific  discipline in
              addition of extensive laboratory experience.   However, for scientists to
              develop into accomplished professionals,  a wide range of "survival skills"
              also are needed.  These skills  can be divided into three categories: 
              communications (e.g. the  ability to communicate both orally and in writing),
              economic issues  (e.g. securing employment), and personal development (e.g.
              managing  time and stress).  While higher education focuses almost  exclusively
              on the content of the scientific discipline and on  research methodology,
              little attention is paid to those skills that  can make the difference between
              technical and creative competence  and success.  This award is to enable (1)
              development of a  comprehensive series of workshops on survival skills; (2) 
              production of materials and relevant literature to assist  instructors in
              higher education to teach their students these  skills; and (3) support of
              workshops to disseminate this  information to faculty members from a wide range
              of institutions so  as to enable other educational programs to initiate similar
               courses.  Evaluation will be carried out for the materials and  workshops to
              assess the success of these activities.  Special  emphasis is being placed to
              improve access for under-represented  groups.  Providing a solid foundation in
              career skills for women  and ethnic minorities may play a pivotal role for
              ensuring their  successful entry into the scientific profession.  An important 
              benefit of increasing the diversity of scientists while maintaining  their
              quality is the incorporation of a diversity of approaches to  scientific
              problems which can only serve to improve science.
