Title       : Development of Crystal Furnace to Produce Large Single Crystal Nd:YAG Slabs for
               High Power Industrial Laser Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1994 
File        : a9413860

Award Number: 9413860
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce H. Chai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1502,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413860  Chai  Current U.S. sheet metal (especially auto) industries have the
              need of high power and high repetition rate lasers which are deliverable via
              optical fibers and linked to robotic arms for high speed and high precision
              drilling, cutting and welding processes.  While both the power supply and
              optical delivery system are available now, the heart of the laser system, the
              lasing medium, is still missing.  The lasing medium is a large single crystal
              Nd:YAG slab which produces the laser power under either coherent (laser diode)
              or incoherent (flash lamp) pumping.  Current state-of-the-art growth process is
              limited to a maximum of 25x200x10mm3 slab due to intrinsic core defects in melt
              pulled single crystals.  Lasers based on slab configuration can generate more
              power with simpler design and better efficiency.  It fits well with current
              diode array pumping design.    We propose construct a novel crystal growth
              system to grow such Nd:YAG slabs.  The system is designed and will be
              constructed and operated by the students and research staffs.  It will provide
              training experience of enormous scale.  It is based on high temperature profile
              control operating at principle with three RF induction heated zones and precise
              temperature profile control operating at temperature in excess of 2000{SYMBOL
              176 \f "Symbol"}C.  The system is fully automatic using adaptive PID feed-back
              control with a computer to monitor the entire growth cycle from heating up to
              growth and to cool down in all zones simultaneously.  The system in its
              proto-form already has the capability of producing up to 125x300x10mm3 single
              crystal slabs.  The Nd:YAG crystals produced in this new system will not
              contain core nor angular growth striations which are common in conventional
              crystal boules.  The crystals produced by this process is capable to deliver
              multi-kilo watt power with multi-kilo hertz repetition rate and joules energy
              per pulse in near defraction limited beam quality so that it is deliverable via
              optical fibers.  Our pr ocess represents a giant step forward in the Nd:YAG
              crystal growth technology.    The proposed system will be the only one in the
              U.S.  At present, both Japan and China have pursued the same aim with good
              progress.  The benefit of this technology is to produce the needed Nd:YAG
              crystal slabs which will create a totally new generation laser manufacturing
              systems for a variety of industrial applications.  Our growth system, once
              perfects its operation, can be further scaled up to produce even larger size
              slabs for large aperture laser beam delivery systems.  It will open a total new
              era for both research and manufacture.  Another example of potential use of
              this high power Nd:YAG slab laser is to build a table top soft x-ray generating
              system for sub-micron lithography applications.  This will provide a low cost
              system for small to medium companies (who can not afford synchrotron radiation
              facilities) to be able to manufacture their own chips at any locations of their
              choice to compete in the market.  ***
