Title       : Development of a Smart Pixel Array Design and Fabrication Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1994 
File        : a9413804

Award Number: 9413804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristina M. Johnson kris@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yung-Cheng Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1502,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413804 Johnson   The term "smart pixel" refers  to picture elements in a
              display or photodetector array that may have some or all of the following
              attributes memory, intra-pixel processing, inter-pixel communication, and
              optical I/O in the form of photodetectors and modulators or emitters.  Smart
              pixel arrays (SPAs) evolved form passive-addressed spatial light modulators
              (SLMs) and displays.  These devices sport "simple: picture elements consisting
              of material placed between two overlapping electrodes to modulate the
              amplitude, phase, or polarization of an optical wave front in response to the
              potential difference between the two electrodes.  SLMs and displays with simple
              pixels suffer form low frame and refresh rates resulting in image degradation
              and  ghosting, low resolution, and limited pixel functionality.  By
              incorporating active circuitry at  each picture element, so-called "smart
              pixel" arrays overcome many of the problems associated with their predecessors.
                 Industrial interest in the project is high as Kopin Corporation, Boeing,
              Rockwell Sciences Center, RCA Sarnoff, Boulder Nonlinear Systems, Meadowlark
              Optics, Physical Optics Corporation , Ford Research Laboratories and Ball
              Communications are already working with the NSF/ERC for Optoelectronic
              Computing Systems (OCS) at the University of Colorado at Boulder (CU) to design
              and fabricate SPAs for applications ranging from micro displays to smart
              cameras for the intelligent vehicle highway system.  These industries have
              funded, or have committed to fund approximately $322,471 per year in support of
              personnel and SPA fabrication cost.  In addition, Photonics Research
              Incorporated, science Applications Incorporated and Hughes Aircraft have
              contracted with the Center for another $290,995 per year to investigate silicon
              backplanes to drive vertical cavity surface emitting laser for parallel,
              free-space optical interconnects.  There are knowledge-based and
              technology-based issues that must be addressed to improve the quality and
              manufact urability of LCOS smart pixel arrays, thus insuring their eventual
              commercialization.    The equipment requested in this proposal will establish
              the first comprehensive computer-aided design, planarization, and advanced
              manufacturing and packaging facility for smart pixel array technology.  In
              particular, we propose to purchase with NSF and matching funds computer
              workstations with color graphics and color printers for a centralized smart
              pixel design laboratory, wafer polishing and metal deposition systems to
              planarize the processed die, and develop an automated robotic controlled
              packaging facility that will lead the way to a low-cost method of manufacturing
              SPAs.  This world class facility will be used for research and research
              training of undergraduate and graduate students, research associates, faculty,
              and industrial researchers working in the field of micro display and smart
              pixel array design.  Working SPAs will be cataloged in a library. 
              Documentation will be provided that detail the operating characteristics of the
              design, including response time, responsivity (when photodetectors are used)
              and I-V curves where appropriate.  One anticipated result of this project is
              the design of 1024X1180 and 2048X2048 smart pixel arrays for helmet mounted
              displays.  These devices will project 6 bits analog and full color data.  High
              density smart photodetector arrays for enhanced night vision will also be a
              focus of  this research.  Another major result anticipated from this project is
              producing planarized silicon backplanes, resulting in an optically flat surface
              for the liquid crystal modulator.  Finally, an advanced manufacturing and
              packaging facility will produce a  low-cost, robotic-controlled method for
              manufacturing SPAs.
