Title       : Acquisition and Development of a High Power Wavelength Tunable Ultrafast Laser
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9413989

Award Number: 9413989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe M. Fauchet fauchet@ece.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian A. Walmsley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Y. Hsiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David D. Meyerhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roman Sobolewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1502,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413989 FAUCHET   We propose to assemble, through instrumentation acquisition
              and development, a versatile femtosecond laser system dedicated to research on
              advanced materials, high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices and
              circuits, and ultra-high bit rate optical communication systems.  The facility
              is based on a titanium sapphire (Ti:S) laser oscillator and amplifier system,
              which generates pulses of less than 100 femtosecond duration tunable form 750
              nm to 1000 nm, either at a repetition rate of 100 MHz and level of 10 nJ per
              pulse, or at a repetition rate of 1 kHz and level of 1 mJ per  trains tunable
              to near 5 um at a level of 1 nJ per pulse, and optical parametric amplifier
              capable of generating 1 kHz-100 fsec pulse trains tunable in the same range but
              at a level of better than 10 uJ per pulse, a femtosecond white light continuum
              generation station and a terahertz generator, capable of producing
              electromagnetic radiation form near dc to more than 10 THz.  This one-of-a-kind
              laser facility is at the cutting edge of the most modern femtosecond laser
              technology.  As such, part of it will be acquired form a company that
              specializes in this kind of equipment, and another part will be designed, built
              and tested by us.  This facility will be operated by five primary users with
              backgrounds in applied physics, electrical engineering, plasma physics and
              optics, who are the co-principal investigators, already have established
              successful joint research efforts, and have ample experience with and are
              committed to ultra fast technology,  process and devices.  The scope of the
              research to be conducted using the new facility runs from device and circuit
              testing to basic nonlinear physical phenomena in condensed matter, and form
              semiconductors to superconductors and polymers.  The common them is the need
              for high peak power femtosecond laser pulses tunable form the visible to the
              mid-infrared, which this for facility will provide.  Examples of projects
              include nonlinear materials and devices f or the 3 to 5 um region and
              enhancement of optical nonlinearities via quantum interference, testing of
              microelectronics circuits using an electro-optic imager, design and testing of
              ultra-wide-band optical repeaters for fiber communications, ultra fast
              processes and development of photodetectors in high-temperature
              superconductors, and high order harmonic generation.  Funding of this facility
              by the National Science Foundation will boost the activities of the active
              ultra fast community at the University of Rochester.  The leadership of the
              Rochester group in the area of application of  ultra fast lasers to the study
              of materials and the development and testing of devices relevant to advanced
              materials and high-performance communication will be renewed and  reemphasized
              through access to the most state-of-the-art equipment.  As a result, other
              researchers, forma  the University of Rochester and local companies such as
              Kodak, Xerox and Clark-MXR with which we have had long-lasting collaborations,
              will be encouraged to use the facility.  In addition, the quality and diversity
              of the graduate students and post-doctoral students attracted to our facility
              will be maintained and improved.
