Title       : Acquisition of a Phosphor Imaging Analysis Work Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1994    
File        : a9413514

Award Number: 9413514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lilian M. Hsu lhsu@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major research instrumentation being requested is a phosphor  imaging and
              analysis work station which will make possible quantitative  autoradiography of
              many biochemical and molecular biological  determinations. In recent years, the
              advancement in gel separation  methods and sequencing technology has given us
              the ability to resolve  differences down to the singlenucleotide and
              single-amino acid level.  At the same time, increasingly clever molecular
              biological  manipulations are enabling us to address ever detailed aspects of
              the  mechanism of many fundamental life processes. To achieve the most 
              rigorous answers, it is not sufficient to only pinpoint qualitative 
              differences, but also to support the detected differences with careful 
              quantitative measurements. The phosphor imaging technology, which has  emerged
              in the past decade, is enhancing our ability to achieve  quantitation of
              molecular differences with great accuracy, speed,  safety, and extraordinary
              sensitivity. When joined with the data  storage and data analysis capability of
              computers, we have a powerful  combination that is revolutionizing the way
              quantitative molecular  sciences are being done these days and will be done for
              the decades to  come.    The type of research activities to be conducted
              initially with the  phosphor imaging unit will include quantitative
              determination of in  vitro transcription reactions, Southern blot hybridization
              analysis,  DNA sequence analysis, and DNA footprinting studies. The
              quantitative  aspect of these studies is crucial in reaching the most rigorous 
              interpretation of the data and conclusions. In terms of research  training, the
              availability of such a unit will encourage quantitative  thinking and
              reintroduce much of the needed vigor into many molecular  biological
              investigations. The ease of usage of a phosphor image with  its impressive
              speed, capacity, sensitivity, and image manipulability  will become evident
              quickly.          Although the work of three major users will benefit from th e
               phosphor imaging system initially, we fully expect other researchers in 
              nearby institutions to take advantage of this versatile piece of  equipment.
              Furthermore, as Mount Holyoke College is an undergraduate  institution devoted
              to training young women scientists, we also expect  to develop
              laboratory-teaching exercise units that will incorporate the  use of this
              state-of-the-art instrumentation.
