Title       : Role of Cholinergic Factor in Developing Nervous Tissue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9413100

Award Number: 9413100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence F. Kromer                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva B. Cramer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keiko Fukada  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Brooklyn HSC
	      450 Clarkson Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112032012    212/270-1000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                    The phenotype of immature neurons is influenced by cues from the  local
              environment in which they develop.  One well-characterized  environment cue is
              a glycoprotein produced by various types of  cultured cells, known as
              cholinergic neuronal differentiation  factor (CDF), or leukemia inhibitory
              factor.  CDF, a member of a  group of growth/differentiation factors called
              cytokines, acts on  a wide range of cell types and exerts a variety of effects.
               This  is in contrast to the nerve growth factor family that mainly acts  on
              neurons and supports their survival.  Despite our knowledge of  a number of
              effects in vitro, the physiological role of CDF in the  developing nervous
              system is unknown, and it is the goal of this  research to understand this
              role.  To elucidate the physiological  role of CDF, it is critical to know
              which neural cells respond to  CDF and which produce CDF in vivo.  At present,
              the full spectrum  of CDF-responsive neural cells is unknown, and little is
              known  about CDF-producing cells in the nervous system.  Using pure native  CDF
              and its function-blocking antibodies, two approaches are  proposed for
              systematic investigation of potential CDF-responsive  and CDF-producing cells
              in the developing nervous system:  1)  examination of CDF receptor distribution
              by radioautography using  iodinated native CDF as a probe; 2)  determination of
              the tissue  content of CDF protein by two-site immunoassay.  These studies will
               provide essential information necessary for formulating specific  hypotheses
              for the role of CDF in the developing nervous system.
