Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced Flow Cytometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1994 
File        : a9413418

Award Number: 9413418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald P. Weeks dweeks1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. Arumuganathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                     With this proposal, we request funding for the purchase of a 
              multi-purpose state-of-the-art flow cytometer / cell sorter (Becton  Dickinson
              FACS VantageTM Cell Sorter system or Coulter EPICS Elite ESP  system) to update
              and expand our current multi-user Flow Cytometry Core  Research Facility of the
              University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) Center  for Biotechnology. The new
              equipment will replace our fourteen year-old  Coulter EPICS V system which now
              requires frequent repairs. This  instrument has only a short life span
              remaining. The present flow  cytometer is also inadequate for the needs of
              several investigators on  the UNL campus who wish to perform bivariate
              chromosome analysis,  multicolor fluorescence analysis, and state-of-the-art
              sorting of  chromosomes and cells in their research endeavors. As a
              multipurpose  facility, we are requesting accessories for a new flow cytometer
              which  will permit: a user friendly operating system; multicolor fluorescence 
              analysis and at least two laser capability; cell sorting in less time; 
              computerized drop-delay setup; large-particle analysis and sorting;  sorting of
              1-100,000 cells into microtitier trays, onto microscope  slides or filters.
              Importantly, the new flow cytometer system we have  chosen is designed to
              accommodate future upgrades and applications.  Even with the limitations of the
              present instrumentation, projects in  over 25 research laboratories have
              benefited from the services provided  by the Flow Cytometry Core Research
              Facility. Acquisition of a  state-of-the-art instrument will better service
              current users and most  certainly will attract additional users whose needs
              cannot be met with  the instrument presently in use.    Examples of specific
              research activities that would result from the  availability the new instrument
              include:    1) Univariate and bivariate flow karyotyping and sorting of
              chromosomes  from  important  plant  species  for the  purpose  of 
              construction  of  chromosome-specific DNA libraries.    Work  is already  in
              progress with tomato and corn chromosomes. We  will  actively  seek 
              collaboration from genome  researchers  throughout  the  world who want sorted
              chromosomes from other important plants. Our goal  is to make our Flow
              Cytometry Core Research Facility an internationally  recognized  center  for 
              plant genome analysis and  chromosome  sorting  research.    2)  Flow
              cytometric analysis of nuclei of animals and plants (both crop  plants  and
              native plants), and cell lines from animals and plants  for  the  determination
               of ploidy level and/or estimation  of  nuclear  DNA  content.    3) 
              Immunofluorescence analysis (1-4 color) and sorting of  blood  cell  subsets 
              and  cell  lines  for  the  expression  of  surface  antigens,  receptors or
              internal substances.
