Title       : Regional Networking in New England Proposal No. 7
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1994    
File        : a9413014

Award Number: 9413014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Rugo JRugo@BARRNET.NET  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9413014  Rugo  Nearnet represented by Bolt Beranek and Newman requests support 
              from NSF for connection of eleven institutions including: Eastern  Nazarene
              College, Emerson College, Forsyth Dental Center,  Franklin Institute, Norwich
              University, Southeast Regional  Education Service Center (SERESC), Eunice
              Kennedy Shriver Center,  Springfield College, Thomas College, Quinnipiac
              College, and  Colby-Sawyer College.  Nearnet is the NSF mid-level network that 
              serves the New England area.  Its primary goal is to facilitate  collaborative
              projects and sharing of resources between  institution, including those outside
              the state.    NEARnet will provide operations management and information 
              services and it will give the universities and colleges a  connection to the
              NSFNET, a high speed (1.5 - 45 million bits per  second) National Backbone
              network.    The each of the universities has written a description of its 
              organization and a statement of the benefits of Internet access  that it
              expects including: greater functionality and network  speed to be able to
              access supercomputers, libraries, and make  file transfers along with being
              able to implement a more reliable  mail system. Students and faculty research
              will benefit from the  links.  This is also a unique opportunity for the
              schools to  explore innovative educational resources.  Their diversity will 
              expose NEARnet to a broader range of user requirements.  Nearnet  will use the
              information obtained by serving this diverse group  for the benefit of New
              England's academic and research community.
