Title       : Acquisition of Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1994  
File        : a9413734

Award Number: 9413734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104344             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melody V. S. Siegler msiegler@biology.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hilary M. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Yedvobnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. L'Hernault  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Funds are requested by the Emory University Biology Department for the  purchase
              of a confocal microscope. The purchase will include a BioRad  MRC-1000 confocal
              laser scanning imaging system and a Nikon Optiphot-2  microscope component.
              This system is unsurpassed in terms of specimen  brightness, image resolution
              and ease of analysis. These capabilities  are required by Biology Department
              labs that need to perform state of  the art analyses of protein distribution in
              complex tissues.  Principally four NSF-funded labs will use the equipment for
              research  and training activities, although it is anticipated that wider 
              departmental use will occur periodically.    Three of the labs are
              investigating various aspects of insect  neurogenesis (Ellis, Siegler and
              Yedvobnick) while the fourth lab is  investigating sperm morphogenesis and
              migration in C. elegans  (L'Hernault). The Ellis lab will utilize confocal
              microscopy to  characterize the spatial distribution of the extramacrochaetae
              (emc)  protein during embryonic development. Originally characterized for its 
              role in achaete-scute regulation during sensory organ development, emc  is now
              known to function more widely during development. Preliminary  studies suggest
              that emc is expressed throughout the embryonic germ  layers. The precise
              relationship between emc expression and  achaete-scute expression will be
              characterized in the embryo. The  Siegler lab will use confocal microscopy in
              conjunction with  immunohistochemistry to identify neurons of known birthdate
              according  to type, and thus test hypotheses about birth order within
              identified  CNS lineages of the grasshopper. The Yedvobnick lab studies lateral
               inhibition and associated signal transduction to the nucleus during  embryonic
              neurogenesis in Drosophila. They will utilize the equipment  to investigate
              cytoplasmic-nuclear partitioning of the product of the  neurogenic locus
              mastermind. They will also investigate potential  physical interactions between
              cytoplasmic mastermind protein and the   transmembranous Notch protein via
              colocalization assays. The L'Hernualt  lab studies sperm morphogenesis that
              initiates as a multicellular  syncitium. Confocal immunofluorescence will allow
              use of available  antibodies to localize Golgi-derived membrane proteins within
              this  complex three dimensional array. In addition, wild type and mutant  sperm
              motility within the hermaphrodite reproductive tract will be  examined by
              confocal microscopy, using already developed fluorescent  tagging techniques.
              It is clear that conventional fluorescent  microscopic techniques do not
              provide sufficient spatial detail to  study these C. elegans sperm phenomena.  
                  The equipment will also be used extensively for the training of 
              undergraduate and graduate students. The Biology Department has a 
              sophisticated program for involving undergraduates in research. Beyond 
              independent research Emory undergraduates are offered advanced project  labs in
              Genetics, Neurobiology and Physiology; Development is planned  for next year.
              In addition to academic year projects, summer research  programs funded from
              NSF REU and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute  bring in students from Emory
              and many other institutions. Although  undergraduate use of the equipment will
              mostly be restricted to  research purposes we anticipate incorporation of
              confocal microscopy  demonstrations into the advanced project labs. Graduate
              students from  programs including Neuroscience, Cell and Developmental Biology,
              and  Genetics and Molecular Biology often rotate through Biology Department 
              labs and several have joined the NSF-funded labs described above. Their 
              utilization of the equipment should greatly enhance the quality of  research
              output from the Biology Department.
