Title       : Creation of a Document Archive, Cold Storage Facility, and Laboratory Space at
               Harvard Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9413015

Award Number: 9413015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89946              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Emery R. Boose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Lent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard D. Boone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                  The Harvard Forest is a 1300-hectare field station in central New England
              that serves as the research focus of a National Science Foundation-funded
              Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) project and the Department of Energy
              funded National Institute for Global Environmental Change (NIGEC) program
              (Northeast Center).  In addition to the resident science and technical staff of
              approximately 35, over 50 researchers from over a dozen institutions conduct a
              major portion of their field studies at the Harvard Forest.  Harvard Forest
              educational activities include (1) annually serving as a host to 2-4 visiting
              faculty through the Bullard Fellowship Program in Forest Biology at Harvard
              University (2) sponsoring graduate student thesis research and approximately 28
              students annually as summer research assistants to faculty and science staff,
              (3) hosting more than 15 university courses for field studies, (4) convening
              numerous state, national, and international conferences in science and policy,
              and (5) educating more than 5000 visitors annually in the Fisher Museum of
              Forestry.  Research at the Harvard Forest is integrated around the central
              theme of forest ecosystem dynamics as affected by natural and human disturbance
              processes.    In recent years the facility has experienced much higher demands
              for laboratory facilities, data and sample storage space, and offices in the
              areas of biogeochemistry, atmosphere-biosphere interactions, paleoecology,
              population ecology, and microbial ecology.  A major commitment to these areas
              has been demonstrated by the appointments of a full-time Soil Ecologists, Data
              Manager/Ecologist, and Paleoecologist, and by increased process-level studies
              by scientists from several institutions.  Education-related demands on
              laboratory facilities have risen as both graduate student research and our
              summer undergraduate research program have expanded.  Increased efforts in
              ecosystem ecology, ecophysiology, paleoecology have resulted in increased need
              for cold storage of soils, plan t tissues, and lake sediment.    In order to
              accommodate these increased research and educational activities an existing
              eight-bay garage complex will be renovated to provide a document archives, cold
              storage of lake sediment and soil samples, a soil/plant tissue archive
              facility, and two additional laboratories for visiting scientists and summer
              research assistants.  When completed the renovation will provide and additional
              800 ft2 of archive/storage space and an additional 800 ft2 of laboratory space.
