Title       : A Laboratory and Field Study of the Radiative and Electrical Properties of Ice
               in the Atmosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9413437

Award Number: 9413437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $796633             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Hallett hallett@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Hudson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Arnott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      P.O.Box 60220
	      Reno, NV  895060220    702/673-7311

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hallett/Abstract         A laboratory study of ice crystals will include their 
              radiative properties, especially thermal infra-red (2-18 m)  extinction and
              emissivity.  This will include crystals oriented by  local electric fields. 
              Sufficient extinction for measurement will  be obtained by multiple path
              traverses.  The emissivity will be  obtained by comparison with backgrounds
              above and below cloud  temperature.  Optical depth measurements are to be
              performed at 685  nm to provide a convenient measure of integrated cloud
              projected  area for normalizing infrared extinction and absorption optical 
              depth measurements.  The extinction measurements will consider  clouds with
              narrower size and habit spectra than previously  produced, utilizing the
              principle of the La Mer generator  (controlled nucleation followed by
              controlled growth) at a specific  temperature.  The liquid drop nucleation mode
              will control the  crystallinity (number of crystals per nucleus), which will be
               related to CCN properties (size, composition).         Complementary to this
              study, an investigation will be made of  the role of trace impurity defects
              role in leading to ice crystal  habit changes at cirrus temperatures. 
              Experiments will be carried  out in an existing diffusion chamber and will be
              used to refine the  protocol for crystal production in the nucleation study. 
              This will  give rise to specific crystal shapes associated with crystals 
              growing at different temperature (thin plate, pristine column,  hollow columns,
              equiaxed crystals and impurity (HNO3).  These  studies will be compared with
              the atmosphere through data already  taken in high level flights in several
              projects (TOGA-COARE,  EUCREX, FIRE II WISP) where crystals have been collected
              under  known conditions.  These will be related to their nucleation 
              characterization (particle volatility and thermal fractionation) CN  and
              physical size vs. critical supersaturation and thence to  crystal concentration
              and morphology.  The sensitivity of the  laboratory prod uced ice cloud
              extinction and emission will be  related to crystal habit and size and used as
              benchmarks for  development of a numerical/analytical model.  The ideas from
              these  different approaches will be synthesized in understanding cirrus 
              formation and its likely radiative properties.         Tropical cirrus
              originates in deep convection with associated  electrical activity.  The origin
              of such ice and electrical  activity (as a surrogate for ice production aloft
              and lower level  surface precipitation) will be investigated from data already 
              obtained on the NOAA P3 in CAPE, several hurricanes and tropical  convection. 
              This will relate ice evolution mechanisms to  coalescence processes at lower
              cloud levels, the rapidity of  secondary ice production in the transition
              region and ultimately  the likely flux of ice water substance into the anvil to
              give  differing radiative properties aloft.
