Title       : Glass Micro-Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9413013

Award Number: 9413013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tien-Pei Lee                            
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $618668             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan N. Houde-Walter shw@optics.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duncan T. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1775,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9413013  Houde-Walter  Funding for basic research is most compelling when it is
              connected  to national needs.  This proposal specifically addresses a 
              fundamental issue in glass science (ion exchange) which is closely  related to
              manufacture of medical instruments which are used in  minimally invasive
              surgical procedures, resulting in shorter  hospital stays, less trauma to the
              patient and significantly lower  costs of treatment and recovery.  Many other
              optical systems, such  as those used in remote sensing for environmental
              monitoring and in  distance sensing needed in intelligent automobiles, either
              use or  are likely to use in the imminent future, ion-exchanged glass 
              micro-optics.    The scientific goal of this work is to better understand the 
              relation between structure, composition and properties of  commercially
              important glasses and to shorten the product  development time of photonic
              components (gradient-index micro-  optics) that are fabricated by ion exchange.
               Relevant structural  chemistry parameters will be obtained by x-ray absorption
               spectroscopy and will serve as constraints on molecular dynamic  modeling of
              the same glasses. Changes in the cation environment  with composition and
              processing conditions will be investigated in  the lab and related to transport
              behavior and the resultant index  profiles.  The transport properties will also
              be observed in  computer experiments of ion exchange and the simulated effect
              of  minority components on transport behavior will be used to guide the 
              tailoring of glass compositions to particular gradient-index and  micro-optic
              applications.  The results will be incorporated in  prototype lenses at
              Gradient Lens Corp., and a small high tech  company in Rochester, NY, that
              manufactures micro-optics and  gradient-index lenses.  By the third year on the
              project we will  have incorporated a large repertoire of diffusion parameters
              and  models into a commercial lens design program and will have  designed,
              toleranced, fabricated and tested the qual ity of an ion-  exchanged
              gradient-index lens system.  ***
