Title       : Developmental Change in Speed of Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9413019

Award Number: 9413019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodney R. Cocking                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Kail   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to determine the influence of age-related change in
              mental information processing speed on cognitive development, specifically
              developmental change in memory, reasoning, and academic skills.  The subjects
              in the research will be 5- to 20-year-olds.  In each of six experiments we will
              measure three types of construct:  global speed of processing, criterion
              performance (e.g., memory, analogical reasoning), and specific constructs
              hypothesized to link processing speed to the criterion measure.  The causal
              links between these construct types will be evaluated using path analysis and
              structural equation modeling.  Results from this project should shed light on
              how age-related change in processing speed contributes to age-related change in
              memory, reasoning, and academic skills.  Specifically, although age-related
              change in speed of processing may be particularly salient in performance on
              speeded tasks, its influence may be much more widespread, affecting performance
              whenever a number of activities must be completed in a fixed period of time. 
              In these situations, poor performance may result because processing speed was
              too slow for the processes necessary for task performance to be completed in
              the time allotted.  For example, speed of processing may explain why, relative
              to adolescents and young adults, children can rehearse less information per
              unit of time and, consequently, remember less accurately.  The planned
              experimentation will help determine the extent to which age- related change in
              processing speed is in fact a causal force in the development of memory,
              reasoning, and academic skills.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
