Title       : Sampling fo Complex Materials for Mass Spectrometric Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9413682

Award Number: 9413682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean H. Futrell jean.futrell@mvs.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas P. Ridge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Burnaby Munson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Murray V. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9157,9161,9181,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This award from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will help the
              Department of  Chemistry at the University of Delaware acquire a FT-Mass
              spectrometer and a high-powered  laser system which will be used in research. 
              The research activity to be supported includes (1)  studies of gas phase
              metalloporphyrin chemistry, (2) laser desorption/ionization and  molecular beam
              studies of polypeptides, (3) method development for analyzing high  molecular
              weight material, particularly biological molecules, and (4) studies of photo- 
              processes involving high molecular weight, polyfunctional or otherwise complex
              material.    Mass Spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to probe intimate
              structural details and to obtain  the molecular compositions of a vast array of
              organic, bioorganic and organometallic molecules.   The addition of the
              technique of electrospray extends the range of MS to protein and nucleic acid 
              molecular weights far beyond any other technique.  The use of electrospray
              ionization in  combination with high resolution provides the latest techniques
              available in mass spectrometry.   It affords the chemist one of the most
              powerful tools available for the characterization of  compounds.  The
              acquisition of this capability in mass spectrometry is essential for the 
              prosecution of frontier research in many fields of chemistry.    A tunable
              laser can provide important information about chemical reactivity.  Its use may
              enable  breakthroughs in our understanding of the properties of reactive and
              nonreactive of molecules.
