Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation to Support of Interdisciplinary Research in
               Plasma Manufacturing of Thin Film Coatings and Electronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1994    
File        : a9413727

Award Number: 9413727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jes Asmussen asmussen@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean M. Aslam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eldon D. Case  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James V. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy A. Grotjohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1502,9148,9157,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9413727 Asmussen  Plasma assisted processing of thin films has been identifed as
              an important, emerging manufacturing technology for producing wear, heat, and
              corrosion resistant surfaces and for the fabrications of electronic and
              photonic materials.  In order to achieve the commercialization of these plasma
              processes, intelligently controlled, user-friendly plasma manufacturing
              technology must be developed.  One class of plasma machines that have exhibited
              great potential to address many plasma assisted manufacturing problems are
              microwave plasma reactor systems.  Their electrodeless nature together with
              their ability to create high densities of excited and charged species have made
              both high-pressure and low-pressure discharges an attractive technology for
              many plasma processing applications.  Past and ongoing research by the
              investigators and others has demostrated the potential of these microwave
              plasma machines in the commercial manufacturing of hard thin film coatings and
              electronic and photonic materials.  Of particular note, are the microwave
              processing applications related to diamond thin film deposition and the
              processing of silicon and III-V electronic and photonic materials.  Building
              upon these past successes, their research activities described in this proposal
              are concerned with the continued development, optimization, and intelligent
              control of this important manufacturing technology.  The proposed work will be
              carried out in the Electronics and Surface Properties of Materials (ESPM)
              Center Laboratories at Michigan State University.  In the Center, microwave
              plasma machines and associated plasma processes are being developed by an
              interdisciplinary group of engineering faculty.  Thus, the requested
              instrumentation will augment an already very active research laboratory and
              will allow ESPM Center research activities to more rapidlly expand into new
              materials characterization technologies, process optimizations, and plasma
              process control, and will enhance ongoing research in plasm a machine
              development, modeling,  and diagnosis.  In particular, the requested equipment
              will provide the instrumentation needed for new, specific plasma process
              development and optimization activities, will provide additional computer
              resources for plasma machine  modeling and reactor control efforts, will enable
              new and strengthen ongoing materials and microstructure characterization
              efforts, and will provide instrumentation required for the recently initiated
              plasma process control activities.  Finally, requested instrumentation will
              allow plasma machine development to proceed into new creative direction.  A
              substantial fraction of the requested equipment funding is for instrumentation
              for new ESPM Center efforts and will aid new Center faculty members with their
              instrumentation needs.  Thus, it is expected that this request will greatly
              improve the Center's research capability on intelligent process control, plasma
              process development,  and materials characterization techniques.  The requested
              laboratory instruments represent and important addition to the capabilities of
              the ESPM Laboratories and it will allow the Center to more effectively perform
              its interdisciplinary research and education missions.
