Title       : Acquisition of Advanced Instrumentation for Research in Turbulence, Chaos,
               Combustion and two-Phase Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1994    
File        : a9413798

Award Number: 9413798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385111             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fazle Hussain FHussain@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1415,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9413798  Fazle Hussain    A coherent, multi-purpose measurement
              system to address the future challenges in a number of major areas of
              hydrodynamics will be developed.  The instrumentation will help studies about
              the structure, dynamics and control of turbulence phenomena, including
              two-phase and free surface flows, utilizing:  (i) particle image velocimetry
              (PIV), (ii) multipoint vorticity and pressure measurements, and (iii) data
              processing.   The first system component consists of lasers, cameras, frame
              digitizes, particle size and high-speed computational equipment necessary to
              implement cine holographic particle velocimetry  (cine HPV) and digital PIV. 
              The second component system contains a 128-channel data acquisition system
              (with 16-bit resolution, low noise and sample rates up to 100 kHz/channel) and
              real-time signal analyzers.  The third system component consists primarily of a
              graphics workstation for analysis of 3D velocity and vorticity fields obtained
              via (i) and (ii) and also numerical simulation.    The Aerodynamics and
              Turbulence Laboratory (ATL) at the University of Houston has both fundamental
              and applied studies in hydrodynamics and related topics (e. g. dynamics of
              coherent structures (CS), turbulence management, chaos in open flows, and
              vortex reconnection and core dynamics, hemispherical microphone arrays, CS
              education).  Combination of experimental and numerical techniques have been
              used to address various topics:  (i) the nature and dynamical significance of
              CS in free shear flows, including their role transition, entrainment mixing and
              combustion, and (iii) the role of vortex reconnection in turbulence cascade.   
              A major thrust here is implementing cine HPV, which can provide time-resolved,
              3D velocity, vorticity and temperature field data.  A time-resolved flow field
              measurements techniques using HPV is the most promising future flow measurement
              technology.  The new instrument will implement cine HPV, capturing evolving
              flow fields at rates up to 1 kHz.   In addition, the velocity and pressure
              measurements will be applied to study CS dynamics in technological floes and
              develop innovative numerical simulation techniques (wavelet-based large-eddy
              simulations) and to analyze in detail turbulence phenomena.    The use of these
              instruments will not only advance our understanding of flow physics but also
              train graduate students and researchers in state-of-the-art measurement
              techniques, thus paving the way for further innovations.  These instruments
              will be used primarily by researchers at ATL but will also be available to
              researchers in engineering, mathematics and physics.  ***
