Title       : Construction of an Undulator-Based Synchrotron X-Ray Scattering Facility for
               Materials Research on Complex Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9413941

Award Number: 9413941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1114950            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Eisenberger   (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony K. Cheetham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1750,9161,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Funds from the Academic Research Infrastructure Program will  be used in the
              construction and implementation of an  undulator-based x-ray beamline at the
              Advanced Photon  Source. The beamline, when completed, will include three 
              fully instrumented end stations optimized for grazing-  incidence x-ray
              scattering from surfaces/interfaces, high  resolution delta-Q-resolution x-ray
              scattering, and small-  angle x-ray scattering. This x-ray scattering facility
              will  be utilized by a consortium of scientists from U.  Pennsylvania,
              Princeton U., U. C. Santa Barbara, U.  Tennessee, Oak Ridge Natl. Lab.,
              Brookhaven Natl. Lab., Los  Alamos Natl. Lab., and the Exxon Corp. Res. Lab.,
              all of  whom are members of the "Complex Materials Collaborative  Access Team"
              (CMCAT). Among the groups studying complex  fluids there are 14 senior
              scientists, 8-10 postdoctorals,  and 9-12 graduate students. The complex fluids
              under study  by this group relate to self-assembled macromolecular  systems at
              interfaces and/or in bulk and include colloidal,  miscellar, polymer and
              biomolecular systems. Some of the  research topics being studied include: lipid
              and surfactant  mesophases; block copolymer melts and solutions; 
              surfactant/polymer association complexes; doped conjugated  polymers;
              fullerenes ("buckyballs"); ultrathin films and  biomolecular materials; heat
              proof proteins; multilayer  biomembrane ordered hydro-gels; protein-polymer 
              complexation; in-situ diffraction of flow and confinement  induced complex
              fluid structures; electrochemistry; liquid  surfaces.    Funds will be employed
              for the construction of an x-ray  beamline to be located at the Advanced Photon
              Source at  Argonne National Lab. which will feature three fully  equipped end
              stations. The beamline will be utilized by a  consortium of scientists from
              universities, government  laboratories, and an industrial laboratory for the
              study of  complex materials. Specific x-ray scattering studies will be  done on
              complex fluids, namely colloidal, micellar, polymer   and biomolecular systems.
