Title       : Acquisition of Instrumentation for High Speed and MillimeterWave Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1994    
File        : a9413774

Award Number: 9413774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Magdy F. Iskander                       
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Smith eedept@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1502,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413774 Smith   The Department of Electrical Engineering at the University of
              Mississippi proposes the award of  funds to enhance the capability of a Hewlett
              Packard HP8510B Network Analyzer System that was acquired in 1988 with
              assistance form the National Science Foundation.  The proposed system
              improvement  includes a basic network analyzer upgrade, synthesized signal
              sources and related millimeter wave equipment, a TDR/digital oscilloscope, and
              materials measurement instrumentation.  The upgraded features and new equipment
              provide for much faster processing of measured instrumentation.  The upgraded
              data, which are needed to further enhance the quality and capability of
              research and research training in elctromagnetics for picosecond time
              measurements and millimeter frequency measurement up to 100 Ghz.  This
              instrumentation is required for proposed and ongoing activities involving high
              speed and millimeter wave circuits.  This network analyzer system and
              TDR/digital oscilloscope are to be used for three major research projects that
              are related to the measurement of narrow band devices  and  the measurement to
              determine electrical properties of materials.  The manufacturer's specification
              for these type measurements require synthesized sources to minimize measurement
              errors caused by "FMing" or  "jitter".  These projects are directed towards
              development 1) of a new  class of dielectric antennas at millimeter wave
              frequencies,   2) of an investigation of crosstalk reduction on high speed ICs
              and microwave/millimeter wave ICs, and 3) for the measurement of advanced
              materials properties for frequencies up to 100 GHz.  Based on past research on
              current NSF and USAF grants, results indicate that continued research will lead
              to a new class of low-loss, high-efficiency, dielectric antennas that are
              usable at microwave and millimeter wave frequencies, which are of importance in
              future communications and information systems.  Also, preliminary result on a
              recent Army Research office grant indicate tha t the proposed method of
              deposition or doping of region between coupled  transmission lines can reduce
              coupling or crosstalk on interconnections between 6 to 12 db.  In addition,
              Magnetic Separation 'Systems and the American Plastics Council is considering
              sponsorship of research on the use of methods proposed by The University of
              Mississippi for the investigation of materials for waste sorting and for
              sensing for impurities in liquid and solids using microwave/millimeter wave
              frequencies.  Research is also continuing on the characterization of the
              electrical properties of advanced composite materials and polymers using high
              frequency measurement as applied to modern day usage for manufacturing of
              commercial and military products.  Currently, the HP8510B network analyzer is
              used to serve a group consisting of 10 faculty members, 20- graduate students,
              and 30 senior undergraduate students per year.  Students will be required to
              take relevant courses on microwave/millimeter wave measurement s to educate a
              new generation of engineers having in-depth measurement experiences.  Training
              in these courses will cover microwave/millimeter wave design, HF
              microwave/millimeter wave measurement, antennas and scattering measurements , 
              and material  properties measurements.  The enhanced HP8510C and its associated
              instrumentation will open a new decade of high performance network analyzer and
              high speed measurements by our electromagnetic research group, because it is
              the new standard for excellence in microwave/millimeter wave measurements. 
              This added instrumentation for our HP8510B network analyzer will provide
              significant increases in performance, convenience , and quality of measurements
              made by students and faculty in the proposed and future research projects in
              electromagnetics.  This, the quality of research of our electromagnetic group
              will be will be substantially improved and broadened with the addition of this
              upgraded instrumentation that should serve our measurement needs past the next
              decade.
