Title       : U.S.-Mexico Research: Pretreatment of Industrial Wastewater Streams for the
               Removal of Suspended Fine Particles and Dispersed Oil Droplets by Air-Sparged
               Hydrocyclone Flotation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1994   
File        : a9413352

Award Number: 9413352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1994  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9413352  Miller    This U.S.-Mexico award will support a collaborative research
              project between Dr. Jan  Miller, University of Utah, and Professor Jose Parga,
              Instituto Tecnologico de Saltillo,  Mexico.  The project's main objective is to
              demonstrate the technical performance of the  air-sparged hydrocyclone (ASH)
              flotation technology for the recovery and separation of  suspended fine
              particles and dispersed oil droplets from industrial waste water streams  along
              the U.S.-Mexico border region.  The research will involve surveying and
              sampling  various industrial waste water streams that contribute to the
              contamination of the border  region, characterization of the samples,
              comparative flotation tests, and pilot station  studies for ASH optimization.  
               The discharge of untreated industrial waste water into transboundary waters
              has contributed  to ecological and esthetic degradation, economic losses, and
              threats to human health along  the U.S.-Mexico border for many years. 
              Untreated industrial waste water can seriously  degrade the ability of
              conventional treatment facilities to treat sewage effectively.  The  ASH
              flotation technology, developed by the University of Utah during the past
              decade,  combines the advantages from both conventional hydrocyclone and froth
              flotation  technologies into a single piece of equipment.  If successful, the
              project will provide the  opportunity to significantly reduce pollution from
              industrial waste water streams in the  U.S.-Mexico border area, and provide,
              therefore, significant environmental and health  benefits to both countries. 
              ***
