Title       : Acquisition of X-Ray Microanalysis System and Related Specimen Preparation
               Instrumentation for Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1996   
File        : a9413762

Award Number: 9413762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marija Gajdardziska-Josifovsk mgj@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcelle A. Gillott  (Principal Investigator former)
              Mary Lynne P. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9157,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT          The Biological Sciences Electron Microscope Laboratory  is a
              teaching and research  facility in the Department of Biological Sciences at the
               University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee  (UWM). Currently, the electron microscopes
              in this facility  are being used by students and staff  in Biological Sciences,
              Physics, and the Materials,  Mechanical and Civil Engineering departments as
              well as the  Center for Great Lakes Studies and the Laboratory for  Surface
              Studies. Researchers in each of these groups have  expressed a need for
              quantitative and qualitative elemental  analysis in conjunction with the
              structural studies  currently being conducted.          The Biological Sciences
              Electron Microscopy (BSEM)  Laboratory and the Laboratory for  Surface Studies
              (LSS) at the University of Wisconsin-  Milwaukee (UWM) are requesting a system 
              of instruments to upgrade the existing electron microscopes  in order to meet
              this need. This  instrumentation falls into 3 equipment groupings:  analytical,
              biological specimen preparation and  materials specimen preparation. The
              analytical needs of the  researchers will be met through the  acquisition of
              energy dispersive x-ray spectrometers (EDS)  for the existing scanning electron
               microscope (SEM) and transmissions electron microscope (TEM)  both of which
              are located in the BSEM lab. The preparation  of biological specimens for
              elemental analysis is not  compatible  with conventional chemical fixation, but
              requires  specialized techniques and instrumentation.  Therefore, we are
              requesting cryogenic equipment for  processing biological samples for elemental
              analysis for  both scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Finally,  for
              inorganic  materials, specialized equipment is needed for the  preparation of
              plan-view and cross-sectional  specimens to allow the imaging, diffraction and
              elemental  analysis of surfaces, interfaces and  small particles in TEM. The
              requested equipment will  complement the existing instrumentation  for SEM
              materials pr eparation. This system of instruments  will be used as an integral
              part of the  research and graduate training programs at UWM.          The
              requested instrumentation will open up new  possibilities for research in the
              biological  sciences as well as in materials and engineering research 
              benefiting both ongoing projects and  future planned research. Cryofixation
              combined with  elemental mapping will enable researchers  in the department of
              Biological Sciences and the Center for  Great Lakes Studies to gain a better 
              understanding of the mechanisms and impact of prokaryotic  and eukaryotic
              organisms in  biogeochemical cycling in aquatic environments. In addition,  the
              cryo-preparation  instrumentation will greatly enhance the capacity for 
              immunolocalization studies.          The cutting and thinning equipment
              requested for  materials specimen processing is  required for TEM analysis of
              brittle and ductile materials.  This instrumentation will be used for the
              preparation of  thin cross-sectional and plane-view specimens for elemental 
              analysis and imaging with the existing TEM; it will also be  required for the
              preparation of specimens for an atomic  resolution 200kV field emission TEM,
              for which separate  funding is being sought (NSF/DMR 9406752; the 
              Instrumentation for Materials Research Program). Finally,  the cutting and
              polishing tools will aid in the preparation  of suitable flat surfaces for
              elemental analysis of bulk  specimens in the SEM.
