Title       : Research Instrumentation for Processing and Characterizationof Electronic
               Materials and Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1996  
File        : a9413476

Award Number: 9413476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117450             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galipeau galipead@mg.sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lewis F. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1502,9157,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9413476 Galipeau  The proposed major research instrumentation is for the
              fabrications and characterization of thin film materials and devices requiring
              advanced materials and processing techniques.  The proposed instrumentation
              includes:  (1) scanning probe microscope, (2) manual RF sputtering-etching
              system, (3) wafer spinner, (4) contact angle goniometer, (5) ultrasonic
              wirebonder, and (6) humidity/temperature chamber.  This instrumentation is
              being requested to enhance and expand the capabilities of the Microelectronics
              and Materials Laboratory (MML) at South Dakota State University.  The MML
              consists of over 1500ft2 of  class 10,000 and 100 cleanroom space designed to
              conduct research on the fabrication, processing, and characterization of
              electronic materials and devices.  The lab is adminstered by the Electrical
              Engineering Deopartment and the College of Engineering.  The Electrical
              Engineering Department is strongly committed to both undergraduate and graduate
              research training.  Since the existing MML facility is the principle research
              laboratory  of the department, it is the objective of this project to maintain
              state of the art research instrumentation in this lab.  This will improve the
              research training at both the undergraduate and graduate levels, build a
              foundation for a Ph.D. program, and improve the research quality of the
              faculty.  The research and research training being conducted in the MML
              laboratory is focused on electronic materials used for electronic devices and
              packaging, sensors. and memory devices.  Current emphasis is on polyimides and
              piezo/pyro/ferroelectric polymer/copolymer materials. Polyimides are used in
              microelectronic applications as dielectrics in multichip modules (MCM)s and
              integrated circuits (IC)s, and as protective layers or coatings.  Of particular
              interest is using a novel microsensor to study the effects of surface
              treatments such as ions sputtering on water permeation in the polymer.  This
              water permeation can affect the adhesion and corrosion of m etal conductive
              layers which in turn can effect device reliability.  The requested surface
              probe microscope would allow for studies of the surface structure treatments. 
              The sputtering system would provide ion sputtering capabilities necessary for
              surface modification, while the contact angle instrument would provide
              information on surface energy, also important for understanding wetting and
              adhesion.  This project will also upgrade and expand the fabrication equipment
              and test apparatus necessary for this research.  Piezo/pyro/ferroelectric
              polymer/copolymer materials are used for ultrasonic and pyroelectric imaging
              and ferroelectric non-volatile memory devices.  Of current interest are the
              high-frequency dielectric and electromechanical properties of new advanced
              ferroelectric copolymer sensor materials.  If this project is funded by NSF,
              the research work would be extended to the fabrication and characterization of
              advanced ferroelectric copolymer materials and sensor processing techniques. 
              This work is important for ferroelectric switching and non-volatile computer
              memory applications.  The sputtering system would permit the deposition of
              well-adhered metallic test electrodes on thin film samples and the fabrication
              of this film integrated piezo/pyro/ferroelectric sensors.  The surface topology
              and adhesion of these thin films is best studied with the scanning probe
              microscope and contact angle instrument.
