Title       : Cooperative Learning in the Chemical Engineering Laboratory:A New Instructional
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1999   
File        : a9751390

Award Number: 9751390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99866              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Felder felder@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven W. Peretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The laboratory course is critical to the learning and retention of chemical
              engineering knowledge.  It exemplifies the principle that active involvement is
              demonstrably more effective than simply watching and listening.  However, the
              traditional laboratory course suffers from several deficiencies.  Laboratory
              exercises are often rote: students complete them mechanically, without
              analyzing what they are doing, why they are doing it, or what the results have
              to do with the theory they may have studied in other courses.  Experiments are
              often carried out and reports generated by unstructured student teams, with one
              or two team members actually doing the work, all team members receiving credit
              for it, and no one being held individually accountable.    This project
              demonstrates a change in both the format and the content of the chemical
              engineering laboratory.  Student teams are required to develop their own
              experimental methodology and to analyze and interpret data using process
              simulation tools.  They also carry out a project that involves formulating and
              demonstrating a new experiment that utilizes multistage operations.  Simulation
              does not substitute for hands-on experimentation but supplements it, being used
              to model the experimental systems and then to explore what-if scenarios far
              more extensively than time would permit in a conventional laboratory.  The
              objectives of the new laboratory course sequence are to (1) augment instruction
              in modern chemical engineering practice through the integration of experiment
              with process simulation; (2) increase comprehension of experimental procedures
              and underlying concepts through structured cooperative learning; (3) stimulate
              innovative thinking in a laboratory team environment by requiring the students
              to design a new multistage experiment; and (4) facilitate the development of
              written and oral communication skills through explicit training in technical
              report writing and oral presentations.  *
