Title       : Electron Paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Undergraduate Teaching
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751420

Award Number: 9751420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel N. Austin raustin@abacus.bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Significant revisions are provided to the upper-level offerings in chemistry and
              biochemistry to make more explicit the connection between electronic structure
              and physical and chemical properties in a wide range of materials.  This
              project purchases a .63 T electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer,
              an instrument of increasingly wide-use in both applied and basic research,
              ideally suited to illuminating the electronic structure of many important
              materials.  In conjunction with the prior instrument holdings of the college,
              an EPR spectrometer enables the college to develop new laboratories
              incorporating recent advances in inorganic chemistry to help students better
              understand connections between chemical structure and function.  An EPR
              spectrometer, in addition to existing equipment, also enables the college to
              develop an innovate immersion course in bioinorganic chemistry to be offered
              during the short-term.  This intensive 5 days per week, 6 hours per day, 5-week
              course provides students with exposure to both the concepts and techniques of
              bioinorganic chemistry.  This course serves both chemistry majors and the
              growing number of biochemistry majors.  Projects developed for this course can
              serve as a model for undergraduate bioinorganic courses.  Incorporation of an
              EPR-based project into the existing upper-level spectroscopy course provides an
              important additional dimension to the existing projects based on molecular beam
              spectroscopy and inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy. 
              Additionally, the EPR spectrometer markedly enhances the research opportunities
              available to students in the natural sciences.           *
