Title       : Analytical and Quantitative Understanding of Integrative Plant Biology through
               Coursework and Independent Student Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9751268

Award Number: 9751268
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoe G. Cardon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Establishing links across levels of biological organization, and impressing upon
              students the importance of those links, are two of the most difficult goals in
              biology today, and two of the most exciting.  In order to bridge gaps between
              subdisciplines of biology, students must be able to understand the basic
              vocabulary of the various disciplines, and, further, to recognize the kinds of
              questions that are asked and quantitative approaches used to answer those
              questions.  In order to lead students toward combining information from
              multiple classes taught at several levels of biological organization, an
              experimental plan linking four plant biology courses is proposed.  each class
              is a unit within itself, but the threads tying each to the others are designed
              to build quantitative skills and technical competence.  This structure should
              draw students into the process of discovery as they recognize links between
              levels of plant biology, while confidently exploring their own biological
              questions using familiar equipment and mathematical models.    More
              specifically, the goals of the curricular innovations proposed here include: 
              Integration of levels of biology, within plant sciences as a theme  Development
              of quantitative skills both in the lab and in the field  Establishment of field
              and lab experiments as partners in exploring biological questions.    The
              strategy for lining class content, and for developing stronger quantitative
              skills, revolves around student mastery of the measurement of photosynthesis
              and respiration using a LiCor 6400 portable photosynthesis system, both in the
              laboratory at Bowdoin College and in the distinctive vegetative communities in
              the fled at the nearby Coastal Studies Center (CSC).  As students gather plant
              physiological data, they will be introduced to the value of and differences
              between mechanistic and empirical models of biological processes, using two
              widely accepted models of photosynthesis as examples.  Using dataloggers and
              various sensors at CSC, students will  also gather realistic values for some of
              the environmental inputs used in these models.  In each of the four classes,
              these same pieces of equipment and portions of the same models will be used,
              but with a different focus, building a rich base of information from cellular
              to ecophysiological levels which ideally will foster integrative thinking and
              spur independently inquiry.  *
