Title       : Discovering Hydrology: Development of Interdisciplinary Labs for All Academic
               Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9751433

Award Number: 9751433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18260              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richelle M. Allen-King allenkng@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wade E. Hathhorn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              C. Kent Keller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Barber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Hydrologic science is emerging as an exciting and crucial dimension of numerous
              academic disciplines.  It provides unique opportunities for students to
              discover how geoscience, the other natural sciences, mathematics, and
              engineering are linked by fundamental principles.  However, the lack of
              availability of standard hydrologic instrumentation for instruction within
              traditional geoscience and civil engineering departments constitutes a very
              real barrier to widespread implementation of active laboratories.  This project
              creates hands-on hydrology laboratories that enable students to discover
              fundamental physical and chemical concepts at all levels of geoscience and
              engineering education.  Problem-based field laboratories can provide a setting
              for students to integrate quantitative and qualitative knowledge gained from
              observations and to work together with colleagues across disciplines on dynamic
              aspects of environmental and geologic systems.  The program is designed to
              build scientific knowledge and confidence in problem solving over the 4 years
              of study.  The new equipment provides the critical instrumentation needed for
              development of these laboratories.  More than 1 ,600 students per year are
              affected by this project.  The new equipment fulfills an important step toward
              the larger goal of enhancing quantitative and interdisciplinary environmental
              education for undergraduates.  Products from research include (1) presentations
              describing laboratory development and implementation at geology and civil
              engineering society national meetings and (2) a manuscript describing an
              introductory-level laboratory using an inexpensive model aquifer. *
