Title       : UV-Visible Spectrophotometer for the Undergraduate InorganicChemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9751133

Award Number: 9751133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Iyere iyerep@harpo.tnstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Two semesters of advanced inorganic chemistry have been taught without a
              laboratory component to augment the theoretical ideas learned in the classroom.
               Since inorganic chemistry is a discipline founded on experimentation, the
              previous practice of teaching it without a laboratory gives students a very
              flawed view of how inorganic chemistry progresses.  The goal of this project is
              to find a modern ultraviolet visible spectrophotometer that will be used with
              other instruments to incorporate an inorganic chemistry laboratory into the
              curriculum.  The new laboratory serves two upper-level inorganic chemistry
              courses, which cover all essential areas of inorganic chemistry.  Consequently,
              during the fall, students focus on the use of the new spectrophotometer in
              exploring basic principles and ideas of molecular spectroscopy as they relate
              to inorganic compounds.  In the spring semester, the instrument is used in
              studying the chemistry of coordination compounds, analysis of mixtures, light-
              and heat-induced color changes in the solid state and in solution, and kinetic
              analyses.      This project benefits African-American students because the
              university is a historically black institution.  The inorganic chemistry
              laboratory greatly enhances the undergraduate chemistry curriculum because it
              reinforces the teaching capabilities and provides an avenue for minority
              students to get hands-on experience in the use of a modern instrument.  New
              experiments developed here can be published in the Journal of Chemical
              Education.   *
