Title       : Enhancing Scientific Reasoning Through Research Training in a General Psychology
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1999  
File        : a9751519

Award Number: 9751519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Lutsky NLutsky@Carleton.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie J. Neiworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Akimoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Wichilinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carleton College
	      One North College Street
	      Northfield, MN  550574001    507/663-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is strengthening the general appreciation for science training that
              undergraduate students in psychology gain.  The project specifically addresses
              two needs: (1) giving a wide range of students (prospective majors and
              nonmajors) significant methodological training and active learning experience
              at the introductory level, without requiring a full laboratory course; and (2)
              giving beginning majors the opportunity to master and apply design and analysis
              skills, using multimedia computing, in research representative of contemporary
              psychological science.  To accomplish these goals, the department is acquiring
              equipment for a new General Psychology Laboratory that supports innovative
              multimedia research modules on topics such as correspondence bias in social
              psychology and behavioral self-control in learning psychology.  Two modules are
              being incorporated in the introductory course.  Each one is leading students to
              collect data on a basic psychological effect, to consult World Wide Web-based
              summaries of relevant research studies, to critically evaluate theory and
              research paradigms, to design and conduct a new study using the module, and to
              receive instruction in statistics and research design.  These modules are
              quickly getting introductory students to think and act like psychological
              scientists.  Reinvigorated training in two core psychology methods courses is
              coherently building upon those introductory experiences.  In those courses,
              majors are developing the ability to operationalize independent and dependent
              variables using multimedia computing.  These experiences are reinforcing basic
              methodological training and motivating more sophisticated work in psychological
              science.  *
