Title       : EEG and Event-Related Potentials in Undergraduate PsychologyLaboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9751472

Award Number: 9751472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dwight Krehbiel krehbiel@bethelks.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bethel College
	      
	      North Newton, KS  67117    316/283-2500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed project is to enhance the student's experience of
              scientific inquiry in the study of relationships between brain functions and
              behavior in humans.  This goal will be achieved by incorporating contemporary
              computer-based electroecephalograpic methods, especially measurement of
              event-related potentials, into our laboratories in biological and experimental
              psychology.  This strategy is based both on the importance of such methods in
              contemporary research and on the high level of student interest in measuring
              human brain events and correlating them with behavior.  The custom-designed
              software package, created by an engineer with whom the project has already been
              extensively discussed, will be written using LabVIEW.  This approach will
              provide software that not only has a convenient user interface, but is also
              familiar to our students because most will have previously programmed with
              LabVIEW.  Therefore, we will be able to modify the software to address changing
              needs.  Stimuli will be presented by means of a second software package,
              PsyScope, with which our students are also already familiar.  Experiments are
              planned that introduce students to fundamental event-related potential
              paradigms - the measurement of the readiness potential preceding motor
              responses to a predicted stimulus and of the latency or magnitude of the P300
              component elicited by visual stimuli.  These experiments will be conducted in
              several different courses.  Since students will generally take more than one of
              these, they will have the opportunity to master the procedures sufficiently to
              be able to employ them in their own senior research projects.  Promising
              sophomore and junior students will also have the opportunity to work with the
              project director on experiments employing these methods.  Thus, this project
              will demonstrate a pedagogical approach for bringing these contemporary
              neuropsychological research methods into undergraduate laboratories.
