Title       : Addition of Investigative Labs and Modern Data Acquisition to Physiology Labs at
               All Levels of the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9751267

Award Number: 9751267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patsy S. Dickinson pdickins@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students graduating in biology must be intimately familiar with both the process
              and content of biological investigations.  They should be able to integrate
              information and use multiple levels of analysis.  In addition, they should be
              comfortable using a variety of data acquisition tools.  Scientifically literate
              non-majors must also understand the process of scientific investigations, as
              well as fundamental concepts.  This project is enhancing the investigative
              laboratories in physiology at all levels of the biology curriculum. 
              Additionally, because most biology laboratories emphasize data collection while
              analysis is done individually by the students, modern data acquisition and
              analysis techniques are being incorporate that promote analysis in class. 
              Students are active participants in their own learning, and are involved in all
              aspects of the experimental design and execution, including hypothesis
              generation, experimental design, data collection and analysis using modern
              equipment, and presentation of results in a variety of formats.  In three
              courses, Introductory Biology, Comparative Physiology, and the Human Physiology
              course for non-majors, two investigative laboratories are being added or
              enhanced.  In the upper-level neurobiology course, the laboratory is being
              entirely restructured to include three semi-investigative laboratories ion
              fundamental concepts in neurobiology, followed by a longer inquiry-based
              project.  By enhancing courses at all levels of the curriculum, the department
              is helping develop students better critical-thinking skills as well as
              understanding the process of science and the fundamental concepts of each
              level.  In addition, a large proportion of the students taking biology are
              being exposed to more realistic science, more discovery-oriented laboratories,
              and more modern scientific equipment.
