Title       : An Inquiry Based Laboratory for First Semester Biology Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751385

Award Number: 9751385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68061              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine J. Denniston kdenniston@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry E. Wimmers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project improves the quality of the laboratory component of two key courses
              in our department.  The first is the freshman entry-level biology course, which
              is taken by approximately 250 biology majors each year.  The other course is
              the second semester of the biology sequence taken by students in the Maryland
              Collaborative for Teacher Preparation (MCTP) track of the Elementary Education
              Major.    The old biology course laboratory consisted of a series of 13
              exercises that students carried out in rote fashion.  The data obtained were
              qualitative, rather than quantitative; as a result, students left the course
              having had no experience with data analysis.  The students were not challenged
              to participate in experimental design; indeed, the lack of equipment precluded
              the students from designing and carrying out experiments that would provide
              quantitative data.  The pedagogical approach has been quite different in the
              MCTP class.  The students were encouraged to work cooperatively to design
              experiments and to critically analyze their data.  However, one problem
              remained the same:  the students did not have available to them the
              instrumentation that would allow them to carry out experiments that provide
              quantitative data or to make the transition to computer-assisted analysis of
              those data.    The new biology laboratory investigates half the number of
              topics and is inquiry-based.  This laboratory provides students with the
              opportunity to actively participate in the design of experiments, as well as
              the implementation.  Students begin the semester with manual data collection
              and analysis to establish a firm conceptual basis for the computer-assisted
              data logging and analysis to be employed during the majority of the
              investigations.  Students present their results orally and prepare a written
              laboratory report for each exercise.  Allowing students the time to design and
              implement experiments, gather and analyze quantitative data, and present their
              results and conclusions both orally and in writing p rovides them the
              opportunity to construct their own models for the phenomena studied.  The
              benefits include modeling the way science is done, promoting critical thinking,
              fostering collaborative team efforts, improving comprehension of the subject
              matter, and enhancing writing skills.    Four of the topics studied in the
              biology laboratory are experimentally investigated in the MCTP course. 
              Furthermore, both courses share the same laboratory space and equipment.  Thus,
              the new instrumentation allows the MCTP students to perform experiments of
              their own design and to learn to use computers to collect and analyze data,
              thereby fulfilling the potential of this course.  *
