Title       : Aquatic Ecosystem Mapping Projects: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Teaching
               GIS, GPS, and Hydroacoustics in Undergraduate Field Courses in Geography and
               Aquatic Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751528

Award Number: 9751528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles G. Parson charlie@vax1.bemidji.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dann P. Siems  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bemidji State University
	      
	      Bemidji, MN  56601    218/755-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary project serving undergraduates in geography and aquatic
              biology is focusing heavily on the quantification of spatial data.  Recent
              technological advances have transformed spatial data acquisition and analysis
              processes.  In particular, approaches integrating geographical information
              systems (GIS), global positioning systems (GPS), and hydroacoustic technologies
              are rapidly becoming standard methods in geographical and limnological
              research. The equipment necessary to develop an integrated system for site
              analysis and acquisition of spatial data from aquatic environments is being
              purchased.    The project is preparing undergraduates for resource management
              careers, field research, or graduate school.  The project is also enhancing
              student understanding of scientific processes, especially among those students
              who enroll in the courses as electives.  In addition, demonstration projects
              with high school biology teachers on local reservations is serving to encourage
              a greater interest in science among Native American students.    The main point
              of the project is an innovative plan combining teams of two or three students
              from the Geography's Field Methods course with two or three students from the
              Aquatic Biology program's core Limnology course.  Members of each of these
              teams interact to produce detailed digital maps of aquatic environments.  This
              project allows students from the two disciplines to interact as complementary
              "content experts" in applying new technologies to real-world problems.  The new
              GIS/GPS/hydroacoustics system is also being used for field instruction in
              several undergraduate geography and aquatic biology courses. Equipment is also
              available for student use in directed research projects, which are required in
              both majors.  *
