Title       : Inventing Concepts and Solving Problems in Labs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9751719

Award Number: 9751719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Van Heuvelen   (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Stith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the past 7 years, the Department of Physics has made two major reforms in
              its laboratory program for the introductory calculus-based physics course.  The
              first effort in 1989 involved the introduction of the microcomputer-based
              laboratory (MBL) tools into instruction in the first quarter of the course. 
              The second effort built on the first and extended the use of the MBL tools into
              the second and third quarters.  In addition, a series of new activities were
              developed in which students first acquired important concepts of physics using
              a guided-inquiry approach.  Students then in later laboratories used these
              concepts quantitatively to solve more complex experiment problems.    The
              innovations supported by the present project permit integration of interactive
              simulations and multimedia into this laboratory learning system.  These
              simulation activities supplement the experiments and allow more efficient use
              of the limited time that is available to achieve learning objectives.  The
              simulations that accompany real experiments build student confidence in the
              authenticity of the simulated world.  By observing multiple representations of
              processes, students have a better chance of developing imagery and intuition
              for the abstract symbolic representations used in physics.  By observing a
              complex process in slow motion, they become better at breaking it in parts,
              solving the parts, and reassembling them to answer the big questions.  By
              predicting how the change in a parameter affects a process, they become better
              at reasoning about physical processes.  In summary, the supplementary
              simulations help students see how the computer can be a useful modeling tool
              for real-world processes.
