Title       : Modernization of Undergraduate Curriculum through Laser - Based Spectroscopies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9751238

Award Number: 9751238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farooq A. Khan fkhan@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Leavitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry is actively pursuing the modernization of its
              teaching laboratories by providing hands-on experience with modern
              instrumentation.  As a part of the effort to update the entire undergraduate
              curriculum, the department is combining the laboratory components of physical
              chemistry and instrumental analysis laboratories into a year-long Advanced
              Laboratory.  New equipment is significantly affecting the students' experience
              in this course.  State-of-the-art instruments are being used an Nd:YAG
              pumped-dye laser and a time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrometer in a variety of
              experiments. These experiments are being selected to illustrate topics
              discussed in lectures and to maintain students' interest and enthusiasm by
              exposing them to current research topics and methodologies.  The novel aspect
              of this project is the use of an integrated laser-based approach to
              upper-division experimental laboratories, with time-of-flight mass spectrometry
              of biomolecules serving as the capstone of the students' accumulated
              experiences.  Specific laser-based experiments include photodissociation of
              Fe(CO)s, nonlinear atomic spectroscopy of Fe atoms using a TOF mass
              spectrometer, and Raman spectroscopy of CHCl3.  The students are subsequently
              applying laser-based spectroscopy techniques in inorganic chemistry and
              biochemistry.  In addition, students are being encouraged to apply these
              techniques in original research projects chosen across the traditional
              divisions of chemistry including, physical, analytical, inorganic, and
              biological chemistry.
