Title       : Technology Education Integration Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9751170

Award Number: 9751170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47899              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rodney L. Custer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to gain support to significantly enhance an
              interdisciplinary Integrated Systems Laboratory (ISL) technology teacher
              education facility for both pre- and in-service teacher preparation at the
              University of Missouri-Columbia. This will result in a model laboratory, unique
              in Missouri, for preparing secondary-level Technology Education teachers to
              work within an interdisciplinary environment. Additionally, the laboratory will
              be utilized by students throughout the College of Education, with specific
              emphasis given to science and mathematics education as well as students from
              the Industrial and Mechanical & Aerospace engineering departments. To insure
              this broadscale integration and use, the specifications for this laboratory
              were developed jointly by faculty from technology education, science,
              mathematics education, and engineering.    Wide-spread national calls for
              Technology Education and the integration of math/science/technology necessitate
              the development of a facility for thematic exploration and study. This facility
              will be the primary show place in the region for this new kind of learning,
              significantly enhancing undergraduate education in Missouri, and setting a
              standard for the midwest. A comprehensive undergraduate program in Technology
              Education has been approved by the University and is in place. The most
              significant barrier to full implementation of the program is a lack of
              state-of-the-art equipment necessary to deliver the program. The equipment
              listed in this proposal has been carefully selected to provide a solid
              foundation for preparing teachers for the 21 st century.
