Title       : Inclusion of Audio and Video Analysis System in Teaching Observational Methods
               in Developmental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1997    
File        : a9751327

Award Number: 9751327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7032               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gorjana Litvinovic glitvinovic@sfcpa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Francis University
	      
	      Loretto, PA  15940    814/472-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Through this project, the teaching of observational research methods in an
              upper-level undergraduate psychology class are being improved.  The specific
              goals pertain to the improvement of the students' understanding of the
              relationship `etween empirical data and psychological theory.  Three areas of
              weakness in the thinking of undergraduates about psychological research are
              being addressed.  First, students come to understand how psychology maintains
              methodological rigor in spite of fuzzy, real-world conditions of research. 
              Second, students perceive observed phenomena as data, not personal experience. 
              Third, students learn that psychological measurement does not apply to real
              things, but is constructed.    The desired change in students can be best
              achieved through instructional methods that require students' active
              involvement and that adequately scaffold student activity.  Seminar on
              Childhood and Culture provides students with the opportunity to engage in
              observational research with an instructor's guidance.  Groups of students in
              this course are responsible for planning and carrying out a research project,
              which involves a brief survey, two semi-structured interviews with an adult and
              a child, and four sessions of systematic observation of adult child and child
              child interaction in formal and informal contexts.      The project includes
              audio and video recording and computerized coding and analysis of audio and
              video data.  The benefits of this approach include increased efficiency of
              student research; firm scaffolding of code scheme development by The Observer
              software; use of materials in class for longitudinal illustrative purposes,
              when direct student observation is inaccessible; and the repetition and sharing
              of the same recorded material as many times as necessary.  *
