Title       : Transforming the Physiology Lab into a Computer-Based, Active-Learning
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9751559

Award Number: 9751559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51071              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana A. Garrigan garrigan@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to transform the Animal Physiology laboratory at DePauw
              University from one of outmoded equipment and pedagogical styles into a
              dynamic, inquiry-based learning environment.  As a wholly undergraduate,
              liberal-arts institution, DePauw falls short of larger, research-intensive
              programs in its ability to provide access to modern instrumentation.  However,
              small class sizes, a motiviated faculty, and otherwise excellent faculities
              position the Department of Biological Sciences well for constructive curriculum
              reform.  Recognizing the value of hands-on experiences in making students
              active participants in their education, the goal of this project is threefold -
              to encourage students to experience and thus learn the process of "doing"
              science to provide real-world experiences with modern instrumentation, and to
              promote independent research.  Specifically, the physiology lab will be
              reorganized around computerized data acquisition and analysis workstations. 
              during the first eight weeks of the semester, students will " learn the ropes"
              of research through a series of guided inquiries structured in such a way to
              enable students to ask questions of their own rather than following recipe-like
              lab protocols.  In the process they will gain experience with instruments for
              measuring gas exchange, metabolic rate, animal responses to temperature,
              osmotic concentration of body fluids, muscle and electro-physiology, and enzyme
              kenetics.  during the last six weeks they will progress to developing
              experiments of their own design.  Though not specifically targeting women or
              minority students, it has been suggested that such a small group, hands-on,
              realistic research experiences maximizes retention of women in science
              programs.  Because Animal Physiology is the most demanded course in the
              Biological Sciences major and a popular course for non-majors in allied fields,
              revisions in this course will influence a broad cross-section of students.  An
              on-line lab manual will be developed and linked to a  course web page and
              freely available over the internet.  *
