Title       : Use of Inductively-Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) for
               Rapid Multi-Element Analysis in Earth Science, Chemistry, and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9751439

Award Number: 9751439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46653              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Webster webster@misu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Crackel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard R. Barkosky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minot State University
	      
	      Minot, ND  58701    701/857-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing the capabilities for rapid, accurate multi-element
              analysis through acquisition of an inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission
              spectrometer (ICP-AES) and related sample preparation equipment. The ICP-AES is
              being used to greatly improve laboratory instruction and research opportunities
              for students in the Earth Science, Chemistry, and Biology programs. In Earth
              Science, ICP-AES is a critical part of reforming mineralogy and petrology,
              de-emphasizing traditional hand-sample description and classification, and
              focusing on investigations that teach students how to study minerals and rocks
              in order to characterize them and interpret their origins. In Geochemistry and
              Applied Hydrogeology, students are investigating interactions between solid
              earth materials and water in hands-on experiments. Earth Science students are
              developing a better understanding of minerals, rocks, and water as chemical
              systems and improving their quantitative problem-solving skills. In the
              Chemistry program, students are being introduced to ICP-AES in Quantitative
              Analysis. ICP-AES is expanding opportunities for water and soil investigations
              in Environmental Chemistry. In Instrumental Analysis, students are learning to
              optimize the ICP-AES operating conditions and gaining valuable hands-on
              experience with an analytical technique that is routinely used in research and
              industry. In the Biology program, ICP-AES is making it possible to include
              quantitative analysis in macro-and micro-nutrient investigations in Plant
              Physiology. In each program, use of ICP-AES is improving the students'
              understanding of important concepts by allowing them to use science in
              appropriate coursework. Of equal importance, students are becoming more excited
              about doing research.  *
