Title       : An Undergraduate Laboratory Program for Spatial Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9751491

Award Number: 9751491
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula J. Sanchini psanchin@coe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Coe College
	      1220 First Avenue NE
	      Cedar Rapids, IA  524025008    319/399-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides global positioning system (GPS) field survey stations and
              a geographical information systems- (GIS) capable computer laboratory that
              allows the Biology Department to integrate new instrumentation and a
              contemporary analytical method into the introductory laboratory series. 
              Development of a GPS/GIS-based curriculum in landscape and spatial ecology and
              incorporating GPS and GIS is a high priority of the Biology Department and the
              college.  Demonstrated student interest in GPS/GIS-based ecological research
              now exceeds the ability to deliver instruction through the summer research
              program.  Professional interest in GIS and GPS is also very strong locally as
              well as in the larger context of the ecological community of scholars, where
              use of GPS and GIS in field ecological study is pervasive.  Undergraduate
              biology departments that expect to provide qualified graduates to job candidate
              pools and graduate programs must furnish access to these tools.  There are
              significant reasons why this education should occur in a liberal arts context
              rather than more technical or discipline-based academic settings.  The strength
              of the liberal arts perspective stems from use of a critical and self-critical
              framework for developing knowledge.  A liberal arts approach to science
              emphasizes the utility of hypothesis testing performed by a skilled but
              skeptical practitioner and evaluated by an experienced but self-critical
              theoretician.  This liberal arts approach is at the base of the Inclusive
              Science Research Experience.  Students learn to use quantitative information to
              evaluate the quality of data.  The investigative activities that use GPS field
              stations from this project and GIS analyses performed in the new laboratory can
              adopt this approach.  GPS data contains within it indications of quality that
              can be used to develop data quality standards for any project.  Geostatistical
              procedures exist that can evaluate the quality of GIS maps and provide
              confidence intervals for analyses performed  across themes.  This project's
              two-step program produces students who know how to assess GPS and GIS data
              quality and can provide research designs that achieve high-quality results.  *
