Title       : The Webware, Interfaces and Networking Experimental Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9751132

Award Number: 9751132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44256              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig E. Wills cew@cs.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Finkel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew O. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kinicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George T. Heineman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to change the way in which the topics of
              computer networks, user interfaces, and Web-Ware are viewed and taught.  Not
              only do students need to understand the important concepts in each domain, but
              students need to better understand the effects of the interaction between the
              domains.  Sophisticated user interfaces are contributing network traffic that
              is more varied in its type, amount, and quality of service needs.  With
              computer networks potentially separating the user, interface, and underlying
              application, the design of user interfaces must take into account network
              delays as well as interfaces to special-purpose devices available only over the
              network.  The development of web-ware technology naturally occurs at the
              interaction between user interfaces and computer networks.    The approach
              taken in this project is to develop a single laboratory for Computer Networks,
              Human Computer Interaction, and Web-Ware courses.  The working name for this
              lab is the Web-Ware, Interfaces, and Networking Experimental Laboratory, or the
              WINE Lab for short.  It is used by students enrolled in each of the three
              courses and by students choosing to use its facilities for their senior
              projects.  It is estimated that 200 to 250 students each year can make use of
              this laboratory.      The WINE Lab improves these three courses because
              students have the opportunity to complete projects, experiment with relevant
              techniques, and make connections between topics that would be impossible in a
              general-purpose computing environment.  There is a real need expressed by
              industrial contacts for such experience by students while at the same time
              little related work was found at other institutions.  These findings suggest
              that these are increasingly important areas of the computer science curriculum
              for which students are not being adequately prepared.
