Title       : An Integrated Environment for Rapid Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9751482

Award Number: 9751482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47150              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Earl Wells wells@ece.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rhonda K. Gaede  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert G. Lindquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer-aided design tools and rapid prototyping methodologies are no longer
              considered exotic in nature but, rather, fundamental concepts of the
              engineerilg profession.  These tools enhance, rather than supplant, a sound
              theoretical background.  Students in the Electrical and Computer Engineering
              (ECE) Department receive this sound theoretical background but had not received
              the practical background necessary to bridge the gap between education and
              industrial practice.  This bridge is particularly necessary at the university,
              where more than 40 percent of the ECE undergraduate students are part-time
              students who have full-time industrial jobs.  In these jobs, students are
              already contributing to the field in their roles as technicians, engineering
              assistants, and cooperative education students.    An informal survey of high
              technology companies in the area shows an apparent consensus for an increased
              emphasis on teaching computer-aided design techniques at universities.  At the
              same time the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) is
              calling for the inculcation of design content throughout the undergraduate
              engineering curriculum.      The rapid prototyping facility that this project
              provides meets the needs of the industrial and accreditation requirements.  The
              capability is used in multiple undergraduate courses, including the computer
              engineering senior capstone sequence, and in undergraduate research.  *
