Title       : The Spectroscopic Workstation: A Tool for Education in Universities with Limited
               Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9751202

Award Number: 9751202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19816              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Ford jford@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George R. Long  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the assembly of a variety of components (optical and
              electrical) to create a "spectroscopic workstation" (SW).  This workstation is
              providing teaching-quality versions of a wide range of spectroscopic
              instruments.  This approach allows more efficient, repeated use of equipment,
              rather than more limited use specialized instrumentation.  The use of SW allows
              the development of a wide range of spectroscopic experiments at lower capital
              investment per experiment.  Thus, the approach is attractive to instructors
              because it reduces the financial constraints which often limit their
              creativity.  In addition, the SW-approach encourages student not to treat
              instruments simply as "black boxes".    In addition to developing the hardware
              for the SW, this project is developing a SW-based curricula for instrumental
              analysis and physical chemistry laboratories.  These curricula use SW to
              reinforce an understanding of how measurements are made, how spectrometers
              work, and the pelationship between instrument design and measurement quality. 
              Special attention has been given to developing curricula that foster
              experimental design skills and encourage integration of knowledge from physics,
              mathematics, and chemistry.  This approach should engage students by making
              them more directly responsible for all components of their laboratory work.    
              The success of this approach is being evaluated by student questionnaires
              designed to determine the students' perceptions of their learning experience. 
              the results of this project, including laboratory manuals and equipment lists
              are being made available.  *
