Title       : Integrating GIS Technology into the Undergraduate Learning Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9751362

Award Number: 9751362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44300              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Lloyd lloyd@fullerton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton
	      800 N State College Blvd, MH-112
	      Fullerton, CA  928346850    714/773-3921

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Objective  The objective of this project is to integrate Geographic Information
              Systems (GIS) into the undergraduate curriculum.  Currently, only advanced
              undergraduate and graduate students have access to GIS.  This project will
              expand access through three initiatives:         > Exposure of general
              education students in World Regional Geography to           the power of
              computerized geographic information technologies,         > Conversion of an
              upper division urban geography course from lecture           based learning to
              GIS technology based learning,         > Expanded access to computing resources
              for advanced geography majors          in cartography, GIS, and land use
              analysis courses.      Methods  The objectives of this proposal will achieved
              through the conversion of the existing GIS/Cartography lab to a modern,
              networked learning environment with 25 student workstations connected to a
              dedicated Windows NT server.  Three curriculum innovations, which have already
              been initiated on a limited basis using the existing facility, will be fully
              implemented once expanded access to GIS has been achieved.      Significance 
              GIS is exerting a revolutionary impact on the nature of modern geography and
              geographic education.  For non-majors, GIS offers a graphics-rich, programmable
              learning environment for accessing information about the world and for
              developing spatial reasoning skills.  for geography majors, GIS represents an
              advanced information technology that can facilitate the learning of important
              geographic concepts.  For advanced undergraduates, GIS provides a wide range of
              challenging high-technology career and research opportunities.  Finally, it is
              noteworthy that this lab will make use of network management software to
              facilitate instructional support.  If this approach proves useful in monitoring
              and responding to the demands of the students, this would be additional
              valuable information developed in this project.    *
