Title       : Improving Laboratory Sciences Learning Through Computer Aided Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1997    
File        : a9751731

Award Number: 9751731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34750              (Estimated)
Investigator: Perka Kresic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trocaire College
	      110 Red Jacket Parkway
	      Buffalo, NY  14220    716/826-1200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Automation in every discipline of Laboratory Science has made necessary an
              accompanying adaptation in instructional techniques and associated learning
              materials to accommodate these developments. This project will provide a
              relevant practical experience that allows computer hesitant science and
              microbiology students to learn and  apply a broad array of theoretical concepts
              in an environment that will closely simulate their work and learning
              environments upon graduation. Through the introduction of requested computers,
              cameras and microscopy, students will learn to visually recognize salient
              characteristics of microorganisms, blood and urine specimens and begin a chain
              of thought processes and applications of their theoretical knowledge to
              accurately apply appropriate tests, and report conclusions based on a patient
              case study model. The instructional model is enhanced through collection of
              live patient specimens from a nearby  hospital. These specimens will allow the
              progression of disease states to be observed in "real life" circumstances.
              Examples of cell abnormalities, e.g., will not be taken from text books or
              purchased CD-ROMs but be gathered, stained, studied and archived. Individual
              cases will be studied collaboratively and cooperatively through the integration
              of eleven linked microcomputer stations. The Project Director, in concert with
              students will develop computer aided instruction modules, in hematology,
              serology, immunology and medical microbiology. These modules will be adapted
              for use in a case study instructional  approach.
