Title       : Development of Hands-On Learning in Modern Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
               Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9751140

Award Number: 9751140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don T. Fujito fujitodl@laroche.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shinil Cho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta S. Hartman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La Roche College
	      9000 Babcock Boulevard
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152375898    412/367-9300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project enables chemistry and physics faculty to develop a comprehensive
              program of instruction in the theory and practice of modern nuclear-magnetic
              resonance (NMR) spectroscopy.  The new NMR spectrometer provides the first-ever
              NMR instrumentation for the college, and the resulting hands-on availability
              dramatically enhances the Chemistry Department's capabilities for conducting
              sophisticated experiments in the area of chemical structure determination.   
              Instruction in NMR is a joint venture of the chemistry and physics faculty. 
              Physics faculty concentrate primarily on teaching the theory and practical
              aspects of NMR hardware, and chemistry faculty concentrate on teaching chemical
              applications of NMR.  Chemistry and biology majors are introduced to the
              instrument in the first-year general chemistry course, and various aspects of
              NMR are taught in five subsequent chemistry/physics courses.  A multinuclear
              spectrometer has been selected in order to expand the NMR experience beyond the
              traditional organic chemistry applications.    This instrument allows students
              to gain continual hands-on experience with a modern NMR spectrometer.  This
              experience provides the laboratory background needed to clarify the abstract
              theoretical concepts that underlie modern NMR spectroscopy.  The instrument is
              well suited to function as both a teaching and research instrument.  Its
              modular construction allows its capabilities to be expanded to meet future
              teaching and research needs.  The diversity of new NMR experiments prepares
              students for future creative work with NMR instrumentation, and the NMR can
              significantly stimulate student interest in undergraduate research projects.  *
