Title       : Advanced Technological Education in Plastics Engineering Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1999  
File        : a9751984

Award Number: 9751984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy E. Weston tweston@pct.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross Stacer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Painter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA Col of Tech
	      One College Avenue
	      Williamsport, PA  177015799    570/326-3761

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 The plastics manufacturing industry has grown at the rate of about 10% a year
              for each of the last 25 years and now has approximately 250,000
              technician-level jobs.  Until about ten years ago most of these jobs were "blue
              collar", requiring little or no technical training.  Innovations in processing
              technology have changed this situation dramatically and there is now a pressing
              need for technicians and engineers with two (and four) year degrees.  There are
              very few two-year institutions with plastics technology programs and only one,
              Penn College, is TAC/ABET accredited.  The institutions that do have programs
              (or often just one or two courses) are limited by the absence of instructional
              materials aimed specifically at technician training.    The objective of this
              project is to tackle these problems through the development of curricular and
              instructional materials and outreach to other two-year institutions through
              faculty and teacher development.  To accomplish these goals a consortium has
              been established between Penn College (a predominantly two-year institution),
              Penn State, the University of Massachusetts at Lowell, and a number of
              industrial partners.  The project is establishing a "modular" educational
              approach that emphasizes hands-on training and allows students to progress from
              high school to two-year and four-year programs.  A special effort is being made
              to reach out to students from underrepresented groups.    Because of the lack
              of programs in this field, this project is having an impact at the national
              level by helping to establish programs that provide career opportunities for
              students while satisfying the needs of what is now the fastest growing US
              manufacturing industry.
