Title       : Modern Observatory Facilities for a New Program in Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9751310

Award Number: 9751310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberley A. Venn venn@clare.physics.macalester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The new program in astronomy and astrophysics includes new courses, faculty, an
              observatory dome, and an astronomy laboratory in the newly renovated science
              buildings.  For the first time, an advanced course on astrophysics and an
              introductory astronomy laboratory are being offered.  In these courses,
              students are gaining experience in astronomical techniques, ranging from simple
              exercises to advanced experiments.  The success of the new astronomy program
              strongly depends on the quality of the projects that can be offered, which
              subsequently depend on the quality of instrumentation available.  The
              combination of a DFM 16'' f/8 Cassegrain telescope, SBIG ST-8 CCD imaging
              camera, high-resolution spectrograph, modern computer controls and operating
              systems, and data analysis software are making it possible for students to gain
              experience previously available only to students in large astronomy
              departments.  The DFM telescope has been specifically chosen for the
              observatory because it gives flexibility for instrumentation choices.  It is
              designed and installed for immediate maximum performance in pointing, guiding,
              and focusing, guaranteed for workmanship, and comes with remote observing
              equipment and a simple, user-friendly operating system.  Furthermore, the 16"
              telescope is ideal for an urban location, since it has good light gathering
              capabilities for observing both bright and faint objects.  Sky brightness can
              also be subtracted in CCD exposures.  With a good CCD camera and
              high-resolution spectrograph, the department can provide a very wide range of
              introductory exercises and advanced experiments in astronomy, as well as
              independent research projects for the advanced students.  These observatory
              facilities also support projects and exercises in planetary geology, physical
              chemistry, electronics, and optics.
