Title       : Integrated Chemical Instruction and Computation: Local and Distance Learning and
               Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2000      
File        : a9751465

Award Number: 9751465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98129              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Dorsey dorsey@chem.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald F. Sears  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph C. Dougherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The three goals of this project are: (1) development of exportable models for
              distance learning in chemistry lectures with a focus on the first two years of
              instruction; (2) development of computer workstation based evaluation for
              chemical instruction that can be used either locally or in a distance learning
              mode; and (3) integration of computational chemistry into all levels of our
              undergraduate curriculum. The means for attaining these goals are the
              installation of the Open Chemical Computation Laboratory and currently
              scheduled program development. Chemistry lecture presentations for laboratory
              and lecture courses are available on the World Wide Web (web) as digitized
              audio and graphics. Evaluation of learning at a distance is based upon voice
              recognition technology for examination certification. The initial phase of
              these developments focuses on General and Organic Chemistry. Examinations using
              the Computation Laboratory will focus on student generated responses to
              questions. Typed input, digitized graphics, and drawing program input are
              utilized. This department has initiated comprehensive curricular revision
              involving introduction of computer use in lecture and laboratory courses at all
              levels of the curriculum, starting with courses designed for chemistry majors.
              Laboratory and course revisions covering the first two years of the curriculum
              have been implemented by the Fall 1997. Students' interest in the results of
              computations on unexplored systems promotes learning and acquisition of useful
              information. The three year implementation period features formative and
              summative evaluations of distance learning, computer based laboratory and
              lecture examinations, and curricular revisions. These changes in instruction
              enrich the learning of more than 5000 students each year, 21% of whom are
              minorities and 55% of whom are women.  *
