Title       : Next Generation ATM and Wireless Network Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9751198

Award Number: 9751198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57183              (Estimated)
Investigator: Veeramuthu Rajaravivarma veeramu@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krishna M. Sivalingam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project strengthens the curricular content of computer networking and
              communications courses through the introduction of hands-on ATM and wireless
              network programming to students.  The Department of Mathematical Sciences and
              School of Technology of two institutions are establishing two laboratories to
              teach advanced computer networking.  Traditional computer networking courses
              are able to provide students with hands-on software development and network
              performance experience with TCP/IP networks.  This project furthers the
              expertise of students by introducing next-generation networks.  In particular,
              projects and experiments based on gigabit ATM networks and wireless networks
              are being introduced.  This step enables the students to be well prepared for
              the upcoming network technologies.  These technologies are becoming more
              prevalent in the industry.  In addition, there are a number of interesting
              research issues that still need to be addressed in these networks.  The
              objective is to prepare the students for both industry and advanced graduate
              research.    Two different approaches are being used to teach practical
              advanced networking concepts.  At one of the institutions, a project-based
              approach is being used.  The students focus on writing software applications
              using the ATM and wireless API.  The other is following an experiment-based
              approach in which each course typically involves 2 hours of theory and 2 hours
              of laboratory work.  The collaborative venture benefits the students, who are
              exposed to both of these techniques.  Two different ATM switches are also being
              used to help students better understand switch implementations.
