Title       : Introductory Physics Laboratory Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9751172

Award Number: 9751172
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36047              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Zitzewitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Bord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Matzke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry R. Povolny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Prentis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Most instructors of college and university physics courses would agree that the
              purpose of the laboratory is to provide a chance for students to grapple with
              the phenomena, see the concepts in action, learn to use equipment, and develop
              experience with the craft of experimental physics.  Traditional labs, mainly
              devoted to taking and analyzing data, usually giving step-by-step, or
              "cookbook" procedures, are mainly ineffectual in achieving these goals.    The
              laboratory is an important part of a thorough change in the way we at the
              University of Michigan-Dearborn are teaching introductory physics courses.  We
              emphasize student engagement with material in lecture, collaborative group
              problem solving, and concepts rather than calculations.  Over the past two
              years we have successfully replaced labs in the first term of the two-term
              calculus-based sequence with ones that encourage students to grapple with
              concepts and to solve real-life problems in the lab.  The labs use computers to
              collect data using a great variety of sensors.  They also support digital video
              analysis of two-dimensional motion and simulation programs as appropriate.  We
              now propose to extend this reform in three directions.  First, to create more
              appropriate labs for students in the algebra-based course taken mainly by
              students going into the health professions.  Second, to complete the changes in
              the labs accompanying the second term course on electricity, magnetism, and
              optics.  Third, to develop computer-based training modules that will provide
              individualized instruction for students in the operation of computer data
              collection and analysis programs.  All students who take physics, whether from
              engineering, the sciences, or mathematics, will benefit from these changes.   
              Most laboratory development projects have concentrated on giving students
              experiences that develop their conceptual understanding.  The laboratory
              exercises we develop that also include the solution of experiment problems will
              be disseminated through presenta tions, publications, and workshops.  *
