Title       : Implementing Distance Education Activities for Laboratory Sciences (IDEALS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9751058

Award Number: 9751058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35959              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Dale Smoak smoak@ped.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Isbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Piedmont Tech College
	      Emerald Road
	      Greenwood, SC  29646    803/223-8357

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The college has had two problems with its laboratory science courses, both open
              to a single solution.  One problem is that, as a result of 6 years of no state
              equipment funding, most of the courses (many of which are new) have only
              minimal equipment to support instruction and laboratory activities.  This
              equipment is too scanty when science is proliferating and student knowledge and
              interest are declining.  The other problem is that providing equal educational
              access to residents of six outlying counties requires delivering courses
              through distance-learning teleclassrooms.  Off-campus students, however, lack
              access to science laboratories for laboratory experiments and procedures.   
              The college seeks to develop the IDEALS system, which uses a combination of
              computers, internet, software, and broadcast technology to enrich each
              laboratory science course while providing off-campus students with fully
              effective laboratory experiences.    The system matches computer software,
              Internet websites, and other resources with each learning objective and
              laboratory activity in 11 science courses.  Content learning is enriched by
              graded assignments using these resources.  Off-campus students use these
              resources to effectively emulate live laboratory activities.  All students have
              the same laboratory reports, learning activities, and tests.  Four biology and
              astronomy courses can be converted during the first 2   years, with the
              remaining seven courses converted during the following 18 months.  Ten
              evaluative activities will answer three questions: the magnitude and the
              quality of these new learning activities and their impact on student learning. 
                *
