Title       : Photoelasticity and Its Synergism with Finite Element Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1997    
File        : a9751315

Award Number: 9751315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Said Shakerin sshakerin@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel D. Jensen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to enhance mechanical engineering education by
              incorporating experiments in photoelastic stress analysis within the existing
              curriculum.  Photoelasticity is a visual, full-field technique for determining
              stresses in parts and structures.  In addition to its traditional use in
              industry, there is a renewed interest in using photoelasticity to test objects
              made by stereolithography.    All mechanical (and to a lesser degree civil)
              engineering students can benefit from this project.  Six new experiments are
              introduced in four courses: Mechanics of Materials, Machine Design,
              Instrumentation and Experimental Methods, and the Finite Element Method. 
              Specific instructional objectives are to increase conceptual understanding of
              stress distribution through photoelastic visualization; gain experience with
              photoelasticity and its advantages/limitations; and appreciate the synergism
              between experimental and numerical methods of stress analysis.    For the
              planned experiments, one transmission polariscope set, one reflection
              polariscope set, accompanying accessories, and a video capture device are
              needed.  The equipment can also be used for in-class demonstrations, testing of
              senior design projects, and motivational presentations to K 12 students. 
              Institutional support exists but is insufficient for the acquisition of these
              precision optical instruments.    Overall, students experience that, in solving
              engineering problems, one has to choose the appropriate tool of analysis and
              recognize that quite often several tools must be utilized to validate the
              results, e.g., validation of numerical solutions by experimental means.
