Title       : Reinforcing Concepts in Chemistry Through FT-NMR Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9751155

Award Number: 9751155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88900              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Barbas jbarbas@valdosta.peachnet.ed  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Baxter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Elizabeth Derrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Valdosta State University
	      North Patterson
	      Valdosta, GA  31698    912/333-5952

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The acquisition of a Fourier-transform nuclear magnetic resonance (FT-NMR)
              spectrometer enables the university to reinforce experimentally vital concepts
              and principles of theoretical chemistry.  Students are guided through hands-on
              qualitative and quantitative NMR techniques using the vast potential of modern
              NMR spectroscopy.  These are integrated with computational and other
              instrumental methods.  Such a dynamic investigative learning experience
              clarifies theoretical concepts and stimulates an interest in chemistry.  The
              equipment is integrated throughout the chemistry curriculum, thus benefiting
              students far beyond chemistry majors.  It also facilitates the addition of a
              laboratory component in biochemistry.  These benefits can be extended to the
              faculty and students of five nearby institutions, thus serving the entire
              region of south Georgia.  Previously, such powerful analytical techniques have
              been inaccessible to students and to the students of the neighboring
              institutions.  The project is significant because students understand chemical
              concepts best and are inspired to delve deeper into the discovery process
              through active experimental learning.    *
