Title       : Incorporation of FTIR Throughout the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751047

Award Number: 9751047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26879              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher P. Janzen janzen@susqu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil H. Potter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Nylund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Susquehanna University
	      University Avenue
	      Selinsgrove, PA  17870    717/374-0101

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to incorporate Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR)
              spectroscopy throughout the chemistry curriculum.  Existing experiments have
              been improved and new experiments developed to make use of the inherent
              advantages of FT-IR.  These improved and new experiments facilitate student
              understanding of FT methods, symmetry and group theory, kinetics, functional
              groups, and rotational/vibrational spectroscopy.  In addition, the hands-on
              experience with modern instrumental techniques, including computer library
              searching/identification, computerized averaging of samples, and nontraditional
              sample presentation, will prepare students for instrumental procedures they are
              likely to encounter in graduate school or industry.  The new FT-IR is
              incorporated into the nonmajors', Organic, Physical, Advanced Inorganic, and
              Instrumental Methods courses.  In addition, sampling accessories, including a
              diffuse reflectance attachment, an attenuated total reflectance cell, and a
              CIRCLE cell for highly absorbing solvents, can be purchased through this
              project and incorporated into the new experiments.  The new equipment
              substantially increases the university's ability to teach its students modern
              instrumental approaches to chemical analysis.  *
