Title       : Virtual Laboratory Simulations as an Enhancement to General Biology Laboratory
               Exercises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9751001

Award Number: 9751001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5718               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan F. Finazzo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Broward Community College
	      225 E Las Olas Boulevard
	      Fort Lauderdale, FL  333012208    305/761-7400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science illiteracy is prevalent in our student population.  Although students
              have been exposed to sophisticated technology in their daily lives, they have a
              difficult time grasping abstract biological concepts.  They also lack the
              ability to collect, collate and analyze data.  The purpose of this proposal is
              to enhance laboratory experiments by creating a virtual laboratory.  Software
              in this laboratory will allow students to extend laboratory exercises to
              include variables not examined in their "hands on" experiments.  Computer
              simulations will be used to perform experiments requiring quantitative data
              analysis.  Students will have to "collect" collate and analyze their
              computer-simulated data.  Students will perform virtual experiments that are
              not currently included in the non-majors' biology laboratory because of time
              constraints or the lack of necessary equipment.    Computers with internet
              capability and commercially available software will be used to establish the
              virtual biology laboratory.  Software designed by faculty to meet our students'
              specific needs will be introduced in the future.  Internet access will be
              available for students to collaborate with other institutions in the design and
              implementation of three virtual experiments.    This project will influence
              nearly 2,000 students during the two year period of this study.  The project
              will increase students' understanding of biological concepts, increase critical
              thinking skills and stimulate the imagination and interest of our students. 
              This project will increase retention of students enrolled in this course and
              lead to an increase in overall science enrollment.  Results of this study will
              be disseminated through meeting presentations and in appropriate journal
              articles.
