Title       : Automation of the Hampden-Sydney College Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9751697

Award Number: 9751697
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8447               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans A. Krimm hansk@pulsar.hsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Kniffen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampden-Sydney College
	      
	      Hampden Sydney, VA  23943    434/223-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This program is automating the existing college observatory as part of a major
              expansion of the astronomy offerings.  This expansion also includes the
              development and improvement of courses for both majors and non-majors, and a
              significant increase in student astronomy research and outreach programs in the
              surrounding community and at other schools.  A unifying theme for student
              observations is the study of variable and transient events.  Variable and
              transient events are a hallmark of astronomy at all wavelengths and on many
              time scales.  Three types of studies are being conducted: (1) a long-term
              supernova search; (2) studies of known variable stars; and (3) studies of
              active burst sources and supernovae, including searches for optical
              counterparts to gamma-ray and x-ray bursts.  A telescope with a flexible
              observing schedule and the ability to respond rapidly to new events can be very
              useful for the discovery and study of variable astronomical objects.  The
              observatory is also being used in lower-level classes.  Such a facility is made
              significantly more efficient if the observatory is automated in its operations,
              scheduling, data collection, and data analysis.    The automated facility
              includes a telescope and CCD camera, along with a custom built automation
              control board interfaced to weather sensors, roof control, and telescope
              control.  Full development of an automated observatory is being carried out
              over several years in a manner that is maximizing student participation during
              implementation.
