Title       : Improvement of a Biochemistry Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9751251

Award Number: 9751251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Jones jonesca@ccsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Kapper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central CT State U
	      1615 Stanley Street
	      New Britain, CT  060532439    860/832-2365

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science programs at Central Connecticut State University seek to provide
              students with high quality instruction and state of the art laboratory
              experiences in preparation for careers in industry and education or further
              postgraduate education.  The B.S. degrees in Chemistry are certified by the
              American Chemical Society's Committee on Professional Training (ACS CPT).  In
              response to student interest and to better prepare students for industry, we
              are developing a specialization in Biochemistry consistent with the ACS CPT
              guidelines.  To achieve this goal we must (1) extend our current biochemistry
              lecture course from 3- to 6-credit hours; (2) improve the scope and quality of
              our 3-hour biochemistry laboratory program by the incorporation of modern
              technology and more innovative experiments; and (3) provide more research
              opportunities for undergraduates interested in biochemistry.    The present
              proposal addresses our intent to improve the biochemistry laboratory program
              through the purchase of instrumentation for revised phased high pressure liquid
              chromatography (HPLC), high speed, low temperature centrifugation, and tissue
              homogenization.  The instruments will be utilized in the following courses in
              the Chemistry Department: Biochemistry Laboratory and Basic Organic and
              Biological Chemistry; and in the Biology Department, in Ecological Physiology. 
              The professors who instruct these courses will also utilize the instrumentation
              in their individual research programs which involve undergraduates.  Dr. Jones,
              a biochemist in the Chemistry Department, is studying the metabolism and
              toxicity of polyaromatic  hydrocarbons and halogenated hydrocarbons in
              prokaryote and eukaryote cells.  She has recently established a small tissue
              culture laboratory for conducting metabolic studies in primary rat liver cell
              cultures.  Dr.  Kapper, a comparative  physiologist in the Biology Department,
              is engaged in study of the physiological and biochemical mechanisms of salinity
              adaptation in marine and estuarine orga nisms.  These studies would be enhanced
              by access to HPLC technology.    Specifically, we propose to purchase a Waters
              reversed phase HPLC system with capability for uv/visible and fluorescence
              detection.  This will be used for analyses of protein hydrolysates, amino acids
              and other biomolecules, and environmental metabolites generated in plant and
              animal tissues.  The Sorval RC-26 Plus centrifuge (max. speed 26,000rpm) with
              and aluminum fixed-angle rotor, will be used for the subcellular fractionation
              of mammalian tissues including calcium-precipiated microsomes for metabolic
              studies, and for the gradient purification of specific cellular proteins.  A
              tissue homogenizer will be used to generate tissue homogenates for differential
              centrifugation.    The acquisition of these instruments would represent a major
              advancement in the quality and scope of training in biochemistry within the
              Chemistry Department, and contribute significantly to the proposed program
              development in this area.  An HPLC system would be widely used in other as well
              as undergraduate research projects in the Departments of Chemistry and
              Biological Sciences.
