Title       : Integrating Techniques of DNA Analysis Across the Biology Curriculum for Majors
               and Non-Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9751280

Award Number: 9751280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne D. Sullivan sullivan@academ.wvwc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl M. Colson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine B. Gregg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Wesleyan College
	      College Avenue
	      Buckhannon, WV  26201    304/473-7011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to address a systemic lack of laboratory experiments in
              molecular biology in majors' and non-majors' courses at West Virginia Wesleyan
              College.  Experiments centered around DNA analysis will enhance student
              understanding of major biological concepts and scientific reasoning, and majors
              will develop strong skills in many of the common techniques of DNA analysis. 
              Teams of students will carry out experiments in forensics, phylogenetics,
              population genetics, cell biology and animal behavior at the freshman through
              senior level.  This equipment will also support student-faculty research in a
              project that will use microsatellites to assess genetic relatedness. 
              Experiments for non-major's courses draw on student fascination with DNA
              evidence in the courtroom and directly relate scientific processes to human
              concerns.  Techniques to be introduced include agarose and polyacrylamide gel
              electrophoresis, use of restriction enzymes and analysis of restriction
              fragment length polymorphisms, DNA isolation and quantitation, the polymerase
              chain reaction, reverse transcription-PCR, Southern transfers, use of 
              chemiluminescent probes, computer-based image analysis, bacterial
              transformation and colony screening.  The proposed project is of interest
              because of its focus on DNA-related techniques across a broad spectrum of
              questions to be investigated, the way in which technical skills are reinforced
              throughout the majors' curriculum, and the emphasis on non-majors' as well as
              majors' courses.  Biology majors constitute almost 9% of the student body at
              WVWC, and over 200 students per year enroll in the affected on-majors' courses,
              including all elementary education majors, for whom one of the courses fulfills
              a state requirement.  At this small, liberal arts institution with a tradition
              of successfully preparing students for medical and graduate school, curricular
              changes are often difficult to justify.  Our evaluation of the proposed project
              should be of interest to similar colleges faci ng the same challenges.
