Title       : Instruments for Integrating the Study of Photosynthesis in aBiology Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9751734

Award Number: 9751734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45603              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl S. Pike c pike@acad.fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy W. Sipe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan L. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      P O BOX 3003
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is directed toward the enhancement of students' understanding of
              photosynthesis and related aspects of plant function.  Photosynthesis is the
              primary process fueling life, yet students often have difficulty grasping its
              principles.  By providing hands-on experience with varied analyses of
              photosynthetic systems, this project is helping students overcome their
              preconceptions of photosynthesis and gain an understanding on the ecological
              and biochemical levels.  The project is providing a model for the multifaceted
              integration of photosynthesis and related functions into undergraduate
              curricula. The lack of such integration is a widespread pedagogical
              shortcoming.  The project, is serving the college's biology majors and
              prehealing arts students, and is also affecting the interdisciplinary
              environmental studies program.  The department is acquiring equipment to
              measure photosynthesis in intact leaves.  The new instruments are primarily
              being used in investigative laboratory settings where students collaboratively
              design and conduct experiments, and in the extensive student independent
              research program.  Projects are being developed for various courses.  The new
              instruments measure photosynthesis and related processes in various ways
              (oxygen evolution, carbon dioxide uptake, or water vapor pelease), so students
              understand and integrate various experimental approaches.  Linking instruments
              to networked computers is enabling students to use sophisticated data analysis
              and presentation tools.
