Title       : Computerized Instruction, Data Acquisition, and Analysis in Undergraduate
               science and Mathematics Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9751625

Award Number: 9751625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Walker kwalker@miseri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mazen Shahin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick T. Schaefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Misericordia
	      Lake Street
	      Dallas, PA  18612    717/675-2181

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project provides scientific and computing equipment to be used by
              undergraduates to perform laboratory experiments and student research in seven
              biology, five chemistry, and three mathematics courses.  A computer learning
              center for mathematics and science provides for (1) expanded use of computers
              for instruction in mathematics and science courses; (2) the modification of
              existing laboratory experiments and the introduction of new laboratory
              experiments involving computerized data acquisition and analysis; and (3)
              enhanced student access to computers, facilitating computer-based assignments
              and follow-ups to laboratories.    Mathematical and scientific concepts are
              strongly linked through the more extensive studies that may be accomplished
              with the aid of computers.  Strengthening interdisciplinary learning is a major
              goal of the investigators involved.  Mathematics is developing course materials
              using examples from the sciences.  The sciences are introducing more
              sophisticated mathematical modeling and data analysis into their laboratories
              to achieve this goal.  The requested equipment can have a significant impact on
              students from a variety of disciplines that include both basic mathematics and
              science, as well as secondary education and allied health majors.   *
