Title       : Inquiry-Based Physics Lab for Under-Prepared South Carolina State University
               Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9751705

Award Number: 9751705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21239              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Smith dsmith@scsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Payne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Franklin K. Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Carolina St Univ
	      300 College Street NE
	      Orangeburg, SC  29117    803/536-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many students begin their undergraduate careers with rather weak backgrounds in
              science.  Consequently, many of them fail to grasp the conceptual basis of
              physics, the rationale for the successive steps in a traditional physics
              laboratory experiment, and the reasoning behind standard data analyses. Both of
              these shortcomings are being rectified by replacing the conventional physics
              laboratory with a guided-inquiry laboratory.    The inquiry-based laboratory is
              being patterned after a successful microcomputer-based laboratory.  Researchers
              have demonstrated that using the computer's fast data-acquisition capabilities
              to instantly confront the students' intuition results in a conceptual
              understanding vastly superior to that developed in traditional laboratories. 
              This result is because emphasis in the laboratory is shifted from data
              collection to data interpretation and scientific thinking.    Students are
              being given the hour-long Force Concept Inventory test at the beginning and end
              of the semester to evaluate the effectiveness of the inquiry-based laboratory
              in imparting physical concepts.  The test is a standard measure of whether or
              not a student has developed a Newtonian world view.    Instituting an
              inquiry-based physics laboratory serves as a model for other colleges and
              universities faced with the problem of teaching physics to insufficiently
              prepared students.  Experiences with the laboratory can be disseminated by
              articles in appropriate journals, and by conference presentations.  *
