Title       : Enhancing Student Design Experiences by Integrating Computer-Aided Engineering
               into the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9751210

Award Number: 9751210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas H. Howell                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65386              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darryl G. Thelen thelen@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Krupczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/392-5111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project integrates computer-aided design (CAD) and computer-aided
              engineering (CAE) into the term projects in four engineering courses: 
              Computer-Aided Design, Solid Mechanics, Finite Element Analysis, and Capstone
              Engineering Design.  Students are enthusiastic about conducting term projects
              in engineering courses, but are often frustrated in their attempts to apply the
              theories learned in lecture to the practical challenges faced in applied
              projects.  The frustration stems largely from the simplifications needed to
              permit isolation of underlying effects, and to facilitate simple closed-form
              solution of relevant governing equations.  Such simplifications create a gap
              between theory and practice that engineering students often view as
              irreconcilable.  The project is bridging this gap by introducing the informed
              use of numerical methods of CAD and CAE in the four targeted courses.  A
              16-seat computer laboratory is being established to accomplish this objective. 
              The laboratory is being used to teach professional CAD (solid modeling) and CAE
              (finite element analysis, dynamic simulation, and numerical analysis) software
              applications through structured exercises conducted under faculty supervision. 
              Term projects can increase in sophistication each year and build on skills
              learned in prior years.  Therefore, seniors can enter their capstone course
              with a range of CAD and CAE skills that they can call upon to conduct their
              hands-on design projects.    This work can result in the integration of
              undergraduate engineering project experiences that demonstrate the modern
              application of engineering science and include all of the challenges of actual
              engineering design problems.  The outcomes of this work can be presented to the
              engineering education community and other schools interested in integrating
              computer-aided engineering analysis into the undergraduate curriculum.  *
