Title       : Incorporating Computers and Innovative Problem-Solving into the Human Physiology
               Lab Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9751723

Award Number: 9751723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18606              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Breckler jbreck@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Barnes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Human physiology is a fundamental course in the biology major of particular
              interest to future teachers, health professionals and researchers. The teaching
              of human physiology is traditionally done through the use of animal models,
              although the relevancy and excitement of the subject is best conveyed to the
              greatest number of students by using the students themselves as experimental
              subjects. New experimental approaches using the human model need to be designed
              which maintain an emphasis on "integrative function" which is inherent in the
              physiology discipline, and at the same time build upon a knowledge base rich in
              cell and molecular sciences.       Students in the laboratory can learn human
              physiology while also acquiring many necessary skills, such as computerized
              data acquisition, cooperative learning, and experimental design. Recent
              advances in available data acquisition software make this possible, and
              presents an exciting opportunity to make fundamental changes in the
              undergraduate human physiology curriculum. Students can focus more on
              integrative concepts and design experiments. Students can also work in small
              groups on problem-based learning assignments. They can achieve more than just
              an understanding of resting conditions by focusing on the acute and chronic
              acclimatizations of the body to changes in the environment.       To implement
              these ideas, we propose to establish 8 computerized physiology workstations to
              measure human physiological parameters and institute a problem-based learning
              curriculum involving physiological responses to environmental stress. Students
              will also participate in a formal outreach program to local middle schools and
              be encouraged to carry out research projects in physiology.
