Title       : Implementation of a Materials Synthesis and CharacterizationLaboratory Component
               Across the Undergraduate Science and Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751376

Award Number: 9751376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmela Amato-Wierda ccaw@hopper.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd S. Gross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roy P. Planalp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher F. Bauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is introducing a materials synthesis and processing program through
              the Department of Chemistry.  The centerpiece of the program is a new
              laboratory course entitled, Materials Synthesis and Characterization.  The
              course features four concurrent, semester-long, inquiry-based laboratory
              experiments drawn from both industrial interactions and current research in
              materials synthesis.  Students are participating in each of the four
              experiments in a rotation that requires information transfer from one group to
              the next.  Thirteen experiments are featured in the project.  Students are
              being required to formulate long-term research objectives and defend them under
              scrutiny from their peers, the professors, and the industrial advisors.  An
              interdisciplinary enrollment from chemistry, physics, chemical engineering, and
              mechanical engineering is ensured by aggressive recruitment.  Problemsolving in
              this environment mimics how complex research and development is performed and
              teaches the students how to interact with colleagues from other disciplines.   
              In addition to the aforementioned course, the acquisition of the new
              characterization tools are impacting 15 materials-related courses and more than
              100 students per year by enabling new experiments.  The project also involves
              the purchase of a thermogravimetric analyzer, a thermomechanical analyzer, a
              dynamic mechanical analyzer, a differential scanning calorimeter, a gas
              chromatograph mass spectrometer, a gel permeation chromatography apparatus, a
              diffractometer with thin film optics, and an upgrade to a sputtering system
              that enables the deposition of multilayer films.  *
