Title       : Incorporation of Fourier Transform Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy into
               the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9751634

Award Number: 9751634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar N. Drake iend@adm.angelo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross C. Dawkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Ruggles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George E. Shankle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerard J. Ostheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Angelo State University
	      2601 West Avenue N
	      San Angelo, TX  76909    915/942-2131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry Department has been in the process of redesigning its
              undergraduate laboratories in order to provide students with exposure to modern
              chemical instrumentation and current laboratmry techniques.  The department is
              acquiring a 200 MHz Fourier-transform nuclear-magnetic resonance (FT-NMR) that
              complements the department's existing instrumentation.  The 200 MHz FT-NMR is
              replacing an inoperable 90 MHz CW-NMR, and enabling the department to expose
              students to nuclear-magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques frequently during their
              chemistry training.  The sequence of laboratory exercises is allowing NMR
              instruction to begin early and proceed with increasing depth as students
              progress in the chemistry program.  Microscale experiments have been
              incorporated into the organic curriculum, as well as the synthesis and
              subsequent analysis of a locally occurring dye.  NMR analysis of products can
              contribute greatly to the instructional value of this laboratory.  In the
              physical chemistry laboratory, the instrument is being used to determine rate
              constants for a reaction at equilibrium and illustrate Heisenberg uncertainty
              relationships evident as line broadening.  Two-dimensional NMR is also being
              introduced, during the instrumental analysis laboratory, in the context of
              sequencing short peptides.  The department is also integrating this
              spectrometer into the biochemistry and molecular biology laboratory by having
              students determine the sequence of a 10 base-pair DNA duplex.  Exposing
              chemistry students to NMR theory and applications through the department's
              laboratory courses, including individual research, is greatly enhancing their
              overall research experience.
