Title       : A Model Dimensional Measurement Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751185

Award Number: 9751185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Whipple zpwhipplebr@trident.tec.sc.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grace L. Duffy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. McAleece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Morton-Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trident Technical College
	      P O Box 10367
	      Charleston, SC  29411    803/572-6111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electronic measuring and data collection has been used in manufacturing to
              increase productivity, ensure quality control, and reduce manufacturing costs. 
              In order to compete for jobs, graduates in Machine Tool Technology, Engineering
              Design Graphics, and Mechanical Engineering Technology programs must become
              proficient in the use of these measuring tools and gain an understanding of how
              the data are used in the manufacturing process.  Through the development of a
              Model Dimensional Measurement Laboratory, the college is able to integrate
              measuring technology throughout the various technology programs.    This
              project is designed to incorporate state-of-the-art dimensional measuring
              instruments into the technology programs at the college.  Through the use of
              both mechanical and digital dimensional measuring instruments, students have
              more exposure to advanced instrumentation that is used by industry leaders,
              come to understand the metric system of measuring and its purpose in the
              manufacturing and engineering community, learn theory and application of data
              collection equipment as applied to Statistical Process Control in
              manufacturing, and include the development of a laboratory manual that utilizes
              the instruments in the Dimensional Measurement Laboratory and provides
              experiences for students with using metric measuring techniques.  *
