Title       : Introduction of Circular Dichroism and Stopped-Flow Spectroscopy in Chemistry
               Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9751709

Award Number: 9751709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36442              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kerry K. Karukstis kerry_karukstis@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison McCurdy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald R. Van Hecke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project introduces the spectroscopic techniques of circular dichroism and
              stopped-flow absorption methods to the chemistry laboratory curriculum. 
              Spectroscopy is among the most fundamental of physical measurements, with
              extensive applications to all areas of chemistry.  However, the previously
              available spectroscopic tools within the Chemistry Department have limited the
              ability to address such structural questions as the distribution of
              conformations within a macromolecular sample or the change in substrate
              conformation upon ligand binding.  Furthermore, the lack of fastmixing
              techniques has reduced the accuracy of kinetic studies of fast reactions in
              solution (typically those reactions with half-lives on the order of 10 ms to 10
              s).  The new instrumentation facilitates the examination of the absorption of
              circularly polarized light by chiral systems and the elucidation of
              time-dependent phenomena in aqueous solution using stopped flow methods. 
              Initial experiments allow students to observe the sensitivity of circular
              dichroism to a variety of conformational and organizational changes and to
              experience the utility of stopped-flow methods for examining fast reactions in
              solution.  The principles underlying these techniques have already been
              presented in three lecture courses in the department: physical chemistry,
              biochemistry, and biophysical chemistry.  The new instrumentation enhances the
              kinetic offerings in the existing sophomore physical chemistry laboratory and
              helps initiate a biochemistry laboratory for the newly approved biological
              chemistry option for chemistry majors.  The instrumentation also expands the
              range of questions that senior majors can address in the required Introduction
              to Research course, including the characterization of the cation effect in
              biochemical systems and of the influence of phase behavior on the optical
              activity of metal-containing liquid crystals.
