Title       : Incorporating Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry into the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9751521

Award Number: 9751521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Douglas douglas@sjfc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Piccolo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. John Fisher College
	      3690 East Avenue
	      Rochester, NY  146183537    716/385-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project incorporates a gas chromatograph mass spectrometer (GC/MS)
              throughout the chemistry curriculum.  In the introductory laboratory courses,
              after a laboratory illustrating chromatography, students use the GC/MS to
              identify a mixture of liquids using the retention times and molecular weights
              of the separated materials.  In organic chemistry laboratory, students learn
              more of the theory of gas chromatography and mass spectrometry and use GC/MS in
              the analysis of a variety of materials they synthesize or receive.  A GC/MS
              also permits a wider variety of special projects in this course.  In analytical
              chemistry, students can begin using the GC/MS independently.  They can develop
              a procedure to analyze potatoes for pesticides and a procedure to analyze gases
              that are emitted from materials in simulated space conditions.  In the
              spectroscopy course, mass spectra taken by GC/MS can be used to illustrate the
              experimental parameters that affect mass spectra.  In biochemistry laboratory,
              students use the instrument to determine the composition of fatty acid esters
              isolated and prepared from naturally occurring materials, and they use the
              GC/MS to determine the amino acid composition of a protein.  In senior
              laboratory, the GC/MS permits research-level synthesis products and more
              difficult unknowns to be fully characterized.  The instrument can further some
              undergraduate research projects and permit other projects to be started.  A
              series of seminars on mass spectrometry can be sponsored for the local
              chemistry community using speakers from local industry and local universities. 
              *
