Title       : Theory and Application of Molecular Biology Throughout the Undergraduate Biology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9751249

Award Number: 9751249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82623              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Gabrielson gabrielsop@william.jewell.edu           Ext. 5662  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel P. Heruth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan F. Strautman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Jewell College
	      
	      Liberty, MO  64068    816/781-3806

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science is investigative and experiential; the teaching of science should
              reflect this reality.  A successful biology curriculum should have
              investigative components throughout the program.  An essential aspect of the
              investigative experience is that students be exposed to the tools of the
              discipline.  Nowhere is this more important than in molecular biology, a field
              that has revolutionized all of biology.  This project integrates teaching the
              theory and techniques of molecular biology throughout the biology curriculum,
              from the first course in Evolution and Ecology through the capstone, Senior
              Thesis research project.  The new equipment provided through this project is
              standard and essential to teach molecular biology in the laboratory.  The
              curriculum has been revised to include molecular biology laboratories in
              existing courses, and two new courses, focused on molecular biology, have been
              added.  Molecular biology also can be integrated into the revised, General
              Education curriculum of the college, which begins teaching students about
              science in Level I courses; provides an interdisciplinary, hands-on,
              investigative laboratory experience in Level II courses; and culminates with an
              interdisciplinary, capstone course that applies the theory and techniques
              learned to real-world problems.  The Science Honors Program in biology, taught
              by the tutorial method, also has molecular biology as its central theme.  This
              project serves as a model for how other institutions, especially small, liberal
              arts colleges, can integrate molecular biology into all levels of their
              curriculum.  The new curriculum and equipment enhances significantly the
              university's ability to teach biology into the 21st century.  *
