Title       : Field and Laboratory Equipment Support for Student Training in Interdisciplinary
               Environmental Geoscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9751645

Award Number: 9751645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48524              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Douglas DouglasB@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee J. Suttner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Brophy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Greg A. Olyphant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                As part of a program of curriculum development in the expanding area of
              environmental geoscience, a set of interdisciplinary, field-based, courses are
              taught from the Geologic Field Station in southwestern Montana.  The setting
              for this field instruction is a Demonstration Watershed whose headwaters is a
              large snow catchment and whose lower drainage is in an arid structural basin. 
              The Demonstration Watershed has been established as part of a cooperative
              effort involving the university, State, and Federal agencies, as well as the
              local water district and ranchers.  Having the students become part of this
              endeavor provides a balanced perspective on the problems they are addressing
              and the need for reasonable, practical solutions that they are helping to
              create as they go on in their professional careers.  Technical phases of the
              course involve data collection from a suite of permanent instruments deployed
              within the watershed.  Students enrolled in the course participate in
              calibration of permanent equipment arrays and undertake additional measurements
              in watershed sub-areas and along grid surveys.   Reliable, state-of-the-art
              portable equipment is necessary to complete these aspects of the courses.  To
              ensure that the location and final compilation of the data are both accurate
              and also at the leading edge of technology, the project incorporates GPS
              receivers for location and a GIS system for data display into the students'
              work.  This project provides additional field equipment and portable lap-top
              computers that will insure state-of-the-art training for the next generation of
              field-based environmental geoscientists.
