Title       : Promoting Student Learning Through Experimental Studies in Geoscience Courses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9751411

Award Number: 9751411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33302              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexter Perkins dexter_perkins@und.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It has recently become clear that traditional, lecture-based courses do not
              serve the needs of most college science students.  Learning facts in a lecture
              setting is an ineffective way to prepare students.  To help solve this problem,
              research components are being introduced in many of the geology courses.  This
              project, centered around the Mineralogy class, is a further move toward a
              research-based curriculum.    Students enjoy doing experimental studies.  They
              like working on projects where they become the expert.  They become original
              thinkers and investigators.  They learn how scientists create science, and
              learn basic scientific principles through application.  The new equipment being
              acquired allows students to conduct more sophisticated, semester-long,
              experimental investigations.  They work in teams, designing their projects,
              collecting data, and interpreting results.  They present their conclusions in
              class, in seminars, and in publications.    The equipment can also be used for
              teaching and for student research in classes other than Mineralogy, including
              Structural Geology, Geomorphology, Petrology, Industrial Minerals, Ore
              Deposits, Sedimentology and Stratigraphy, and Coal Geology.  The video system,
              in particular, simplifies large group instruction and discussion based on the
              petrographic microscope, and facilitates presentations of student research
              results.  *
