Title       : Integration of Photonics and Electronics in the Undergraduate Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9751463

Award Number: 9751463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Spiegel dspiegel@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Bartels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782123104    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is integrating electronics and photonics into a single
              upper-division physics laboratory course.  The new course has been structured
              to take advantage of the strong pedagogical links between photonics and
              electronics, and to enable students to obtain both hands-on competence with the
              instrumentation and a thorough understanding of the theoretical principles.   
              A hands-on electronics course has long been an important staple within many
              quality undergraduate physics programs.  However, due to the enormous recent
              impact of laser-based photonics technologies, physics undergraduates must also
              obtain significant experience with the principles of photonics and fiber-optics
              instrumentation.  Research and development in photonics technology has already
              had major effects on the U.S. economy.  As they begin their graduate or
              industrial careers, physics students clearly benefit from an in-depth
              understanding of the advantages of photonics over electronics for many
              applications requiring high bandwidth, low loss, or improved sensitivity.  It
              is imperative that students gain as much hands-on experience as possible, and
              that the course include current applications employing high-quality single-mode
              fiber.  A lecture course in optics, is being required with the proposed
              laboratory course.  The new laboratory can be taken either for two credits by
              physics majors, who are carrying out both electronics and photonics
              experiments, or for one credit by engineering science majors, who are
              conaentrating on the photonics investigations.  The laboratory course structure
              serves as a model for widespread incorporation of photonics into the
              undergraduate physics curriculum.
