Title       : Self-Directed Multimedia Geographical Information System andImage Analysis Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  2000  
File        : a9751131

Award Number: 9751131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51825              (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Ritter ritterj¦oit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack A. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Inst of Technology
	      3201 Campus Drive
	      Klamath Falls, OR  976018801    503/882-6321

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geographical Information System (GIS) and Image Analysis techniques have become
              a rapidly developing component of our technological age.  The sphere of
              applications for these techniques spans several disciplines.  These tools are
              fundamental to site characterization studies for construction projects, mapping
              soil types and drainage patters for optimizing crop rotations, identifying the
              spatial extent of old growth forests, as well as many others.  The current
              generation of Civil Engineers and Environmental Scientists must be adept at not
              only understanding the theoretical foundations for these tools, but also
              skilled in their practical application.  Current budgetary constraints dictate
              that innovative and fundamental reforms must be found in both curricula and
              pedagog to ensure that graduates have attained the technical skills required to
              meet the challenges facing our society.    A self-directed multimedia GIS/Image
              Analysis laboratory is proposed.  The laboratory will have sufficient
              computational power, data storage, and networking capability to enable a series
              of instructional modules in the fields of GIS/Image Analysis to be administered
              either on or off-site via CD-ROM or the World Wide Web, the extending the
              bounds of the traditional classroom.  The proposed effort includes a procedure
              that will enable students to gain access to both the requisite software and
              data independent of their location.  The proposed infrastructure will enable
              students to access appropriate data sets without significantly impacting the
              current campus networking traffic.    The project will be evaluated in terms of
              the number of students who enter the instructional time-line, whether or not
              their curricular goals were achieved, their recorded proficiency, and their
              ability to integrate their skills into student projects.  Results will be
              disseminated at both national and regional conferences.
