Title       : GPS Instrumentation for Improved Instruction in GIS and Field Geology Courses,
               Using Expertise of Geology and Geography Departments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751445

Award Number: 9751445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth H. Orvis orvis@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Dunne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the purchase of backpack and hand-held Global Positioning
              Systems (GPS) receivers and related equipment.  These units upgrade the
              technology content of the field-based components in courses from the
              Departments of Geological Sciences and Geography.  A strong need exists to
              train students in data acquisition and navigation with GPS receivers,
              differential post-correction of GPS data with microcomputers, and GPS data
              acquisition for Geographic Information Systems (GIS) programs.  The need
              derives from the shift to gathering scientific field data with digital
              equipment rather than pencil and paper, and from employers requiring that
              potential geoscience applicants be well versed in this technology.    The two
              departments have joined in this proposal to (1) increase the number of students
              using the new equipment; (2) provide instructors who have used GPS equipment
              for different purposes; and (3) provide the university with a future basis for
              expanding field instruction with GPS units into courses in the biosciences and
              engineering.  The new equipment can be used in at least eight exercises, and in
              four courses that affect most juniors and seniors majoring in Geography,
              Geological Sciences, and Civil Engineering.  The students train in the use of
              different types of GPS receivers for determining position and navigating.  They
              are expected to determine the effectiveness of these different tools as a
              function of scale of mapping, ease of use, and accuracy.  Students are trained
              in differential post-correction calculations with microcomputers to demonstrate
              the improved accuracy in positioning and navigation with more advanced GPS
              receivers.  Students are also shown the uses of GPS data beyond just issues of
              position and navigation.  For example, they input data into GIS programs to
              construct geological maps with graphical databases, and input data into
              bitmap-based drawing programs to correct aerial photographic distortions.  *
