Title       : Modern Applied Electromagnetics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9751264

Award Number: 9751264
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25683              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich D. Foltz hfoltz@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene B. John  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785392909    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electromagnetics, as traditionally taught, often concentrates on rigorous
              preparation for further work without emphasizing applications.  This approach
              fails to meet the needs of the majority of electrical engineering students who
              are not going to be fields and waves specialists.  The project is adding a
              laboratory component to first-semester electromagnetics that directly
              establishes its relevance to modern electronic systems, including digital
              systems.  Seven sets of apparatus are being constructed, which will (1)
              demonstrate transmission of digital signals over long transmission lines; (2)
              allow the study of pulse propagation, reflection, and distortion; and (3)
              permit the study of crosstalk and other forms of unintended coupling in printed
              circuits.  Most importantly, the apparatus is being designed so that students
              can analyze these effects using ordinary benchtop instruments (function
              generators and oscilloscopes) with which they are already familiar. They are
              also able to design solutions to electromagnetic-oriented problems using
              standard electronic components.  Equipment for electromagnetic interference
              (EMI) measurements is also included.  This equipment allows measurements of
              field strength, radiation patterns, and spurious emissions.  Students can make
              compliance measurements on personal computers, and design shielding solutions
              to interference problems.  This project is affecting every student in the
              electrical engineering program. The result should be graduating engineers who
              are better able to apply electromagnetics principles in modern high-speed
              electronic systems.  *
