Title       : Iowa Lakes CADD/GIS Lab Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1997    
File        : a9751275

Award Number: 9751275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51177              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger R. Patocka rpatocka@ilcc.cc.ia.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa Lakes CC Cent Office
	      19 South 7th Street
	      Estherville, IA  513342234    712/362-0435

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              During the eleven years that lowa Lakes has offered CADD courses, CADD use has
              matured. Early CADD courses relied on computer platforms to augment lab work
              performed on drawing boards. Today, drafting and design is performed almost
              exclusively on computers, and recently, at several locations, simultaneously. 
              Today's hardware must support today's sophisticated software applications for
              manufacturing, architecture, civil engineering and geographic information
              systems (GIS). Early CADD focused on two-dimensional techniques and fledgling
              applications; today's computer platforms must support three-dimensional
              techniques, solids modeling, rendering, and animation.  The sophistication of
              software programming and the need to support the explosion in digital
              communications are driving the demand for newer and faster computers.
              Educational institutions, especially those in relatively remote areas, are
              challenged to find adequate resources to update software and hardware that have
              increasingly shorter shelf lives.  This upgrade will provide students an
              improved vehicle to initiate collaboration with other users on a global basis.
              Efforts for educational collaboration among institutions are currently being
              formulated to take advantage of the improved platform.  Approval of this
              project will provide students, employers and communities with access to
              emerging technology and the potential to make more informed choices. Good
              decisions are rooted in competent information, whether decisions are personal,
              or whether decisions are the result of representative deliberation. Helping
              people synthesize informed choices is the essence of education.
