Title       : Laboratory Instruction and Experimental Psychology EmployingHands On and Virtual
               Lab Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9751602

Award Number: 9751602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Monteiro monteiro@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John J. Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The primary objective of this proposal is to move our current laboratory
              experience for the era of "brass-instrument" technology to computer-controlled,
              virtual experimental instrumentation.  The goal of this project is to use the
              advanced computerized and multimedia technologies to provide students with the
              following three learning experiences:       1.  direct laboratory research
              experience or interactive laboratory demonstrations to the largest number and
              broadest range of our student population;       2.  instruction for all of our
              students in modern research skills, including computer-controlled research
              design, implementation, and data acquisition and analysis; and       3. 
              laboratory experiences in a wider range of areas than we currently offer, e.g.,
              cognitive neuroscience, learning, perception, cognition, human factors,
              cross-cultural psychology.       In order to provide these experiences, we will
              develop a laboratory  complex consisting of a central laboratory/classroom,
              three specialized  satellite laboratories, and a portable two-way audio/visual
              system that allows teleconferencing any lab with any appropriately wired
              classroom.  These laboratories will be used by three types of courses:  (1)
              dedicated laboratory courses, (2) large theater-style classes which, through
              the distance-teaching technologies, will expose students to interactive
              laboratory demonstrations  conducted in the specialized satellite laboratories.
                    It is expected that the added hands-on training provided by this
              instrumentation and the proposed curricular changes will enhance students'
              compentecies in conducting social science also expected that students will gain
              deeper appreciation for the theories, findings, and applications of psychology
              and science more generally.
