Title       : Essential Improvement of the Surveying Program at OIT Using Real-Time Kinetic
               Global Positioning Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9751138

Award Number: 9751138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis D. Findorff findorfd@oit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack A. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Inst of Technology
	      3201 Campus Drive
	      Klamath Falls, OR  976018801    503/882-6321

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Changes in technology over the past 10 years have had an enormous impact on
              surveyors.  The advent of the Global Positioning System (GPS) has brought about
              significant changes in the manner in which surveyors gather observational data,
              establish project control networks, and locate positions on the Earth's
              surface.  Recent advances in GPS technology have provided the surveyor with the
              ability to determine three-dimensional positions in real time using kinematics
              techniques.  This real-time kinematics (RTK) system has made GPS technology
              useful for the solution of problems encountered by the typical surveyor.  The
              danger in this technology lies in its use by those who are technically
              illiterate and view the system as a black box which merely produces results. 
              Practicing and future professional surveyors must be educated so they are able
              to scrutinize results and discriminate between usable and unusable data.    It
              is imperative that a comprehensive surveying education provides students with
              exposure to GPS technology throughout the curriculum.  This integration of GPS
              within the curriculum is facilitated by the use of RTK techniques which may be
              applied to plane surveying as well as geodetic surveying.  Familiarity with the
              theory and applications of RTK surveying demystifies the black box and produces
              graduates who can have a positive impact on the surveying profession.    This
              project makes RTK surveying systems available for use by students in the
              surveying program.  The acquisition of RTK equipment is essential for
              maintaining a contemporary, comprehensive curriculum that produces
              technologically literate students.  *
