Title       : Computerized Chemistry Laboratory as an Extension of the Hands-on Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9751108

Award Number: 9751108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8451               (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Precedo-Choudhury   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Broward Community College
	      225 E Las Olas Boulevard
	      Fort Lauderdale, FL  333012208    305/761-7400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many community college students have weak backgrounds in the sciences and
              therefore have a difficult time grasping abstract concepts in chemistry.  The
              purpose of this project is to make chemistry less intimidating and more
              approachable by introducing a medium into the Laboratory that student are
              familiar with - computers.  The hands-on experience of laboratories has
              traditionally been an invaluable aid in clarifying concepts presented in class.
               This project will enhance this important aspect of chemistry by allowing
              experimental data be recorded directly to a computer hard drive via a computer
              interface to the laboratory instrument.  The analysis and subsequent graphing
              can thus be accomplished quickly by the computer so that students can observe
              graphically the results of their experiments.  Computer simulations further
              enhance the hands-on experience by allowing student to change the initial
              reaction conditions and quickly observe the effect of these changes as
              displayed graphically.  This combination of real and virtual laboratories
              accommodates different learning styles and increases the students'
              understanding of chemical concepts.  This in turn stimulates their imaginations
              and entices further exploration of chemistry.    The project impacts nearly
              1,800 students during the two year period of the grant.  Improved understanding
              of chemical concepts should lead to increased student retention and success
              rates.  The ultimate goal of the project is to create a science literate
              students who can understand the world around them.  The results of this project
              will be disseminated through the electronic media such as LabNet as well as
              through professional meetings and articles in the literature.    *
