Title       : A Computerized Laboratory to Enhance Undergraduate Psychology Education and
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9751113

Award Number: 9751113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian C. Cronk cronk@griffon.mwsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Phil D. Wann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Missouri Western State Col
	      4525 Downs Drive
	      Saint Joseph, MO  645072246    816/271-4200

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The college offers a strong program in experimental psychology and related
              courses.  Over the past decade, psychology students have made more
              presentations, and earned more awards, in the Missouri Academy of Science
              undergraduate paper competitions than students from any other college in the
              state, regardless of discipline.  In recent years, the focus of the program has
              started to shift to more computer-assisted instruction.  All psychology majors
              now receive training in the use of electronic mail, word processors,
              spreadsheets, web-browsers (e.g., Netscape), and basic statistical analysis
              software.  In addition, students have been placing their independent projects
              on the college's World Wide Web server.  In the past, although the college had
              limited computer resources available for both in-class and independent use,
              those resources were heavily taxed and shared with all other departments on
              campus.  Moreover, the computer laboratories did not have the required software
              or technical support for conducting statistical analysis or for data
              collection.    This project develops a comprehensive computerized laboratory
              that allows students to integrate better the computer skills they learn into
              their current academic work, their future professional work, and their future
              scientific endeavors.  This laboratory allows an increase in both the amount
              and quality of research that is produced by our undergraduate students.  The
              skills acquired in this laboratory should give students the technical knowledge
              required for critical thinking in modern society.  A further goal is to
              increase the communication among undergraduate researchers through the use of
              modern technology.    The project creates a 17-station teaching/research
              laboratory where students can learn and practice all steps of the scientific
              research process.  This objective is accomplished through four components: 
              Basic Research Skills, Statistical Analysis, Data Collection, and Simulation
              and Demonstration.  These four components should enhance  the psychology
              students' already exceptional record of independent research and promote
              enthusiasm for careers in science.  *
