Title       : A Computer Laboratory for Mathematics Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751407

Award Number: 9751407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41118              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Buoni buoni@math.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/941-2377

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Mathematics and Statistics is strengthening the undergraduate
              program in mathematics by providing students with the technological tools
              necessary to solve complex and realistic problems.  Faculty efforts focus on
              five key courses: multivariate calculus, linear algebra, mathematical
              statistics, numerical analysis, and the undergraduate research project in
              mathematics.  These courses are using Maple, MATLAB, and SPSS with the goal of
              helping students to develop a qtrong conceptual understanding of mathematical
              ideas, the ability to apply mathematical ideas in meaningful and complex
              contexts, and the ability to clearly communicate mathematical ideas orally and
              in writing.    This project is establishing a computer classroom dedicated
              solely to mathematics and statistics instruction.  The classroom consists of 20
              computers networked to a server and connected to the World Wide Web.  The
              addition of this facility is making possible the implementation of a
              technology-intensive mathematics program. The department has previously used
              the computer facilities to pilot sections of multivariate calculus, linear
              algebra, and numerical analysis.  The revised mathematical statistics course is
              drawing from faculty experiences teaching elementary statistics in a computer
              laboratory.    Half of the mathematics majors in the department are preparing
              to become secondary mathematics teachers.  The program impacts these students
              in two direct ways:  (a) by increasing the emphasis on modern technology, the
              mathematical and technical skills of future teachers are improving and (b) by
              actively involving students in their own learning, the future teachers are
              preparing the implement NCTM standards that emphasize appropriate use of
              technology throughout the curriculum.
