Title       : High Field NMR Across the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9751691

Award Number: 9751691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98888              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia P. Baker bakerj@winthrop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas F. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifton P. Calloway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lennart H. Kullberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winthrop Univ
	      701 Oakland Avenue
	      Rock Hill, SC  29733    803/323-2211

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The 300 MHz Fourier transform NMR spectrometer is used in a wide range of
              courses to improve the quality of education for students majoring in chemistry,
              biology, human nutrition, and medical technology.  the objectives of this
              project are: to excite students about chemistry by exposing them to this
              powerful tool for structure determination, to train them in the theory,
              methods, and application of modern NMR spectroscopy, and to combine this
              structural tool with molecular modeling to give them a broader perspective of
              chemical science.  The NMR spectrometer is first introduced to students in the
              General Chemistry cooperative laboratory program.  Sophomore organic students
              use the instrument to obtain proton and C-13 spectra for product analysis and
              are also introduced to two-dimensional NMR through a COSY experiment.  Students
              then use variable temperature NMR in the inorganic laboratory to explore the
              structural and fluxional behavior of inorganic systems.  In the physical
              chemistry laboratory, students use variable temperature NMR to obtain kinetic
              and thermodynamic data for the internal rotations in N,N-dimethylacetamides. 
              In instrumental analysis, students use the instrument to study the
              relationships between time and frequency domain spectra as well as signal
              averaging and digital filtering.  Emphasis is placed on using the NMR in
              conjunction with molecular modeling to provide the opportunity for students to
              explore the relationship between structure and spectra.  *
