Title       : A Central Molecular Biology Laboratory for Curriculum Enhancement of
               Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9751735

Award Number: 9751735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18789              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillian S. Waldbeser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry Lovelace  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PROPOSED PROJECT: To set up a central molecular biology facility.  The objective
              of this project is to set up a central, state-of-the-art molecular biology
              laboratory to enhance the learning experience of students from various
              departments at the university, including, Biology, Chemistry, and Clinical
              Laboratory Science.  In order for our students to be competitive after
              graduation and to enrich their communities, they need to have a working
              knowledge of state-of-the-art technology. The project is to acquire the
              necessary equipment to teach methods of nucleic acid studies and recombinant
              DNA techniques. The laboratory will be set up to perfoun DNA and RNA analysis,
              such as Southern and Northern blot hybridizations, genomic and extrachromosomal
              restriction fragment length polymorphism, gene banks and polymerase chain
              reaction. The equipment will be used in Biology program for teaching
              Introductory Molecular Biology, in Clinical Laboratory Science for teaching
              Advanced Bacteriology, and in Chemistry for Biochemistry. In Introductory
              Molecular Biology, the students will be taught the basic techniques in DNA
              manipulation and will be given a project of cloning a bacterial gene from a
              gene bank. In Advanced Bacteriology, the students will identify specific
              bacteria species using restriction fragment length polymorphism and Southern
              blot hybridization as well as polymerase chain reaction methods. In
              Biochemistry students will use the molecular biology laboratory to obtain
              hands-on experience with human DNA fingerprinting (specifically VNTR
              polymorphism detection by PCR and A~ Insertion polymorphism detection by PCR),
              restriction mapping and southern hybridization of B-DNA, general DNA
              restriction studies, and to study the effects of methylation on DNA restriction
              analysis.  This project would not only enhance the learning of the
              undergraduates at the university, its will further benefit the community
              because our enrollment also include secondary school teacher certificate
              students who will bring their k nowledge to the local schools. In addition,
              many of our science and technology graduates become high school science
              instructors. To increase the impact of the project, the PIs also propose to
              provide molecular biology workshops to demonstrate the ease of incorporation of
              the techniques into an existing science curriculum. The following two target
              audiences would be addressed: (1) area high school teachers and (2) colleagues
              at Texas A&M University - Corpus Christi and area 2-year and 4-year
              institutions who are currently not using the techniques.
