Title       : Distributive Computing Environments and Equipment Interfacing for New Directions
               in Principles of Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9751145

Award Number: 9751145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38925              (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Pistole dpistole@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The Department of Biology has recently implemented changes to create a
              cohesive academic community. These changes include establishing a new
              curriculum, peer mentorship program, biology student dormitory floor, and
              funding for undergraduate research. The department is renovating 10
              laboratories used for undergraduate research. The cornerstone of the new
              curriculum is a 2-semester introductory course entitled Principles of Biology.
              This new course is giving students a better appreciation of the unifying themes
              that run through modern biological science, and ensuring that all of the majors
              are exposed to new technology, critical thinking, and experiential learning.
              The department is establishing a distributive computing environment with
              equipment interfacing for the new course. The project is stressing interactive
              instruction with exploration and discovery through a server linked to a
              computer network.  The network includes a newly developed computer room,
              lecture and laboratory classrooms with interfaced equipment, and dormitory
              rooms.  Instructors are emphasizing conceptual thinking, increasing the level
              of curiosity towards biology, and reducing student alienation of tools used in
              scientific inquiry.  The project is being developed in phases.  The department
              is integrating the equipment into the course and authoring the course on the
              server. The course, along with some equipment, is then being made available to
              local high schools and schools for a year. At the end of this phase, the course
              can be made available  to anyone with Internet access.
