Title       : Equipment for ICED - Integrated Computer-Engineering Design Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751215

Award Number: 9751215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64849              (Estimated)
Investigator: Augustus K. Uht uht@ele.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. Sadasiv  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project purchases laboratory equipment to realize a novel undergraduate
              Computer Engineering (CE) major curriculum.  Traditional CE curricula are
              composed of disparate courses that poorly unify key themes and do not allow
              students to develop critical abilities.  The Electrical and Computer
              Engineering department remedies these ills with a new CE curriculum.  The
              centerpiece of the curriculum is the design of a richly complex digital system:
              a network of computers including, particularly, a computer with hardware and
              important system software built entirely by each student.  This project spans
              the courses taken for the past 3 years of each undergraduate's studies.  This
              curriculum allows a novel emphasis on fundamental engineering understanding,
              which cannot be developed in projects of shorter duration.  Students develop an
              understanding of how design decisions play out over time, they employ
              sophisticated design techniques using standard simulation and synthesis tools,
              and they make complex software/hardware tradeoffs.  This unified, longitudinal
              Integrated Computer Engineering Design (ICED) curriculum has been planned over
              several years.  It has been broadly accepted by the university.  ICED can be
              evaluated with surveys of CE students involved in either the original (current)
              curriculum or the new (ICED) curriculum, both before and after graduation,
              measuring ICED's impact and efficacy.
