Title       : Integration of the Data Acquisition and Control Software LabVIEW Throughout the
               Mechanical Engineering Curriculum at University of the Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1997    
File        : a9751111

Award Number: 9751111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian L. Weick bweick@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel D. Jensen  (Principal Investigator former)
              Edwin R. Pejack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Said Shakerin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hakan B. Gurocak  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Increased visual reinforcement and hands-on experiences promote learning.  In
              addition, it has been found that repetitive use of a software package in a
              number of undergraduate courses and use of state-of-the-art commercial software
              is beneficial for enhanced learning.  In view of these principles, this project
              integrates the use of the data acquisition and control software LabVIEW
              throughout the mechanical engineering curriculum.  LabVIEW is one of the most
              sophisticated data acquisition and control programs available and is heavily
              used in industry.  Implementation of seven carefully planned experiments into
              six separate courses ensures that students are using LabVIEW during each year
              of the curriculum.    The experiments begin with introductory laboratories in
              the freshman and sophomore years.  Junior- and senior-year experiments are more
              complex and include control as well as data acquisition.  Furthermore, the
              software and hardware for the experiments can be made available for final
              projects in courses in instrumentation, controls, and the capstone senior
              design project.  Demonstrations that use the project's equipment are planned in
              several other courses as well as in presentations given to K 12 students to
              promote interest in engineering.  For this project, LabVIEW software, various
              data acquisition hardware and additional computers are required.  Each of the
              seven experiments stresses the visualization and hands-on capabilities made
              available by LabVIEW through its graphical programming environment and data
              flow visualization capabilities.  National Instruments (producer of LabVIEW)
              has committed to work with the university to publish results of this project
              both in their trade journal and in the university portion of their Web pages.  
               *
