Title       : A Hybrid Classical/Digital Control Systems Course with Laboratory Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9751087

Award Number: 9751087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Hakan B. Gurocak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Today's trend is toward a high level of manufacturing automation and design of
              smart products.  All of these products or their manufacturing processes contain
              control systems.  As indicated in a recent survey, both analog and digital
              control modes are used by the industry to implement controllers.  Therefore, a
              good control systems education should contain courses both in digital and
              analog control theory supported by hands-on experiments.  The previous
              mechanical engineering program has offered only an analog controls course with
              no laboratory.  Because of the maximum credit limitations, a digital controls
              course cannot be added to the curriculum.   To enhance students' learning, this
              project provides a set of laboratory experiments supplementing a hybrid
              analog/digital undergraduate control systems course is proposed.  This approach
              enables the students to learn the most fundamental theory of both analog and
              digital control systems, as well as their actual physical implementation in a
              single course.    Seven new experiments are introduced.  The objectives are to
              provide a better understanding of the concepts of abstract control systems
              theory, highlight the differences and similarities between the digital and
              analog control modes, and teach the hardware/software implementation of the
              mathematical controller designs for both control modes.  The equipment for the
              new laboratory includes servo fundamentals training units, function generators,
              oscilloscopes, and software for simulation, design and real-time control.  All
              mechanical engineering students benefit from this project.  Some of the
              experiments can also be used in motivational presentations to K 12 students.  *
