Title       : Employing Remote Direct Digital Control of Live HVAC Systems to Increase
               Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1997    
File        : a9751674

Award Number: 9751674
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dolph H. Hayden   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Wantiez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As systems improvements move toward the exclusive use of microelectronics for
              sensors and distributed processing, it is imperative that high-performance
              technicians who install and maintain Direct Digital Control systems and the
              engineers who design these systems achieve higher competency levels in the
              application of this technology.  The university improves the teaching of direct
              digital controls and related process instrumentation, data communications,
              electrical/electronic control applications, and air conditioning and
              refrigeration courses with the transformation of the campus Student Union into
              a live laboratory.  Using real-time microelectronic systems controls, students
              monitor and control mechanical systems operations that maximize environmental
              comfort and energy efficiency in full compliance with ASHRAE Standards.  In a
              live laboratory, students interface and monitor microelectronic control systems
              in full compliance with building engineer design specifications; calibrate,
              tune, and maintain heating ventilation and air conditioning direct digital
              control systems to ensure operation at building engineer design specifications;
              operate microelectronic control systems and mechanical devices from remote
              locations; and link ethernet local area networks into a fiber-optic and copper
              communications infrastructure.  The development of the direct digital controls
              live laboratory can result in curriculum improvements, higher levels of student
              learning, and better prepared high-performance technicians for the emerging
              workforce.  This project serves many nontraditional students: the campus'
              average student age is 26.6 years, and the racial distribution is more diverse
              than the state population.  Student pre- and post-tests can document the
              project's success in producing more broadly trained and competent technicians. 
              Project reports can be offered to electrical/electronic and HVAC technical
              societies and publications, to educational associations, and on the Internet
              home page.  *
