Title       : Application of Computing Tools and PC-Instrumentation for Science Students:
               Enhanced Learning Through Visualization and Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9751135

Award Number: 9751135
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38748              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bon K. Sy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark G. Miksic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Schwarz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander A. Lisyansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/541-0434

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ***  9751135  Sy  Many students perceive science difficult and tedious.  The
              objective of this project is to make  learning science and math easier and more
              interesting by means of computer applications.  There are  three specific goals
              of this project:  (1) introduce students to PC-driven instrumentation for data 
              acquisition, (2) introduce students to computing tools that allow them to
              interpret difficult science  concepts and processes visually as well as
              mathematically, and (3)  prepare them with skills for the  marketplace.  We
              propose to develop curricula of two laboratory courses:  PC-instrumentation for
               science experiments, and exploring scientific computing tools.  These courses
              will introduce students  to tools that are commonly used in the marketplace. 
              Using PC-instrumentation, laborious manual  measurements and data recording
              will be replaced by automated data acquisition.  Students can easily  vary the
              parameters of their investigation and observe the effect of their changes. 
              Using computing  tools like Math Cad, students can easily graph and visualize
              difficult concepts and better understand  the underlying principles.  More
              importantly, electronic books are available, and, when being used  with the
              computing tool, make it an excellent learning tool.  Students can manipulate
              "live" data/  formula and visualize the change "on-the-fly. " Learning these
              tools are indispensable laboratory  activities of the courses.  In this
              project, we will improve an existing lab to equip with state-of-  art computing
              and PC-instrumentation tools.  The main beneficiaries of this project are upper
               sophomore and lower junior science students, as well as pre-service science
              teachers.  This project is  significant because (1) the tools students will
              learn are useful in many science courses, and (2) the  skills students learned
              on using tools are marketable because they are the same tools used in the 
              market place.  *  ***
