Title       : Development of an Innovative Integrated Learning Environment for Laboratory
               Instruction in Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9751372

Award Number: 9751372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56344              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. McDonald dmcdonald@gw.lssu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ajay M. Mahajan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maurice E. Walworth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lake Superior State Univ
	      
	      Sault Ste. Marie, MI  49783    906/632-6841

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The current paradigm in engineering course instruction builds on a lecture
              prerequisite structure but ignores the need for a laboratory prerequisite
              structure.  Educational quality is therefore diminished as instructors optimize
              specific laboratories but fail to optimize the overall program laboratory
              experience.  This project focuses on creating a learning environment that
              forces students to use not only concepts and skills but also actual data and
              models from lower division laboratories in upper division laboratories.  The
              integration occurs because students must utilize their previous laboratory work
              as a reference as they study the different facets of the same experimental
              setups in multiple engineering laboratories.    The vertically integrated
              learning environment builds on a lower division course such as electrical
              circuits and targets upper division courses such as dynamics and automatic
              controls.  This approach requires the students to use specific skills in modern
              instrumentation from circuits to verify mathematical models in dynamics, and
              then use these mathematical models as sequential building blocks when
              completing laboratory exercises in the automatic controls course.  The learning
              environment occurs in a new Integrated Systems Engineering Laboratory that, in
              addition to dynamics and controls, supports laboratories in machine design,
              vibrations, and digital signal processing, as well as projects in senior design
              and undergraduate student research.  This laboratory uses experimental setups
              such as a vertical pendulum and a mobile robot that can be shown to be ideal
              platforms to support this vertically integrated learning environment.    A
              comprehensive evaluation plan entails coordination of an internal and external
              evaluator by the Dean of Engineering.  Further, an aggressive dissemination
              plan is outlined that relies heavily on modern technology such as the Internet
              and a recordable CD ROM.  This project has the potential for national impact
              because it challenges the existing par adigm of laboratory instruction and
              completely redefines the way universities develop instructional laboratories.
