Title       : Beyond Traditional Statistical Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9751644

Award Number: 9751644
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Robert Stephenson wrstephe@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne H. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Kaiser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Q. Meeker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Today's courses in statistical methods, for the most part, focus on the same
              methods that were taught 30 years ago, before the use of computers became
              standard in the classroom.  The actual practice of statistics has, of course,
              moved beyond these traditional statistical methods.  Modern methods include
              dynamic computer graphics, nonlinear estimation of various types, spectral
              analysis, neural networks, resampling, and other simulation-based inference
              methods.  Although these modern methods are often computatiollally demanding,
              today's computers make their use feasible, if not easy, to perform.  Many
              scientists and engineers use these modern statistical methods routinely.  As a
              result, current statistical methods courses are often viewed, from the outside,
              as being somewhat outdated.    This project develops a collection of
              instructional modules, built around actual applications from science and
              engineering.  These modules are self-contained with a minimum prerequisite of a
              first course in statistical methods.  They illustrate an appropriate modeling
              and inferential approach for the problem and illustrate the appropriate
              application of some of these newly developed and developing statistical
              methods.  The modules include all necessary instructional materials including
              objectives, examples, lecture materials, computer implementation of the
              methodology, homework class/discussion exercises, and laboratory assignments to
              test students' knowledge of basic material and reinforce important conceptual
              ideas.  These modules make it easy for instructors to experiment with and
              explore the use of modern statistical methodology in undergraduate statistics
              methods courses.  *
