Title       : Brownfields Investigations as an Integrated Approach to Sampling, Sample
               Preparation, and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751151

Award Number: 9751151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl W. Mincey dwmincey@cc.ysu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott C. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Renee L. Falconer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Wagner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Youngstown St University
	      One University Plaza
	      Youngstown, OH  445550001    330/742-2377

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is developing an integrated course employing realistic techniques
              and procedures needed to affect Phase I and II property assessments of
              Brownfields. Brownfields are previously used industrial sites that are
              presently not being used because of an uncertailty regarding long-term costs.
              Through actions taken by the Ohio EPA, a property owner may have the
              contaminants on a property assessed, prepare the land for eventual use, and
              receive a "covenant not to sue" from the EPA. Once received, the covenant will
              limit the liability faced by a property owner. The Phase II property assessment
              requires the integration of sampling, sample preparation, and analytical
              procedures with quality control, quality assurance, and good laboratory
              practices. There is data that suggest that an integrated approach may provide
              students of environmental studies, chemistry, civil and environmental
              engineering, biology, and geology, with an increased appreciation of what is
              often presented as independent functions. The dependence of an analysis
              protocol on size and type of sample collected, type of container and
              preservatives, collection procedure, and the method of sample preparation is
              being presented in an integrated format. The new microwave oven is permitting
              reproducible and safe preparation of samples collected at local Brownfield
              sites and enabling students to experience analytical method development on
              instrumentation encountered in a working laboratory. Graphite Furnace Atomic
              Absorption and Gas Chromatograph-Mass Spectrometers are necessary instruments
              to affect a Brownfield site investigation. They are being networked, through
              the Internet, to a series of existing data stations, permitting the analysis
              and data processing of Brownfields samples in the laboratory courses.
