Title       : Southeastern Massachusetts Environmental Technology Instrumentation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9751338

Award Number: 9751338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick M. Tatano   (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm A. MacGregor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sukalyan Sengupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cape Cod Cmty College
	      Route 132
	      West Barnstable, MA  02668    617/362-2131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The fragile environment of southeastern Massachusetts is threatened by the
              extensive pollution at the Massachusetts Military Reservation (MMR) SuperFund
              site on Cape Cod.  In an attempt to turn this potential disaster into a success
              story, a group of state and Federal legislators initiated a state appropriation
              to encourage three state institutions to develop an environmental education and
              training program that would prepare students to enter the job market or to
              continue their education in a baccalaureate program.  Students enrolled in the
              program have the opportunity to intern with companies working on the clean-up
              project at the MMR as well as other environmentally related positions.  The new
              equipment provides the collaborating institutions with the necessary laboratory
              instrumentation and computer software to meet this challenge.  The laboratory
              experiments are designed to incorporate the new instrumentation in specific
              courses in a way that stimulates students and exposes them to real-world field
              experience.  The targeted population of older students and women who often lack
              the confidence and academic background to enroll in science/technology programs
              is far more likely to succeed using a hands-on methodology.  Faculty at each of
              the institutions are committed to the creation and subsequent refinement of
              laboratory experiments that teach the essential scientific concepts and their
              application in the field.  Assessment of student response and success with
              these exercises can be carefully measured:  employers of interns can be
              surveyed regarding student performance, and  intern supervisors and other
              industry representatives acting in an advisory capacity have agreed to assist
              in an on-going review of the relevance of the laboratory exercises and teaching
              techniques from the industry point of view.  Dissemination is to occur within
              the network of Massachusetts community colleges and nationally through the
              Partners in Environmental Technology Education publications and on-line
              database.  *
