Title       : A Parallel Processing Curriculum Incorporating Laboratory Activities and
               Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751344

Award Number: 9751344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50703              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet D. Hartman hartman@katya.acs.ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean E. Sanders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a cohesive, integrated program in parallel processing for
              Computer Science majors that incorporates laboratory activities and
              undepgraduate research projects in appropriate courses.  An SGI Onyx2 parallel
              computer, with four processors, is being used to introduce a real environment
              early in the Computer Science curriculum and in subsequent required and
              elective courses, develop a set of laboratory activities in parallel processing
              to accompany topics in computer science, support undergraduate research
              projects, and eliminate problems related to remote computer access. 
              Specifically, the computer enables faculty to (1) teach performance analysis
              more effectively using experimentation and statistical methods, (2) assign
              projects that have been precluded by equipment limitations, (3) support long
              term honors and research projects, (4) give students a larger number of more
              appropriate laboratory experiences with a real computer, (5) develop a model
              for a parallel processing curriculum that integrates the new computer into
              activities of appropriate courses and undergraduate research projects, and (6)
              support collaborative projects with students and faculty outside the
              department.  Evaluation of the project includes an instructor questionnaire to
              ascertain the effectiveness of laboratory activities and use of the computer in
              meeting course objectives.  Students are asked to evaluate the laboratory
              activities and the computer in carrying out course requirements and
              undergraduate research.   *
