Title       : Implementing Discovery-Based Geochemistry Labs and Broadening the Scope of
               Research Projects in Introductory and Advanced Geology Courses through
               XRF-Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9751006

Award Number: 9751006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Ridky                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy N. Lincoln tlincoln@albion.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albion College
	      611 East Porter
	      Albion, MI  492241831    517/629-5511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is supporting a sequence of discovery-based geochemistry laboratory
              projects. It is making improvements in the research projects of three other
              geology courses, including a high-enrollment introductory course, and
              supporting an expanding student research program.  All of these improvements
              are being made possible by the new x-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) and
              supporting equipment.    In order to make geochemistry more appropriate for
              chemistry and biology majors in environmental sciences concentration, as well
              as for geology majors interested in environmental fields, a sequence of
              laboratory projects is being implemented to give students a detailed view of
              the rock cycle from a chemical perspective.  The subjects of these projects
              include chemical weathering, adsorption, sedimentary differentiation, and
              igneous fractionation.    The XRF equipment enhancing existing projects in
              other courses by expanding the precision and range of analytical work available
              to students.  In Introductory Geology, a successful water-quality research
              project is being broadened by allowing students to work with sediment and soil
              samples as well as with water.  In Petrology, the precision and efficiency of
              the spectrometer is allowing faculty to expand class projects on the chemistry
              of rock suites to the point that analytical work is becoming the principal
              means of introducing the chemical characteristics of important rock
              associations.  In Environmental Geology, class research projects are being
              expanded by work with soils and sediments.
