Title       : Computer Enhancement of a Multidisciplinary Laboratory- Centered Course
               Sequence, Science and Our Global Heritage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9751120

Award Number: 9751120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Rattan K. Khalsa khalsa@hslc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Emerson F. Heald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Bacon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Henry Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              D. Bruce Armitage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thiel College
	      College Avenue
	      Greenville, PA  16125    412/588-7700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is improving the pedagogy of a recently introduced,
              cross-disciplinary, two-semester course sequence called Science and Our Global
              Heritage I and II, which is required of all sophomores at the college.   
              Previously in the course, the department has been limited to performing
              experiments in physics, chemistry, biology, environmental science, and
              sociology, which are often difficult to extrapolate to the global arena a
              meaningful way because of the time necessary to perform extensive data analysis
              and real-world modeling.    With the introduction of computers into the
              laboratory, students can extend their understanding of real-world global
              problems in a meaningful way by implementing simulations and complex modeling.
              In addition, the introduction of the computers facilitates quick, accurate
              graphical presentation of data for data analysis and mathematical curve
              fitting.    The objectives of the project include (1) allowing students to
              manage and manipulate data quickly so that they can focus on the discovery
              process underlying scientific concepts; (2) allowing students to investigate
              how topics being investigated in the laboratory can be applied to investigate
              global concerns; (3) improving the ability of small groups of students to
              investigate the application of the science process to the problems of society;
              and (4) producing a CD ROM as an aid to the teaching of the science component
              and to facilitate the dissemination of the course material.    The department
              is equipping each of three laboratories with eight multimedia PCs to be used
              interactively by small student groups for data collection, analysis, modeling,
              and acquisition of descriptive material regarding the laboratory topic. In
              addition, CD writing equipment is being installed to facilitate the production
              of a CD ROM, and three laptops with projection equipment are being provided for
              laboratory instructors' use.  *
