Title       : Applying Computational Chemistry to the Undergraduate Laboratory: A "Wet" Lab -
               "Dry" Lab Experience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9751013

Award Number: 9751013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29762              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Karpen karpenm@gvsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie A. Schaertel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grand Valley State Univ
	      1 Campus Drive
	      Allendale, MI  494019401    616/331-7105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students have difficulty understanding the abstract atomic world of chemistry. 
              They often learn concepts by an algorithmic approach rather than by truly
              understanding the underlying theory.  This problem is in part due to the
              three-dimensional, dynamic nature of chemistry, as well as the mathematical
              models used to predict chemical behavior.  Computational chemistry has the
              power to overcome these obstacles to student learning.  It allows students to
              perceive molecules and electronic structure in three dimensions.  It displays
              dynamical information critical to chemical behavior.  Students can manipulate
              mathematical parameters and observe the atomic consequences.  To aid student
              learning, this project incorporates computational chemistry into our physical,
              organic, and biochemistry curricula.  Computational chemistry is increasingly
              applied at the workplace in all fields of chemistry and biochemistry.  By
              experiencing a computational curriculum closely tied to experiments, students
              learn to appreciate computational chemistry in the context in which it is most
              often used, to predict and interpret experimental data.    Free energy
              simulations are used to study the thermodynamics of protein folding, ligand
              binding, and solvation effects and of other large systems.  These methods, not
              yet exploited in the undergraduate curriculum, have great pedagogical value in
              giving concrete examples of the molecular basis for thermodynamics.  Since they
              depend on classical Newtonian physics, the underlying theory is very accessible
              to the undergraduate student.  Through this project,  undergraduate
              laboratories are developed using molecular-dynamics-based free energy
              simulations.    The laboratories developed, tested, and refined here on
              graphics workstations are easily performed on the next generation of PCs.    *
