Title       : Independent Investigative Laboratories in Cell Biology and Immunology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9751415

Award Number: 9751415
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49065              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Cruise jlcruise@stthomas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill M. Manske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of St. Thomas
	      2115 Summit Avenue
	      St. Paul, MN  551051096    651/962-6720

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In 1993, a new approach to introductory Cellular and Molecular Biology
              laboratories was initiated in the Department of Biology.  In 2-week modules,
              students learned assay methods, then designed and executed experiments.  This
              generated material for work on scientific communication skills, culminating in
              either research poster sessions or papers in the style of the primapy research
              literature.  The opportunity to design and test their own hypotheses generated
              considerable enthusiasm among biology majors for open-ended investigation. 
              This has been evidenced by above-capacity enrollment pressures in related
              courses and increased student research production, particularly in cell biology
              and in immunology.    Interest and enrollment in these courses has continually
              increased, challenging faculty to create laboratory experiences that take
              students to a higher level of independence, and straining the limits of
              departmental space and available equipment.  A new science building  offers an
              opportunity to expand independent investigation within these courses.    This
              project creates a cell culture facility in the new instructional laboratory
              space for Cell Biology and Immunology and equips it for microspectrophotometry,
              thermal cycling, and computer analysis.  New laboratory experiences at the
              junior and senior level involve more students, working in small groups, in
              increasingly sophisticated and up-to-date preparation.  Cell Biology is a
              prerequisite for Immunology; changes in the laboratory curriculum are designed
              to improve this linkage as students develop laboratory investigation skills. 
              An emphasis on cell culture and cellular /molecular techniques is expected to
              reduce the need for vertebrate animal experiments in Immunology.  The
              improvements to instructional laboratory facilities also has significant
              benefits for student research involving cell culture, including a special
              January-term Introduction to Biological Research, which targets beginning
              biology majors for hands-on research experiences.   *
