Title       : Incorporating Stable Isotope Geochemistry in Undergraduate Education and
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9751139

Award Number: 9751139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7036               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirschner dkirschn@eas.slu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Encarnacion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate students are rarely given opportunities to learn about stable
              isotope geochemistry and gain hands-on experience in geochemistry laboratories.
               This fact is unfortunate because stable isotope geochemistry is more
              interdisciplinary than most geoscience subdisciplines.  Stable isotopes are
              used, for example, to study global climate change, groundwater/surface water
              hydrology, and high-temperature fluid rock interaction.  Following the
              construction of two inexpensive stable isotope extraction lines, undergraduate
              students are experientially learning about stable isotope geochemistry and
              procedures commonly used in geochemistry laboratories.    The new equipment is
              used by students enrolled in two upper-division courses Groundwater Hydrology
              and Environmental Geochemistry and is available for use in the
              research-oriented course entitled Senior Inquiry Research Project.  Three-week
              modules are designed so that students (1) collect water and rocks samples; (2)
              analyze their samples for the stable isotopes of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen;
              (3) interpret their results; and (4) write a research report.  The class
              projects are integrated with projects that local environmental firms are
              investigating once faculty have gained confidence with the functionality of
              this module.    The project can be assessed several times during the tenure of
              the 2-year project.  Students and faculty associated with the module can be
              asked to evaluate it.  Their comments and answers to questions listed in the
              Summative Evaluation section of the User-Friendly Handbook for Project
              Evaluation can be reported at the termination of the 2-year project.  The
              implementation, application, and results of the module can be disseminated four
              ways.  This process includes distributing the information on the World Wide
              Web, publishing in a recognized journal on geoscience education, and presenting
              at a national GSA meeting.  In addition, a video that illustrates the
              construction of the line and analytical procedures used in the l aboratory can
              be made available to interested academicians.  *
