Title       : Development of a Nuclear Instrumentation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9751343

Award Number: 9751343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theodore W. Hodapp                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33036              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Brey brey@physics.isu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Bennion  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott S. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gyorgy Vizkelethy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Rosentreter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Idaho State University
	      309 Fine Arts Bldg., Box 8046
	      Pocatello, ID  832098046    208/282-2592

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Departments of Physics, in collaboration with the Departments of Chemistry
              and Geology and the College of Engineering, is developing a novel
              multi-disciplinary approach to the way undergraduate nuclear instrumentation
              courses are presented.  The program is introducing undergraduates to research
              quality activities much sooner than traditionally experienced.  It is producing
              undergraduates who are valuable to investigators as collaborators rather than
              merely technicians. One fundamental instrumentation course is being offered for
              many different disciplines, including physics, health physics, chemistry,
              geology, and engineering.  This approach is providing the fundamentals
              necessary for the next semester's advanced course.  The advanced course's
              structure involves several experimental modules, including high-energy charged
              particle reactions, nuclear magnetic resonance, XRF, UPS, SEM, STM, reactor
              approaches to critical experiments, environmental radioactivity analysis, and
              neutron activation.  Students, along with their advisors, are being given the
              opportunity to select a fraction of the available modules within a semester
              period, thereby building a program most suited to their needs.  Through a team
              teaching approach, students interact directly with researchers with expertise
              in each area of study.  These classes, emphasizing fundamentals of
              instrumentation theory, stress scientific technique and communication skills. 
              To make this happen, the project is establishing four experimental stations
              primarily applicable to the first course, but available as required in the
              second course.  The stations include five additional microcomputers, four
              multichannel analyzer cards, four advanced oscilloscopes, and two printers. 
              Several NIMs are also being added, including five spectroscopy grade
              amplifiers, one TAC, and one PNMR spectrometer.  Specialty items, including an
              instructional STM and two alpha spectroscopy systems, are also being acquired. 
              This program reduces duplication of advanced laborato ry teaching efforts and
              intensifies the laboratory experience for undergraduates by providing clear
              vistas between the fundamentals of technology and current technological
              applications.  *
