Title       : Improvement of the Biochemistry Curriculum by Incorporation of Fluoresence and
               CD Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1997       
File        : a9751530

Award Number: 9751530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63825              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hansen jhansen@westga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : State Univ of West Georgia
	      
	      Carrollton, GA  30118    404/834-1311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Them Department of Chemistry at the State University of West Georgia is actively
              pursuing the modernization of its teaching laboratories by providing hands-on
              experience with modern instrumentation.  Presently, we are making major changes
              in our curriculum as we convert to a semester based system.  This provides an
              ideal opportunity to make dramatic changes in our biochemistry curriculum that
              address the significant changes that the field has recently undergone. 
              Biochemistry has been revolutionized by techniques developed for manipulating
              DNA.  These techniques have opened avenues of inquiry into the physical
              chemical nature of biological systems.  Thus, physical biochemistry has
              increasingly become the fundamental basis of biochemical understanding.  Since
              this background is often absent in the education of undergraduate biochemistry
              majors, we propose to restructure the present curriculum to reflect the
              contemporary biochemical outlook.  In a novel approach we plan to combine the
              traditional topics of biochemistry with topics in physical biochemistry and
              spectroscopy of biological macromolecules.  In the laboratory course we will
              use CD and fluorescence spectroscopy to explore areas such as structure,
              stability and dynamics of macromolecules, enzyme kinetics, protein folding and
              membrane dynamics.  These spectroscopic techniques are not inordinately
              difficult techniques for students to Learn, and they can be readily applied in
              a laboratory course.  The goal is for our students to be conversant in, and
              comfortable with a more physical chemical approach to biochemistry.  Those that
              enter graduate school will have the confidence to pursue broader research
              interests, while those that seek positions in biotechnology will have
              experience in the instrumental techniques used by the industry.  Many of the
              companies have broadly defined concerns in physical biochemistry (e.g.,
              designing and engineering new enzymes, and minimizing aggregation in the
              recombinant production of therapeutic proteins).
