Title       : Preserving the Legacy: A Comprehensive Curriculum and Materials Development
               Project in Support of Advanced Environmental Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9751988

Award Number: 9751988
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $986000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally V. Beaty intelecm@cerfnet.com                    Ext. 119  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard H. Guyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Intelecom Intell Tele
	      Plaza Centre
	      Pasadena, CA  911012437    /   -

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                           Preserving the Legacy, as its subtitle reveals, is "A Comprehensive
              Curriculum and Materials Development Project in Support of Advanced
              Environmental Technology Education, specifically, a set of textbooks and videos
              produced by a collaboration between INTELECOM Intelligent Communications, the
              Partnership for Environmental Technology Education (PETE) and Van Nostrand
              Reinhold Publishers.  These materials are being created to answer the pressing
              need for high-quality, professional-level instructional materials for training
              two-year community and technical college students--as well as secondary school
              students, 4-year university students, and corporate and government employees. 
              Educational institutions can incorporate Preserving the Legacy within distance
              learning programs that link instructors and students through
              telecommunications.  Others can integrate the materials within training
              programs for business and industry.  Preserving the Legacy is designed for
              flexible use in any number of curricular programs and educational delivery
              modes.  When Preserving the Legacy is complete, textbooks and videos will be
              available nationally and internationally to present the basics of environmental
              technology, not only to inform and train students, but also to inspire future
              students.  As one of its promises, then, the Preserving the Legacy project
              helps ensure that we create a national legacy of well-trained environmental
              technicians.
