Title       : Data-Driven Statistic Courses in an Interactive Teaching Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1997  
File        : a9751571

Award Number: 9751571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54969              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre M. Lubecke alubecke@lander.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ginger H. Rowell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Lander University
	      320 Stanley Avenue
	      Greenwood, SC  29649    864/388-8305

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is creating an interactive teaching laboratory for students in
              elementary statistics which is improving the curriculum by increasing
              data-analysis potential, proving access to resources on the World Wide Web,
              enhancing possibilities for cooperative learning, and encouraging the
              development of communication skills.  Gateway computers are being networked
              using the V-Net Interactive Training system which allows the instructor to
              monitor, interact with, or display the work on any individual station from a
              control station.  The course also taps into resources available on the World
              Wide Web, for example Chance News, and a variety of real-world data sets.  The
              course emphasizes problem-solving and critical thinking skills by making
              extensive use of a professional quality statistical software package.  Students
              are being required to communicate the results of their statistical inquiries
              using both written and oral formats.    This data-driven course emphasis and
              the variety of classroom experiences made possible by V-Net is providing better
              preparation for students in statistics-intensive majors and exposing students
              in teacher education programs to a wide variety of learning experiences. 
              Student laboratory exercises and project results are being made available on
              the project's we` page.  *
