Title       : Improvement of Biochemistry Laboratories for Science Majors and Non-Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1997     
File        : a9751510

Award Number: 9751510
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6445               (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa A. Salerno terry salerno@msl.mankato.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Minn State Univ, Mankato
	      Research and Sponsored Programs
	      Mankato, MN  56001    507/389-5275

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The field of Biochemistry has changed significantly in the past 20 years. 
              Lectures are easily updated to reflect these technological improvements and
              applications, but laboratory exercises often lack equivalent modernization. 
              Because laboratories are needed to reinforce lecture concepts, to teach
              technical and analytical skills, and to provide active and cooperative
              learning, they must be improved.    This project introduces new, relevant
              experimental problems for biochemistry courses servicing both science majors
              and nonmajors.  In the elementary nonmajors course, two new experiments are
              introduced which focus on the analysis of LDH isoenzymes and LDH cDNAs in
              normal and disease states.  These experiments require a PCR system for DNA
              amplification, a simple fluorometer for DNA quantitation, and electrophoresis
              equipment for protein electrophoresis and DNA SSCP analysis.  This project
              provides these instruments to perform PCR, SSCP analysis, and isoelectric
              focusing in a laboratory project for science majors focused on the analysis of
              apolipoprotein E variants.  Through their participation in the project design,
              science majors learn to use literature and protein and DNA structure databases.
               The equipment selected allows further modification in project designs that
              incorporate modern electrophoresis techniques and the use of computer-accessed
              information.
