Title       : Laboratories in Developmental Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9751081

Award Number: 9751081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24421              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Niemiec niemieca@kenyon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Marcey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon L. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Smolak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kenyon College
	      
	      Gambier, OH  43022    614/427-2244

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose to improve our laboratory curriculum by the addition of laboratory
              exercises in developmental neuroscience to several classes: (1) the
              newly-developed Introductory Methods in Neuroscience course; (2) the
              newly-developed Methods in Developmental Psychology course, and; (3) the 
              existing Investigating Developmental Biology course. The laboratory additions
              will allow students to investigate developmental aspects of behavior and
              biology and will provide opportunities to experimentally manipulate early
              nervous system development. This will strengthen our interdisciplinary approach
              to  neuroscience by mixing psychological and biological investigations of
              development at both the introductory  and advanced levels.            Our
              course additions will employ the requested physiological recording equipment to
              monitor  developmental changes in muscle and eye coordination as well as EEG
              and evoked potentials. Behavior  monitoring equipment will be used to examine
              developmental aspects of complex cognitive and memory  processes and to
              investigate behavioral reactions to experimental manipulations.  Microinjection
              equipment  will be employed to investigate the mechanisms of embryonic
              development of nervous systems in model  organisms.  In addition to use in
              formal laboratory classes, the equipment requested will see further use by 
              undergraduates in Junior and Senior Honors research, independent research
              during the academic year, and summer projects. The instrumentation will thus
              allow us to fill important gaps in our current curriculum  and, as a result,
              broaden the scope of undergraduate research at Kenyon.     *
