Title       : Computer Assisted Data Acquisition and Processing in Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751154

Award Number: 9751154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29476              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunther Holzer gunther.holzer@biology.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry W. Snell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Lloyd Dunn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger M. Wartell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The School of Biology is the focal point for the institution's undergraduate
              programs in the life sciences.  It offers the Bachelor of Science degree in
              applied biology and supports certificate programs in biochemistry,
              bioengineering, and health and performance sciences.  The long-term goal of the
              institution is to promote student interest in pursuing careers in the
              biological sciences by providing stimulating and realistic laboratory
              experiments through the use of modern instrumentation.  In order to realize
              this goal, computer-assisted data acquisition and processing are being
              introduced in the laboratory experiments.  This process is expanding the
              experimental possibilities in many undergraduate biology laboratories.  It is
              also shortening the time and effort required to gather sufficient data for
              statistical analysis, which allows the focus of a laboratory exercise to shift
              from data collection to data analysis and interpretation.  The introduction of
              computerized acquisition and processing techniques is benefiting the
              undergraduate laboratories in three distinct areas; Image Analysis, Microbial
              Technology, and Environmental Biology.  Automation of the measuring and storage
              of images is allowing students to record statistically valid data regarding the
              size, shape, and transparency of microscopic organisms to determine variation,
              biomass, and productivity of natural populations.  The introduction of an
              automated carbon dioxide analysis system in the microbial technology laboratory
              courses is enabling students to record and store continuous measurements on
              disc and perform post-acquisition analyses to determine growth curves and
              metabolic rates.  In the environmental biology laboratory courses, a
              computerized analysis system is being introduced to measure energy metabolism
              and respiration in whole organisms and aquatic ecosystems.  *
