Title       : Linking Biology and Physics through Biological Motion Analysis in Investigative
               Laboratories and Student Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1997     
File        : a9751226

Award Number: 9751226
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48331              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Fraga dfraga@acs.wooster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anna P. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Wooster
	      
	      Wooster, OH  44691    216/263-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Motion is a nearly universal feature of life that can inform the investigator
              about the biophysics, biology, and behavioral parameters of the subject.  In
              this project, motion analysis is being used as a way to demonstrate basic
              biological and physical principles and to introduce students to the analysis of
              complex systems using a multidisciplinary approach.    Students are developing
              protocols, troubleshooting them, and identifying the significant variables
              using five simple motion analysis stations that can analyze individual moving
              objects or points.  They then proceed to an automated CellTrak Motion Analysis
              station that can perform an efficient analysis of large numbers of moving
              objects or points in a matter of minutes. The processed data is then downloaded
              to the simple motion analysis stations for graphical and statistical analyses. 
                    The project's educational objectives include      Establishing links
              between the Biology and Physics Departments that use analysis of motion as a
              way to introduce students to an interdisciplinary approach to scientific
              investigations.  Student interest is being developed in the boundary between
              biology and physics in a manner consistent with the interests of both
              departments.    The departments ability to offer investigative laboratory
              exercises that demonstrate basic principles in biology, physics, and computer
              data acquisition, as well as the analysis of data using statistics is being
              improved.      Faculty research interests are being more closely linked with
              actual classroom exercises so that students see clearly the relevance of what
              is done in the classroom laboratory.    This project's initial benefits are
              affecting two courses and student research (both independent study and
              sophomore research)  These experiences are also serving as catalysts for
              generating similar themes in other courses..
