Title       : Incorporation of ESCA Spectroscopy into Undergraduate Science and Engineering
               Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1997        
File        : a9751040

Award Number: 9751040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana A. Phillips dphillip@kettering.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl J. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prem P. Vaishnava  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bahram Roughani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert McAllister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kettering University
	      1700 West Third Avenue
	      Flint, MI  485044832    313/762-9790

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA) (aka x-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy) is one of the most developed and versatile of the modern surface
              analysis techniques and has unique capabilities beyond those of any
              instrumentation currently found in undergraduate science and engineering
              laboratories.  This technique is routinely used for the characterization of
              surface and subsurface layers and interfaces of a wide variety of materials,
              providing insight into their elemental composition, oxidation states,
              structure, and bonding.     Although ESCA is a well-established technique, used
              extensively in both academia and industry, few undergraduate programs teach the
              theory associated with it, and no institution has incorporated its use into
              undergraduate course-related laboratories.  In the past, all commercially
              available instruments were not only expensive ($500,000 and up), but were very
              temperamental and required extensive training to operate.  With the recent
              advent of lower cost ($200,000 range), user-friendly, instruments designed for
              on-line inspection, the feasibility of ESCA's becoming a routine teaching tool
              has been established.    The potential for utilization of ESCA by students
              (both chemists and engineers) is great.  Knowledge of this technique and its
              capabilities gives students an awareness of the types of analyses that are
              currently being performed, not only in industrial and academic research
              laboratories, but also on the floor of manufacturing facilities.  This project
              provides one ESCA spectrometer for use in the science and engineering
              curriculum.  ESCA experiments are incorporated into six chemistry, one physics,
              and two or more engineering laboratories.   *
