Title       : Developing a Laboratory Course in the Psychology of Reasoning and Problem
               Solving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9751681

Award Number: 9751681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33617              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Best cfjbb@ux1.cts.eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred L. Yaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The teaching of scientific principles and practices in psychology is in
              transition. Although courses such as "experimental design" and "research
              methods" are common in undergraduate curricula at many colleges and
              universities, the wisdom of employing these courses as the only source of
              science education for psychology majors is open to question at a time when
              developing scientific competence is thought to be a critical dimension of the
              undergraduate experience.      One question has to do with how much "hands-on"
              research students actually do in such courses.  A second question pertains to
              the nature of the research that is done.  Often, the projects that students
              carry out are canned demonstrations that only tangentially relate to the
              research currently being done in psychology.      This proposal addresses these
              issues.  We propose to use microcomputers in a semester-long laboratory course
              in the cognitive psychology of reasoning and problem solving.  The course will
              cover the basic theories in this area of psychology.  The laboratory component
              of the course will run subjects in an effort to reproduce the findings that are
              expected, a priori, theoretically.  The laboratory component will also provide
              students with the opportunity to design and carry out their own research
              projects.      The use of this laboratory and the associated learning
              experiences will foster understanding and appreciation of the principles of
              scientific reasoning.  In addition to the knowledge of reasoning and problem
              solving that students will develop, the laboratory component has been designed
              to improve students' capability for "pure" scientific thinking.    *
