Title       : Fourier Transform NMR for Liquids and Solids in the Undergraduate Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1997      
File        : a9751497

Award Number: 9751497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Shirley wshirley@pittstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dilip K. Paul  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Caple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Hamlet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Pavlis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pittsburg State University
	      1701 South Broadway
	      Pittsburg, KS  667625856    316/231-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry Department plans to incorporate a Fourier-transform nuclear
              magnetic resonance  (FT-NMR) spectrometer with solid-state capabilities into
              its undergraduate curriculum.   The purchase of this spectrometer is a major
              part of its continuing effort to modernize the chemistry program. 
              Undergraduates in the organic laboratory program gain first-hand experience in
              obtaining proton and carbon NMR spectra as part of a course emphasizing student
              planning and design of syntheses.  Advanced FT-NMR experiments involving liquid
              samples clearly impact the undergraduate biochemistry, polymer, and physical
              chemistry laboratories as well as undergraduate research.  The department has a
              very active undergraduate research program, with students making presentations
              at regional and national meetings of the American Chemical Society.    A unique
              part of the project is that high-resolution NMR of solids is to be part of the
              undergraduate laboratory experience.  Five new experiments involving
              solid-state NMR are provided for undergraduate laboratory courses in organic,
              analytical, physical/inorganic, and polymer chemistry.  Solid-state NMR is an
              important tool for undergraduate research in catalytic surfaces and polymers. 
              Recent advances in solid-state NMR instrumentation make it possible to bring
              solid-state NMR to an undergraduate program.
