Title       : Instructional Laboratory for Undergraduate Mathematics Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9751284

Award Number: 9751284
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hien T. Tran tran@control.math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Thomas Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For the past 3 years, the proposers have developed (on a small scale of 15 18
              students) a modeling course (MA581B) based on fundamental physical processes:
              heat flow, wave propagation, and fluid and structural dynamics.  Among the
              specific topics covered in the course have been thermal imaging and detection,
              dynamics properties (stiffness, damping) of structures such as beams and
              plates, acoustics, and fluid transport.  The course, at a level appropriate for
              juniors, seniors, and first-year graduate students in the mathematical
              sciences, has been an unqualified success and is being expanded from a
              one-semester trial course to a two-semester regular course sequence.    One of
              the difficulties during the past 3 years has been the necessity to use several
              different laboratories (e.g., NASA Langley, local industries, and even other
              universities) throughout the semester.  In order to bring this pedagogy to a
              wider group of students (including students from a new Applied Mathematics
              Honors Program and students in selected sections of undergraduate courses), the
              university must have a dedicated laboratory where experiments can be scheduled
              at the convenience of the courses using it.    The objective of the new
              equipment acquisition is to equip an instructional laboratory for undergraduate
              mathematics majors.  Several specific areas (thermal, acoustic, mechanical
              vibrations, and Fourier analysis) of capabilities can be developed for the
              laboratory experiments and demos.  For prospective academicians as well as
              young mathematical scientists entering the industrial (multidisciplinary)
              workforce, the experiences afforded by these laboratory-based mathematics
              courses are invaluable.
