Title       : Hypothesis Grounded Laboratories in Physiology and Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9751261

Award Number: 9751261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32253              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy W. Kleckner nkleckne@bates.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura G. Malloy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bates College
	      
	      Lewiston, ME  04240    207/786-6093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Laboratory experiences have been to enhance student participation in the
              scientific process at the introductory and thesis levels. Introductory courses
              emphasize small group discussions, self-directed experimental design,
              quantitative analysis, and scientific writing. This project is creatine a
              bridge to thesis -level research using student designed research projects in
              intermediate- and upper-level courses. Students are being taught to apply and
              develop the skills they learned in introductory classes towards hypothesis
              formulation and recognition of the frame of reference they use in testing a
              hypothesis. In collaborative laboratory projects of 3 weeks, in
              intermediate-level courses and in coordinated semester long research and
              seminar projects, students are focusing on making distinctions between "what"
              questions (descriptive science), "how" questions (mechanistic science that
              focuses on proximate causation). and "why" questions (applied or design science
              that focuses on ultimate causation).  They are addressing hypotheses at several
              levels of biological organization and using multiple methods of data analysis.
              This approach provides the curriculum with an effective transition from
              introductory-level investigates to upper-level thesis project. This goal is
              being achieved by coordinating laboratory experiences in sophomore- junior- and
              senior-level courses in neurobiology, animal physiology, physiology of
              locomotion, and drug actions in the nervous system, as well as in research and
              seminar courses  in animal physiology and neurobiology.
