Title       : The Northeast Center for Telecommunications Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a9751990

Award Number: 9751990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James V. Masi masi@mail.stcc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Daly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fenna Hanes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Mullett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon Snyder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Massa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jon C. Abeles  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Springfield Tech Cmty Col
	      Armory Square
	      Springfield, MA  01105    413/781-7822

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                With the unprecedented technological advances experienced in the
              telecommunications industry over the past decade, the challenge to provide that
              industry with adequately trained and proficient individuals is crucial if
              American industry is to maintain its competitive edge in the increasingly
              competitive global marketplace.  The ultimate goals and objectives of the
              Northeast Center for Telecommunications Technology are aimed at increasing the
              number of trained persons equipped to ensure such a competitive posture.  This
              is being done by monitoring trends, developing and disseminating relevant
              curricula and materials, exploring and promoting the best educational methods,
              ensuring the continuing competency of faculty who teach
              telecommunications-related programs, and recruiting and educating a diverse
              student population.  By developing model curricula in conjunction with
              telecommunications industry partners, the project is serving as a national
              model.  To this end, an intense effort is also being made to develop a diverse
              telecommunications workforce, including non-traditional workers.  The target
              audience are the faculty and students at two-year colleges, universities and
              secondary schools.  Both traditional and newly emerging teaching methods (such
              as virtual classroom and laboratories) are being employed.  Given the rising
              importance of the field of telecommunications, following evaluation of the
              project, its outcomes are being disseminated nationally.      Led by
              Springfield Technical Community College in Massachusetts and Hudson Valley
              Community College in New York, a consortium of six senior institutions, ten
              community technical colleges, numerous secondary schools, several
              business/industry partners, government agencies, and the New England Board of
              Higher Education are participants in the project. The major areas of
              telecommunications are networking, wireless/RF, Microwave/Millimeterwave and
              Lightwave technologies.  The program articulates with BSET degrees at four
              regional universities a nd with the NYNEX "Next Step" program.
