Title       : San Diego Miramar College Laboratory Improvement in Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9751657

Award Number: 9751657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Trubovitz drdantru@flash.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra R. Slivka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego Miramar College
	      10440 Black Mountain Road
	      San Diego, CA  921262910    619/230-6500

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              San Diego Miramar College proposed to improve the quality of learning and
              breadth of instruction in Biotechnology by providing "hands on" laboratory
              experiences for both community college and high school students in their shared
               teaching facility at Scripps Ranch High School.  Responding to the national
              need to implement biotechnology skill standards and improve biotechnology
              instruction, this project features training and practice in the use of
              industry-based research techniques with an emphasis on team work, critical
              thinking and problem solving skills.    Project objectives focus on helping
              students gain the laboratory competencies required for entering the field of
              biotechnology and/or for advanced study in the field.  During the term of the
              grant, instructional laboratory activities will be produced to develop student
              skills in: 1) basic laboratory techniques, 2) immunology, 3) tissue culture and
              4) working with nucleic acids.    Project Co-PIs will join in a collaborative
              effort with industry representatives, Miramar faculty, Scripps Ranch High
              School faculty and other local educational institutions in order to recruit
              underserved and underrepresented students, accomplish project goals, and
              disseminate project results.  The instrumentation equipment requested will also
              be used to enhance biology and microbiology laboratories for both majors and
              non-majors.    Significance of the Miramar College ILI-IP project centers on
              the industry-education commitment to improving the quality of biotechnology
              education by utilizing local industry resources and expertise.  The enhanced
              offerings will increase the number of students majoring in science,
              transferring to four year colleges and/or receiving A.S. degrees and
              professional certificates.  In addition, the instructional materials developed
              under this project will provide a useful laboratory improvement model for other
              high school and community colleges.
