Title       : An Alliance to Prepare Technicians for Careers in Advanced Manufacturing and
               Engineering Materials Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9751987

Award Number: 9751987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66900              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Jacobs j_jacobs@vger.nsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Penny J. Pagona  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Ledgerwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Norfolk State University
	      700 Park Avenue
	      Norfolk, VA  235043907    757/823-8600

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to develop student recruitment and retention techniques,
              instructional strategies, educational materials, and laboratory activities that
              provide precollege and college students with advanced technological education
              related to manufacturing and engineering materials technology.  Goals will be
              achieved through a dynamic alliance among community colleges, public schools,
              and a university coupled with business, industry, government and technical
              societies.    Building on the vast experience of the project team from Norfolk
              State University, Tidewater Community College, and Virginia Beach Public
              Schools, the alliance will synthesize a coherent 2+2+2 model program that moves
              students into and through the pipeline for careers as advanced
              industrial/engineering technicians.  The project will draw on an established
              national network of educators, and from a wide variety of educational groups
              including other NSF projects teams, technical societies, businesses,
              corporations, and federal laboratories.  The project team will select and
              develop appropriate materials for both precollege and college technician
              programs.    At the precollege level the emphasis is on developing integrated
              math, science, and technology concepts through the content of materials science
              and technology with an emphasis on interfacing computers with materials testing
              equipment.  Also, strategies and materials aimed at informing guidance
              counselors, students, and parents about the career opportunities for
              technicians in materials science and manufacturing will be developed.    At the
              A.A.S.  and B.S.  technology levels, the project team will select from
              available materials and develop multimedia units related to engineering
              materials technology and manufacturing.    The Annual National Educators's
              Workshops on engineering materials technology will provide technical updating
              for ten community college faculty members each year of the project.  *
