Title       : An Activity-Based Approach for Teaching Critical Scientific Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  1999    
File        : a9751257

Award Number: 9751257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35578              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Klug gklug@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis R. Osternig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Troxel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henriette A. Heiny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Exercise and Movement Science (EMS) is providing training to
              students seeking careers in health-science professions.  The EMS program
              differs from the traditional approach to such training in that instruction goes
              beyond providing a basic science education. EMS students are taught the
              importance of physical activity and lifestyle in health promotion and disease
              prevention, a philosophy that has been very successful.  The department has 220
              majors, teaches all campus courses in human anatomy and physiology, and
              contributes heavily to the general science curriculum.    The task of meeting
              the enrollment pressure created by these responsibilities is challenging. 
              Moreover, the departmental developmental plan calls for major curricular
              additions and improvements; steps that are impossible without additional
              laboratory resources.  This project is improving the EMS teaching laboratory
              environment and permitting the development of a new physiology sequence that
              uses human exercise models.  Computer instruction in anatomy, redesign of the
              laboratory experiences in major core courses, and expansion of on-going
              collaborations with both area secondary schools and practicing physicians are
              becoming more viable.    These changes are allowing EMS to provide excellent
              training to pre-health science students while enriching the curriculum so that
              students can work independently, communicate effectively, and have a heightened
              degree of sensitivity toward the value of physical activity in disease
              treatment and prevention.  *
