Title       : CS150 Laboratory Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751256

Award Number: 9751256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann C. Smith asmith@cs.smumn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean Kelley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Bonomo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/452-4430

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to transform the introductory computer science course to
              better excite and sustain student interest and to provide broader problem
              solving skills needed for success in later courses.  The course will be
              transformed by:     * exposing students to a variety of programming paradigms, 
                 * expanding course presentation to accommodate additional learning styles   
               * developing relevant assignments which make use of current technologies.   
              These transformations will be accomplished by adding a java-based multimedia
              laboratory component to the course.  Java facilitates the introduction of a
              variety of programming paradigms in a visually stimulating manner and is a
              comparatively easy language for introductory students to learn.  A structured,
              hands-on laboratory will allow students to acquire a view of computation as a
              dynamic, interactive, and collaborative process.  Together these will help to
              better prepare students for the increased rigor and theoretical nature of later
              classes.  The visual and hands-on experiences in the lab will also accomplish
              our goal of appealing to diverse learning styles.    The traditional view of
              computation as a static, isolated enterprise is no longer applicable in today's
              dynamic, networked and graphically oriented environments.  Moreover, the
              traditional approach to teaching introductory computation is neither applicable
              to the current view of computation nor to many of the learning styles of the
              students who populate it.  This project, therefore, intends to provide a model
              for migration away from the traditional course toward one which is more
              appropriate for today's students and computing environments.  *
