Title       : Laboratory Instruction in Gas Chromatography/Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9751211

Award Number: 9751211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly H. Swaile beverly.swaile@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemical Technology Department offers multiple degrees including a 5-yr
              bachelor of science degree in Chemical Technology. This BS degree program is a
              unique laboratory-driven curriculum emphasizing analytical chemistry and
              featuring six quarters of cooperative work in industrial or government
              laboratories. This project develops a number of new laboratory experiences and
              courses to improve and add technical content to the Chemical Technology program
              based on acquisition of a gas chromatography / mass spectrometric system
              capable of performing tandem mass spectrometry. Incorporating new laboratory
              course work is enabling our students to develop working skills with the most
              advanced techniques and instrumentation currently used in industry and
              government laboratories. Existing courses directly affected by this project
              include: Chemical Technology V, Chemical Instrumentation, Senior Project,
              Biotechnology, Preparation and Analysis of Organic Compounds, and Basic
              Pharmaceutical Technology. New courses planned under this project include
              Sample Preparation, Special Topics in Mass Spectrometry, and Design of
              Experiments.  Instrumentation being used to accomplish this project is a Varian
              Instruments Saturn 2000 Gas Chromatograph/Ion-trap Mass Spectrometer (GCIMS)
              workstation. This equipment is designed to separate and detect organic chemical
              species at the parts per billion level.  With the heavy use of the instrument
              and the time required to perform each experiment, use of three computers with
              mass spectral software and NIST libraries installed permits considerably
              expanded student participation for data manipulation and tutorials for
              interpretation of mass spectral data.  Collaborations to disseminate these
              laboratory experiences to additional students at the Raymond Walters College
              and Clermont College, branch campuses of the University of Cincinnati, and the
              independent Cincinnati State Technical and Community College are underway.
              Southeastern Community College in Lincoln, Nebraska, and Miami U niversity in
              Middletown, Ohio, and six regional alliances of schools, colleges, and
              industries are participating as users and evaluators of instructional
              materials. Further, applied student research and senior projects in the
              Chemical Technology department stemming from project products will be on going
              for students resulting in published papers and presentations at national and
              regional meetings.  *
