Title       : Use of a Personal Densitometer for the Mini-Project Approachto Curriculum
               Enrichment in the Undergraduate Biochemistry and Physiology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9751426

Award Number: 9751426
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou Caspers casperml@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory M. Grabowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry and Biology faculty are dedicated to the continued development of
              an undergraduate laboratory curriculum that enables our students to be
              successfully trained in the current methodologies necessary to compete within
              the contemporary scientific community.  Thus, we are evaluating a mini-research
              project approach in upper-level biology, biochemistry and chemistry
              laboratories which will allow students to develop their own problem-solving
              skills with the proper supervision necessary to ensure that they are exposed to
              a wide variety of research and instrumental approaches.  Through the
              acquisition of a personal densitometer new experiences will be introduced into
              our undergraduate biochemistry and physiology laboratories which will extend
              and strengthen the mini-research project concept.  At present, experiments
              requiring the quantitation of electrophoretic blots or autoradiograms cannot be
              performed.  The wide use of densitometry in biological and biochemical research
              makes it imperative that our undergraduates appreciate the sensitivity and
              versatility of this technique.  The personal densitometer will also be used in
              undergraduate research projects that are currently underway in the chemistry
              and biology departments.  Implementation of the mini-project approach to the
              biochemistry and physiology laboratories, as well as the new experiments
              designed for the personal densitometer, will be shared with colleagues within a
              professional forum.  In summary, the impact of a personal densitometer in our
              undergraduate laboratory curriculum cannot be understated.  Use of the personal
              densitometer, within the framework of the project-orientated laboratory, will
              significantly enhance our undergraduate biochemistry  and biology programs.  It
              will allow us to provide our students, many of whom are under-represented
              minorities and women, the strong foundation in biochemistry and physiology
              necessary to pursue their goals of and advanced degree of professional
              employment.
