Title       : Integrating Process Control into Electromechanical Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9751718

Award Number: 9751718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Bartelt barteltt@foxvalley.tec.wi.us.  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman L. Wolff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard I. Place  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Bourassa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fox Valley Technical Col
	      1825 North Bluemound Drive
	      Appleton, WI  549132277    414/735-5600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project integrates process control equipment in order to revise the
              curriculum of the Electromechanical Technology (EMT) associate degree in
              response to technology changes in the manufacturing industry.  The requested
              equipment enables the development of process control training to prepare
              technicians better for the maintenance and operation of sophisticated
              processing systems that are prevalent in modern facilities.  The process
              control curriculum is integrated with the current motion control training by
              replacing outmoded segments of the curriculum, redesigning the course
              structure, and developing two new courses.  The final segment of the curriculum
              modification requires new process control equipment to offer real-world
              experimentation opportunities to student technicians.  A unique feature of the
              Electromechanical Technology associate degree program design is that all of the
              course material is formatted for individualized instruction providing greater
              accessibility to the technical education needed by the nontraditional students
              and special populations who are primarily enrolled in this degree.  This model
              of instruction for electromechanical training has created widespread national
              interest in replication for other colleges as a method to address enrollment
              problems in traditionally designed programs and minimize equipment investments
              within limited budgets.  *
