Title       : Atomic Emission Spectroscopy as a Tool for Teaching Experimental Design and Team
               Building
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9751003

Award Number: 9751003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38255              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene C. Johnson ejohnson@uwsp.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Stevens Pt
	      2100 Main Street
	      Stevens Point, WI  54481    715/346-2632

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) is being
              used in course throughout the chemistry curriculum to stimulate interest in
              science, to explore different approached to experimental design, and to answer
              scientific questions of interest to students.  ICP-OES is a technique in which
              an argon stream is caused to absorb energy from a radio-frequency source.  This
              energy converts the argon into a high temperature plasma into which samples are
              introduced.  The sample atoms absorb energy from the plasma and move to excited
              states.  These atoms then return to their ground states by emission of
              radiation by emission of characteristic lines of radiation.  The theory behind
              this technique is presented early in the introductory chemistry course. 
              Students at all levels work in teams under the supervision of a faculty mentor
              to develop model projects for study.  These projects involve collection and
              preparation of environmental samples for determination of specific elements
              selected by the team.  In the introductory laboratory, students submit samples
              and receive data for interpretation and analysis.  In more advanced
              laboratories, students use the instrument to explore limits of detection of
              elements in the environment and  also become familiar with the EPA procedures
              for analysis.  One specific activity involves the collection of all
              documentation required for EPA certification of an ICP-OES method.  Advanced
              students run the samples collected by students in the introductory courses and
              then serve as consultants to the introductory students in the analysis of their
              data.  This project emphasizes a team based approach to the use of ICP-OES in
              solving problems requiring both qualitative and quantitative information.  *
