Title       : Introduction of Surface Science/Quantum Mechanical TunnelingExperiments to the
               Physical Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9751183

Award Number: 9751183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jordan C. Poler jcpoler@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel S. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart F. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The curriculum of the Chemistry Department is improved by introducing a new set
              of material-science experiments in scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and
              atomic force microscopy (AFM) into the Physical Chemistry laboratory thereby
              significantly enhancing the education and training of graduates.  Materials
              science, a relatively new, very important, and rapidly developing
              interdisciplinary field of science remains, for the most part, unexplored at
              the undergraduate level of instruction at this and most other institutions. 
              Recent developments make STM and AFM affordable and accessible to the
              undergraduate laboratory and thereby provide the department with a
              straightforward method for teaching the fundamentally important concept of
              quantum mechanical tunneling and related STM and AFM technologies of
              piezoelectric positioning, vibration isolation, etc.  This new set of
              experiments is incorporated in the Physical Chemistry laboratory, a gateway
              course for undergraduate chemistry majors.  The curriculum also includes an
              American Chemical Society certified option in materials science.  This
              equipment is the cornerstone of a materials science laboratory within the
              Chemistry Department.  These courses can eventually support the university's
              materials program in the Mechanical Engineering Department.  *
