Title       : Improving Laboratory Instruction through Computer-IntegratedMachine Tool
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9751246

Award Number: 9751246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40265              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace L. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan G. Yendall  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florence-Darlington Tec C
	      2715 W. Lucas St.
	      Florence, SC  295010548    843/668-000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to rapid technological advances and changing student and employer
              needs, Florence-Darlington Technical College will enhance its Machine Tool
              Technology (MTT) laboratory instruction through a comprehensive infusion of
              state-of-the-art equipment, instructional software, and enhanced instructional
              design.  The project will improve the learning environment of MTT students -
              emphasizing higher levels of creative problem-solving, teamwork, problem
              analysis, creativity and computer skills - and will include the re-design of
              core Computer Numerical Control (CNC) theory courses that will directly impact
              more than 300 curriculum and continuing education students annually.  The
              project centers around a modern laboratory environment anchored by computers
              with specialized simulation software and computer-controlled lathes with
              industry-standard controls.  The laboratory environment will simulate that of
              industry and be enhanced by an inteactive, eam setting that more closely
              reflects the global work environment of the 21st century.  This approach will
              encourage students to learn how to learn, emphasizing creative problem-solving,
              effective communication skills, goal identification and evaluation,  and
              teamwork.  Students will be introduced to machining operations through
              exercises that combine practical, hands-on experience with creative
              problem-solving and project management within a team environment.  The concept
              of computer integration with the machining process will be taught by allowing
              students to perform experiments, develop scientific and technical skills in
              creating designs, run simulations, and produce a product using state-of-the-art
              technology.  Students will gain a greater working knowledge of the entire CNC
              process and will acquire key skills required by local business and industry. 
              The project will integrate traditional machine tool education with the
              in-demand skills of leadership, quality and reliability, production process,
              computer automation, and teamwork.  *
