Title       : Molecular Modeling in the Undergraduate Curriculum: HelpingUndergraduate
               Students CAChe in on Molecular Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9751361

Award Number: 9751361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18955              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan M. Fleischer fleisja@earlham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Ruttledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earlham College
	      National Road West
	      Richmond, IN  47374    317/962-6561

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Chemistry Department has always striven to meet the needs of its chemistry
              students.  Environmental topics have been included in both the introductory and
              upper levels, providing ample opportunity for the students to see how chemistry
              is used to identify and help solve current environmental problems.  Other
              initiatives include creating a student affiliate chapter of the American
              Chemical Society, incorporating student-designed experiments into the organic
              chemistry sequence, introducing spectroscopic and chromatographic
              instrumentation methods into the introductory courses, and giving students a
              chance to work and learn in the Analytical Laboratory.  The curriculum includes
              all major areas of chemistry in order to give students a well-rounded chemical
              background.  However, the department has lacked the computers and software that
              would include a very important area of chemistry molecular modeling in the
              curriculum.  This project remedies this need by providing six CAChe Worksystems
              running on Power Macintoshes.  These workstations greatly increase the
              molecular modeling capabilities and allow the department to introduce students
              to this increasingly significant area of chemistry.  The long-term development
              of student expertise in molecular modeling can be monitored from introductory
              experience with molecular modeling in early courses through ongoing use in
              upper-level classes.  In the new experiments, students learn to (1) use a web
              browser to find and download chemistry software, (2) visualize molecules in
              three dimensions, (3) rearrange molecules by rotating and translating, (4) set
              up and direct chemical calculations by semi-empirical quantum mechanics and
              molecular dynamics methods, (5) determine optimum geometry, (6) compare and
              contrast computed and experimental vibrational data, and (7) predict and study
              reaction mechanisms.  *
