Title       : Geotechnical Field Investigation Equipment for the Instruction of Civil and
               Environmental Engineering Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751318

Award Number: 9751318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47729              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg L. Fiegel gfiegel@oboe.calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay S. DeNatale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Defining the characteristics of a subsurface profile is a challenge that is
              unique to geotechnical engineering.  It is important, therefore, that aspiring
              geotechnical engineers have a knowledge of site exploration strategies and
              sampling techniques before entering professional practice.  In most
              geotechnical programs, students are taught these topics using textbooks and
              videotapes.  This practice is frowned upon by industry professionals since the
              students are unable to get a true feel for the work and thought involved in a
              typical site investigation.    A primary goal of the Geotechnical Engineering
              program is to integrate field testing procedures into the undergraduate
              curriculum using a hands-on approach.  The faculty believe that students must
              have a complete understanding of modern geotechnical exploration practices if
              they are to appreciate the judgment required in geotechnical engineering
              design.  This project provides a truck-mounted Mobile B-53 Explorer drill rig
              and accessories.  The drill rig and accessories complement and upgrade the
              Geotechnical Engineering program's field testing capability (cone penetrometer
              and flat-plate dilatometer field testing systems have been utilized) and allow
              the faculty to integrate field testing procedures in many different aspects of
              the undergraduate geotechnical curriculum.    The value and need of the
              proposed project have been recognized by the College of Engineering, the Civil
              and Environmental Engineering Department, and the geotechnical engineering
              community.  All realize that a student with an understanding and appreciation
              of site exploration strategies is better prepared to effectively solve
              real-world problems upon graduation.    As part of this project, student
              preparedness, or the effectiveness of the proposed curricular improvements, can
              be evaluated by a team of practicing geotechnical engineers.  *
