Title       : Development of an Intranet to Enhance the Instruction of Research Methodology in
               Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9751114

Award Number: 9751114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13530              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Govern Govern-J@toe.towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Monica A. Greco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert L. Petri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifton J. Santiago  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests computing equipment and software necessary for the
              Psychology department at Towson State University to:  1) establish a local area
              network (LAN)  of the 30 existing personal computers in the department's
              laboratory, and 2) establish an "intranet" connection between the Psychology
              department computer laboratories at Towson State University and Rowan College
              of New Jersey.  The goal of these improvements is to enhance the learning
              experiences of students in the statistics and Experimental Methodology courses,
              which are required of all Psychology majors and minors.  The LAN will provide
              all Towson Psychology majors with access to statistical analysis, graphics and
              data collection software.  The intranet connection with Rowan will expand the
              library and computing resources of both institutions.  Both the LAN and
              intranet will be employed in a pilot collaborative instructional effort between
              the two schools.  Students in the methodology courses will cooperate on
              laboratory and homework assignments, participate in group discussions and
              decision making, and solve research together.  They will also collaborate in
              the literature review, design, data collection, analysis and interpretation
              phases of a required independent research project.  Students will be encouraged
              to present the results of these projects at Rowan's annual undergraduate
              research conference.  Through this unique process, students will learn the
              fundamentals of research methodology through "hands on" lab experiences, learn
              how to use communications technology (e.g., email, file transfer, etc.) in a
              meaningful context, gain experience working with others -- both in person and
              via electronic media, and learn the benefits and limitations of the use of
              technology in collaborative efforts.
