Title       : Mathematical Computing Courses and an Inflatable Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9751156

Award Number: 9751156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rafael Martinez-Planell                 
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50060              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Betounes david.betounes@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mylan Redfern  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project develops two new courses: Mathematical Computing I & II, within the
              Mathematics Department for mathematics majors and secondary education majors. 
              These courses teach the principles and techniques of computer programming by
              using MAPLE as a programming language.  The use of MAPLE affords an easy,
              effective, and rich environment for learning the art of programming without the
              hassle of input, output, and formatting concerns.  The content of these courses
              focuses on programming tasks designed to reinforce mathematical concepts
              learned in previous courses (calculus, differential equations I, discrete math,
              and linear algebra I) which are not part of the programming work in
              senior-level courses (such as numerical analysis, differential equations II,
              PDE, and advanced engineering mathematics).  To make this curriculum
              development successful, the project augments existing computing environment
              with a new Inflatable Lab, consisting of 25 laptop computers.  The physical
              location of this laboratory varies throughout the day and night.  During the
              day, the laboratory can be scheduled and set up in any traditional classroom,
              connecting to the Intranet by wireless infrared technology and serving to
              establish a computer classroom for lecture, demonstration, or testing.  At
              night, the laboratory can be set up to function as a traditional computer
              laboratory used by all students.  In addition, over the weekend and during
              special semesters, some of the laptops from this laboratory can be checked out
              for use by our commuting students and students in the proposed new courses.   
              *
