Title       : An Integrated Earth and Atmospheric Sciences Computer Laboratory for
               Undergraduate Instructional Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9751613

Award Number: 9751613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39115              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Clayson clayson@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Ogg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Harbor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence W. Braile  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this project, computing equipment and software are being purchased to
              establish a specialized, dedicated computing laboratory for undergraduate
              instruction in the Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences.  The
              department has recently been working specifically on improving the quality of
              the undergraduate program.  Several assessments have been performed by people
              within and outside of the department and by former alumni.  Following these
              evaluations, a department-wide curriculum revision was initiated, which
              affected every aspect of the undergraduate program.  Based on these
              evaluations, the department has targeted several key areas for improvement of
              undergraduate instruction.  As part of that improvement, the department is
              enhancing the geoscience undergraduates' computing skills, providing laboratory
              opportunities for the application of learned quantitative skills, and
              increasing the faculty's ability to include open-ended problem-solving
              activities in the curriculum.  A specialized, dedicated undergraduate computing
              laboratory is the most effective method for achieving these goals.  It builds
              on a strong base of computer-assisted instruction in the department.  The
              intent of the project is to make the computer laboratory and associated
              learning activities and experiences integral parts of the entire undergraduate
              program.  As such, they can be used by every faculty member and every student
              (currently 150 majors) in the department and can be consistently integrated
              into the department's undergraduate curriculum.
