Title       : Consequences of Habitat Fragmentation as a Model for Inquiry-Based Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9751313

Award Number: 9751313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Kephart skephart@willamette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy A. Perigo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Koprowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Willamette University
	      900 State Street
	      Salem, OR  973013930    503/370-6300

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Reports of the Office of Technology Assessment and conferences sponsored by
              organizations as diverse as Sigma Xi, AAAS, and the American Medical
              Association have shown repeatedly that undergraduate, liberal arts institutions
              that link hands-on research experiences to quality teaching(i.e., small
              student-faculty ratios such as Willamette University's 12.8:1 ratio) are
              particularly successful in encouraging undergraduates to pursue graduate and
              professional careers in the sciences.  Presently our program is attracting an
              increasing number of students interested in conservation biology topics even
              among non-science majors.  With a new complex now in place, we propose to
              expand an existing inquiry-oriented approach by asking students to pose
              questions that address both the genetic and ecological consequences of habitat
              fragmentation.  New microscopes equipped with video-imaging systems and
              micromanipulators will allow creative exploration of movement & function as
              well as form.  New computers equipped with sufficient memory to analyze images
              of organisms & DNA bands will be shared among student teams as they try to 1)
              classify plant & animal biodiversity as scientists do; 2) examine its
              connection to habitat reduction using statistical and conservation-related
              software; and 3) review and communicate their results in peer and mentor-based
              groups.  State-of-the art molecular tools will guide comparative study of the
              genetic diversity of population relics of rare and common organisms, and will
              expand the basis for posing solutions to historical and contemporary
              anthropogenic problems.  A unique feature is that collaboration is possible via
              pairing majors and non-majors courses.  Also, future scientists will be able to
              better articulate the results of the experiments they initiate, to perceive
              differences in ecological and evolutionary scales, and apply their 
              understanding to real-world situations.  The wedding of molecular tools with
              ecological and systematic studies is essential if students are to be 
              successful in a world where environments and interpretations of them are
              rapidly changing.
