Title       : Collaborative Computational Chemistry Projects in Physical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9751605

Award Number: 9751605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30646              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Whisnant   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry J. Howe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa S. Lever  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of our project is to develop a set of collaborative laboratory projects
              involving students from the physical chemistry classes of three colleges
              (Wofford College, Converse College, and the University of South Carolina at
              Spartanburg). Most of the projects involve computational chemistry (molecular
              mechanics and semi-empirical or ab initio MO theory) giving the students
              valuable experience with the applications and limitations of modern
              com-putational investigations. The students are collaborating via an E-mail
              listserver and a set of World Wide Web pages, so they also are being introduced
              to important Internet tools. This project has a significant effect on our three
              colleges, because the collaboration converts our small classes, in which there
              are only a limited number of classmates with whom to interact, into a larger
              learning community. The computational chemistry experiments also are giving
              students experience with what are becoming important laboratory tools. The
              project will have an impact beyond our departments because it is an example of
              how small departments can become stronger by sharing resources. It is resulting
              in several WWW pages containing hypermedia-based information on computational
              chemistry aimed for undergraduates in a junior-level physical chemistry class.
              It also is resulting in a set of new computational experiments that can be used
              either as individual experiments or collaborative projects.  *
