Title       : Undergraduate Physiological Psychology Teaching Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9751060

Award Number: 9751060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janie H. Wilson jhwilson@gasou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel G. Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia Southern Univ
	      P.O. Box 8005
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will equip a computerized physiological psychology laboratory.  The
              equipment will provide laboratory experiences for undergraduate students in
              physiological psychology by allowing them to learn human and non-human animal
              neuroscience methodology in a "hands-on" environment.  It will allow  the
              Psychology Department to incorporate laboratory demonstrations and exercises in
              the existing undergraduate physiological lecture course and to develop a
              research laboratory course in physiological psychology.      Through a
              structured sequence of exercises, students in the laboratory course will become
              familiar with the research literature, learn how to design and conduct ethical
              research in the physiological area, and learn how to write professional reports
              about their research.  The laboratory will also allow students the opportunity
              to conduct supervised independent research on physiological topics.     
              Instruction in other courses in the psychology curriculum will be improved as
              faculty begin to take advantage of this opportunity to incorporate
              demonstrations of physiological phenomena in their courses, and by allowing
              development of physiological instructional materials designed for use in these
              courses.      Faculty in Biology and Kinesiology will also begin to use this
              facility for improving undergraduate learning in their disciplines.  The design
              of the laboratory also allows for production of video instructional material
              that may be disseminated to interested faculty at other institutions.
