Title       : A Multidiscipline Remote Sensing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9751241

Award Number: 9751241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19212              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yin S. Soong yssoong@seahorse.millersv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell L. DeSouza  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles K. Scharnberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A state-of-the-art remote-sensing laboratory for geosciences includes
              comprehensive software packages and six Windows NT-networked computers and
              enables students to analyze different types of remotely sensed data and apply
              them to their respective disciplines.  The IMAGINE software from ERDAS
              (Atlanta, Georgia) is used to process multispectral raster-type data, and the
              IDL/ENVI package from Research Systems (Boulder, Colorado) is used to process
              non-raster-type data.  A shareware called BILKO is used in introductory courses
              for students to gain some fundamental knowledge in remote sensing.  This
              laboratory is a major expansion of the old single-user image processor that has
              been used for the past 10 years.  Specific course exercises are planned to
              utilize satellite data from GOES, Landsat, SPOT, NOM, Nimbus, TOPEX/Poseidon,
              Synthetic Aperture Radar data from space shuttle missions, and digitized images
              of aerial photographs.  Not only can the archived data sets on magnetic tapes
              be used effectively in this laboratory, but also students can, through Internet
              connection, access existing and future remote-sensing data at NASA
              laboratories.  It is anticipated that more spaceborne sensors may be put into
              orbit, such as that in NASA's Mission to Earth (Earth Observing System)
              project.  This laboratory greatly enhances the learning process in the
              regularly offered remote-sensing course for students in meteorology, geology,
              oceanography, geography, and biology.  Faculty of other science courses who may
              not have used remote-sensing data before can also use this laboratory after
              taking a workshop that is part of this project.  The hands-on experience of
              digital image analysis on workstations also brings a very desirable strength to
              the technical background of the university's future geoscientists.  *
