Title       : The Introduction of Molecular Modeling into the Two-Year College Chemistry
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9751067

Award Number: 9751067
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44721              (Estimated)
Investigator: Iraj B. Nejad   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen DiMauro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount San Antonio College
	      1100 North Grand
	      Walnut, CA  917891341    714/594-5611

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The concepts of molecular bonding, electronic structure, molecular orbitals, and
              intermolecular and intramolecular interactions are fundamental to all areas of
              chemistry.  Although these concepts have been covered at several levels of
              sophistication in various chemistry courses, they have not been well understood
              by the majority of students.  The problem that students have had with
              understanding these concepts arises from the difficult task of visualizing
              these concepts in the microscopic world of atoms and molecules.  Recent
              advances in molecular modeling, computational chemistry, and 3-D visualization
              software provide an exciting opportunity to more effectively teach these
              critical concepts in an innovative way. These advances, coupled with relatively
              powerful and affordable computer workstations, and superb graphic software and
              hardware, make this approach viable.    For years, molecular modeling has
              played a significant role in chemical and pharmaceutical designs in both
              industry and graduate-level researah.  Now is the time to incorporate molecular
              modeling into the undergraduate curriculum to help students better comprehend
              critical structural concepts.  To achieve this goal, the department is
              purchasing 14 computers and one SGI workstation, which can be interconnected
              and can support SPARTAN software.  This new facility is enabling chemistry
              faculty to teach molecular modeling and computational chemistry to students in
              a meaningful way, and it is enabling students to visualize a number of
              fundamental microscopic concepts that are important to the macroscopic
              properties of materials.
