Title       : Student-Managed Web Servers and the Delivery of QuantitativeResults --
               Redefining Computer Literacy for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9751660

Award Number: 9751660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25635              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. LeBlanc mleblanc@wheatoncollege.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Ratliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wheaton College
	      26 East Main Street
	      Norton, MA  027660930    508/286-8239

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Society's embrace of information and our reliance on the distributed networked
              environments that carry that information is changing the definition of a
              "liberally educated person."  The skills required of all college graduates (not
              just computer science majors) will soon include the electronic delivery of
              information and services.  This project constructs a laboratory where
              non-science students manage World Wide Web servers.  The project has two major
              objectives.  The first objective is to ensure that each student has a firm
              grasp of the computational tools required for manipulating, organizing and
              displaying quantitative data.  The second objective is to give each student the
              opportunity to manage the delivery of that information to interested clients. 
              In this introductory course in computing for non-majors, students employ common
              forms of applications software as tools and then disseminate their results via
              a personally-managed web server.  The quantitative tool-based component
              includes a significant emphasis on mathematical content to address the needs of
              other departments that depend on this service course.  The server-focused
              component addresses the client-server skills that will be required of graduates
              entering the workforce in the next century.  an interactive web page
              facilitates dissemination of the method to instructors at other institutions
              and permits the construction of tailor-made lab handouts.  Instructors have the
              flexibility to choose from examples that use a particular application tool
              independent of their choice of instructions for a particular delivery
              mechanism.  *
