Title       : Precision Machining and Measurement Labortory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9751517

Award Number: 9751517
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Kenner kenner@corning-cc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Corning Community College
	      Spencer Hill
	      Corning, NY  148303297    607/962-9011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the equipment, training, and interpersonal skills
              requirements of students preparing for high precision, highly automated
              machining positions. The project is addressing these issues by retrofitting an
              existing engine lathe with digital readouts and a Bridgeport mill to emulate
              equipment found in small machine shops. Machinist students are acting as peer
              trainers to high school students enrolled in similar programs. Students who
              teach will truly learn their trade. In addition, the project is establishing a
              website linking all high schools, BOCES, and interested industrial shops to the
              college's site for the purpose of sharing information on projects, vendor
              demonstration schedules, student mentoring activities, and job opportunities.
              Students who are required to work in teams, and have some interaction with
              industry, make a much smoother transition to the team-oriented work
              environment. A coordinate measuring machine (CMM), SPC, and other digital
              readout devices are being incorporated into the college's metrology course to
              better prepare freshmen students for their summer co-op experiences and future
              work environment. Engineering technology students are being provided with a
              metrology course in which they can gain skills in SPC applications and
              concepts. Lastly, existing machining and measuring facilities are being brought
              up to the standards demanded by industry.  *
