Title       : Computer-Assisted Instrumentation for Improving Biology Laboratory Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9751626

Award Number: 9751626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra J. Barnes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeanne Wiegand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher L. Tarp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Contra Costa CC College
	      2600 Mission Bell Drive
	      San Pablo, CA  948063166    415/235-7800

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Biological Sciences Department at Contra Costa College seeks to provide our
              students with computerized recording and analyzing instrumentation for use in
              the laboratories of Physiology, Zoology, Botany, Microbiology, and General
              Biology.  this instrumentation will expand and enhance the educational process
              for our students, many of whom are minorities and women and are traditionally
              underrepresented in the sciences.  These instruments will provide students with
              the ability to measure several biological functions (e.g. heart sounds, pulse,
              and EKG) simultaneously, and to store this data for analysis, manipulation, and
              graphing.  This will enable the department to cease using live animals for
              experimentation, and substitute non-invasive techniques on human subjects. 
              This will prove more relevant and interesting to many students, especially
              those in pre-clinical programs.  The requested instruments replace very old
              physiographs and transducers used in traditional muscle experiments and allow
              new labs on, for example intracellular membrane potentials, respiration (where
              volumes are coordinated with rate), circulation (heart sounds, pulse, blood
              pressure, and EKG) EMG measurements on skeletal muscle, and students on
              locomotion.  Additionally, computer analysis and graphing of data will become
              routine in all of the department's courses.  The computers and
              hardware/software will be portable and will be employed throughout the
              department's laboratory courses, serving approximately 1,100 students per year.
               Experiments using this instrumentation will be published in course laboratory
              manuals and will be provided to the MacLab manual and to teaching societies
              such as Human Anatomy and Physiology Society (HAPS).
