Title       : A Development Plan for Incorporating Molecular Techniques into the Curriculum of
               Undergraduate Biology Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1997       
File        : a9751245

Award Number: 9751245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38666              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie B. Slusher lslusher@wcupa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elise A. Triano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Beneski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The recent addition of computer simulations into the laboratories of several of
              the biology courses has greatly enhanced the learning experience of students. 
              By combining the practical experience of traditional wet laboratories with the
              unique opportunities for student input and discovery that is available through
              computer simulations, students in these laboratories are exposed to and
              actively participate in all phases of the scientific process ranging from the
              inception of experimental design to the dissemination of experimental results. 
              In this project, the number and types of laboratories for which this pedagogic
              model is offered are expanded to include laboratories involving modern
              molecular techniques.  Integration of computer simulations with wet laboratory
              exercises provides a better learning environment than either type of exercise
              provides alone.  Because of past equipment limitations, the university has been
              unable to offer wet laboratories to complement the computer simulation of
              molecular techniques used in Genetics and Cell and Molecular Biology.  A new
              laboratory course entitled Molecular Techniques in Biology has been developed
              to serve as a general companion course for lecture-only courses.  By these
              additions to the curriculum, students are better prepared to conduct
              independent research, enter the competitive job market, or enter graduate
              school.  Success of these laboratories can be evaluated using the departmental
              learning outcomes assessment process.  Parameters used for this assessment
              include the number of students participating in local, regional, and national
              scientific meetings; the number of publications written by students; and the
              number of students accepted into competitive graduate and professional
              programs.  An additional parameter includes job placement in the discipline
              within 24 months of graduation.  Plans for dissemination of this project's
              results include sponsoring an on-site training program for sister institutions.
               *
