Title       : Improving the Physiology Laboratory through Interactive and Sequential
               Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9751243

Award Number: 9751243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22461              (Estimated)
Investigator: Colleen J. Nolan bionolan@stmarytx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's Univ San Antonio
	      One Camino Santa Maria
	      San Antonio, TX  782285433    512/436-3011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this proposed project is to improve the quality of science
              instruction, primarily to students enrolled in the General Physiology course,
              at St. Mary's University.  St. Mary's is an Hispanic Serving Institution with a
              69% Hispanic undergraduate student body.  Biology is the largest major at the
              University with over 300 majors.  The activities of the proposed plan are
              intended to improve learning and stimulate the interest of our students in
              variety of careers in  the biological sciences.  The goal of improving
              instruction will be achieved through reaching the following objectives: 
              enhancing knowledge and insight about the roles of different physiological
              systems; improving collaborative skills; improving critical thinking skills;
              improving writing and speaking skills.  These objectives will be realized by
              creating an interactive learning environment and a hands-on approach to
              learning in the physiology lab; by improving the quality in and variety of
              instructional delivery; and by providing students with opportunities to present
              results of laboratory experiments to others.  The addition of modern
              instrumentation and enhanced classroom technologies will increase the hands-on
              experiences of our students in data collection, integration and synthesis of
              data, and will improve the communication of the results of the experiments. 
              The major equipment purchases include six Power Macintosh computers, MacLab
              hardware and software, software for data analysis and presentation, and
              specific physiograph components for collection of data.  This equipment will be
              used to upgrade current experiments and add new experiments to the physiology
              course and lab.  St.  Mary's University is contributing an equal amount to this
              project.
