Title       : A Groupware Laboratory for Software Engineering Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9751282

Award Number: 9751282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18184              (Estimated)
Investigator: William M. Mitchell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana State Shreveport
	      8515 Youree Drive
	      Shreveport, LA  711152301    318/797-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Until recently, students could be introduced to the relevant concepts of
              software engineering environments by simply placing a variety of these tools on
              various computers and requiring students to build software with them.  Now the
              nearly universal practice of industry is toward the use of groupware tools that
              allow and control the sharing of software artifacts among large teams spread
              over time and space.  This project outfits such a groupware laboratory to
              support medium- to large-scale distributed software development.  This
              environment cannot be emulated by students on their home computers; nor can the
              department's computer laboratory be configured for this use because of the
              emphasis on remote accessibility of artifacts through the use of centralized
              software.    The integration of groupware activities into software engineering
              programs is particularly important for small, urban colleges and universities
              that are located in the same city as the employers of their students.  These
              programs are rewarded for maintaining parity with industry practices and run
              great risks in credibility if the instructional program is observed to be
              seriously out of step with the practice of local industry.  In these same urban
              settings, students are often nonresidential, and therefore they will greatly
              appreciate a distributed instructional environment that allows them to meet and
              work electronically.  The very software tools that are to be assessed for their
              productivity in industry solve the scheduling impediment that has discouraged
              academic programs from large team exercises.  Through the groupware laboratory,
              students experience the convenience as well as the power of distributed
              software development environments.  *
