Title       : The Research Experience in the Undergraduate Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9751231

Award Number: 9751231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23910              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Candela candela@phast.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl M. Martini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Tuominen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Krotkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An ongoing project is enhanced in order to bring the methods and experiences of
              basic research to a laboratory course for undergraduate physics majors.  The
              course, which has been taught for 3 years, includes such elements as required
              library research, timed oral presentations before a skeptical audience, and
              reports in the format of journal manuscripts.  Students work in small teams on
              open-ended but time-limited research projects, some of which are drawn from
              current research literature (quantum conductance in nanocontacts,
              sonoluminescence, colloidal crystals...).   This project provides
              instrumentation, computers, and software that closely duplicate those used in a
              typical research environment.  The goal is to train students in some of the
              actual methods, instruments, and data-reduction packages that they are likely
              to use in their future careers, as opposed to "model" or "student" versions. 
              These needs are addressed by five powerful data acquisition and reduction
              stations, each consisting of a computer with a data-acquisition board, a GPIB
              interface and research-quality multimeter, together with LabView
              data-acquisition software and several full-featured data-reduction and
              presentation packages (MathCad, Mathematica, and Origin).  In addition there is
              more specialized GPIB instrumentation (frequency counters, digital
              oscilloscopes, function generators, and lock-ins), as well as a shared printer
              for graphing and preparation of viewgraphs and reports.   Although targeted to
              junior-level physics majors (for whom it is required), this course in its
              enhanced form is expected to attract students from other scientific and
              technical majors.  This research model for upper level laboratory equips the
              students with useful skills in verbal and written communication, as well as
              instrumentation and data analysis.
