Title       : Stereolithography: A Distributed Partnership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9751651

Award Number: 9751651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tirupathi R. Chandrupatla chandrupatla@rowan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raman Kolluri  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Hudgings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Schmalzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Marchese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rowan University
	      201 Mullica Hill Road
	      Glassboro, NJ  080281701    856/256-4057

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                         Stereolithography: A Distributed Partnership      
              Stereolithography has become a powerful industrial tool in reducing the
              manufacturing lead time from design conceptualization to product realization.
              It has begun appearing in engineering and technology curricula only recently.
              One objective of the project is to enable Rowan's engineering students to
              rapidly produce designs working with their technology team partners at Camden
              County College. This activity is centered around the creation of a
              stereolithography center. Freshmen engineering students develop product designs
              in their engineering clinic course, but are generally unable to fabricate them
              since conventional processes require high degrees of skill and long cycle
              times. Stereolithography allows any 3-d model developed on a computer to be
              produced by successively solidifying layers of resin using a laser beam.
              Engineering students can now ascertain the design complexity and assess the
              functional requirements. Technology students now have access to a
              state-of-the-art manufacturing capability that complements their training in
              computer integrated manufacturing and laser technology.       The second
              objective of the project was to bring technology and engineering students
              together in project teams. This represents the real work environment that
              students will face after graduation. By placing the stereolithography equipment
              at Camden County College, Rowan's engineering students must interact with the
              technology students by remote access to produce prototypes of their designs.
              The remote access is provided by video teleconferencing combined with
              distributed computing using a networked design package.       This innovative
              approach will better prepare both engineering and technology students to adapt
              to a rapidly changing work place.
