Title       : A Research-Oriented, Evolution-Based Biochemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9751332

Award Number: 9751332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Olsen kolsen@luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duarte M. Freitas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A significant portion of recent scientific progress has taken place at the
              interface of the traditional science disciplines.  It is imperative that the
              training of undergraduate chemistry students reflects the current
              interdisciplinary nature of chemical research.  With this goal in mind, the
              Department of Chemistry has established a Bachelor of Science degree in
              chemistry with a biochemistry emphasis.  This degree better prepares students
              for graduate work in biochemistry and medicine and for exciting career
              opportunities in the rapidly expanding biotechnology industry.    The new
              degree features an advanced laboratory in biochemistry, which integrates the
              concepts covered in the two biochemistry lecture courses.  The laboratory is
              using the theme of evolution and providing the students with a collaborative
              research experience.  This new approach satisfies several pedagogical
              objectives, including teaching a wide variety of biochemical techniques,
              reinforcing an appreciation of the chemical basis of biology, illustrating both
              the unity and diversity of life, providing a research experience, and
              supporting the development of a team-oriented approach to investigating a
              problem.    Three centrifuges, an electrophoresis setup, protein purification
              equipment, and a spectrophotometer are among the new equipment providing
              hands-on experiences with biochemical techniques actually used in research
              laboratories.  The program is greatly reducing the gap between undergraduates'
              education and actual research done in academic and industrial laboratories.  *
