Title       : Chromatography for Laboratory Instruction and Undergraduate Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9751393

Award Number: 9751393
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Makaroff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil D. Danielson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Perhaps the most common and powerful analytical technique being used for the
              analysis of biomolecules is high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). 
              With the recent integration of biotechnology into numerous aspects of
              biochemistry and chemistry, HPLC specifically, reversed-phase liquid
              chromatography is playing an increasingly more important role in the
              purification and characterization of proteins.  Through this project, two HPLC
              systems are being purchased to be used primarily in the advanced undergraduate
              biochemistry and chemistry laboratories.  They are also being made available
              both for use in the instrumental analysis class and for undergraduate
              independent study projects.    The HPLC systems are being used in the
              biochemistry laboratory in conjunction with capillary electrophoresis and
              sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis to analyze cell
              extracts and purified protein from E. coli lines that overproduce a recombinant
              protein.  Generally, students in undergraduate laboratories are provided with a
              single method to illustrate a particular type of analysis.  Rarely are they
              asked to directly compare methods to determine the relative strengths and
              weaknesses of each method.  The new units are being used in the undergraduate
              chemistry laboratory to evaluate the effect of varying the flow-rate and
              gradient profile on the elution patterns of a series of proteins.  Students are
              examining from a theoretical and practical point of view, special
              considerations and difficulties encountered by the analytical chemist dealing
              with biological systems.  *
