Title       : Controlled Development and Prediction of Zero-flux Planes, Diffusion Paths and
               Diffusion Structures in Multicomponent and Multiphase Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0304777

Award Number: 0304777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mysore A. Dayananda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
This grant explores the phenomenon of isothermal diffusion at 775oC in alpha
              (a, fcc) and beta (b, bcc) single phase and multiphase alloys in the Cu-Ni-Zn
              system. A major objective is to reduce interdiffusion of a component through
              development of a series of zero-flux planes (ZFP) adjacently spaced within the
              diffusion zone. The study also investigates intrinsic and interdiffusion, as
              well as development of zero-flux planes, diffusion paths and diffusion
              structures, in diffusion couples characterized by controlled thermodynamic
              forces for two of the components. Other goal of the proposed investigations is
              to develop a user-friendly, multicomponent diffusion code equipped with a
              library of diffusion data for several multicomponent systems, and capable of
              analysis and prediction of diffusion paths and diffusion structures in
              multicomponent assemblies.
%%%
The experimental portions involve assembling
              infinite and finite diffusion couples with a and b Cu-Ni-Zn alloys having
              compositions on an isoactivity line for Ni. These couple pairs are so assembled
              that the activity differences for Zn and Ni between the terminal alloys are
              identical in magnitude but different in sign. All couples are analyzed by
              electron microbrobe techniques. Diffusion structure development in multiphase
              couples is examined by scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron
              microscopy. These controlled experiments contribute to better understanding and
              insights into the intrinsic and interdiffusion phenomena as well as ZFP
              development in multicomponent systems. The development of the planned diffusion
              code is expected to serve as a teaching, research and design tool for the
              analysis and prediction of diffusion paths in multicomponent, multiphase
              systems and can reach a large audience in the fields of education and
              industry.
***

