Title       : Effect of Grain Boundary and Size on Electro-Thermo-Mechanical Properties and
               Internal Friction of Nano Grained Thin Metal Films Using MEMS Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0304243

Award Number: 0304243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. A. Saif saif@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,7237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Objective: Our first goal is to measure, for the first time, using MEMS sensors
              and actuators, the following properties of free standing nano grained nano
              scale metal films:(a) elastic and plastic response due to uniaxial loading, (b)
              electrical conductivity, (c) thermal conductivity, and (d) internal friction in
              low to high temperatures and under various mechanical stresses. Our second goal
              is to explore the role of grain boundaries and the surfaces in determining the
              measured properties. For example, grain boundary atoms are known to be randomly
              and sparsely arranged compared to those within the grains. We will investigate
              whether the grain boundaries offer sufficient compliance (in contrast to the
              mechanism of grain boundary sliding) to nano-grained metals lowering the
              elastic modulus compared to their bulk counterparts (observed in our
              preliminary experiments). Similarly, we will explore whether the abundant grain
              boundaries may cause sufficient scattering of the conduction (electrical and
              thermal) electrons, thus increasing thermo-electric resistively. Theoretical
              models will be developed to explain and predict the thermo electro mechanical
              properties of nano scale metals.
The models will account for grain boundaries
              and surfaces.


Education: Research and education must be complementary to
              each other. Research advances the frontier of knowledge, whereas education
              disseminates it. As part of PI 's CAREER project (awarded 1998), video series
              on MEMS has been developed for broad audience including high and middle school
              students and people with basic science background interested in MEMS. The
              series, titled A voyage through the world of micromachine is available at
              http://www.mie.uiuc.edu.

The education component of the this project will
              include:(a) development of short video series on
nano materials and technology
              ,and the micro instruments for testing such invisible samples. Undergraduate
              research assistants from diverse group will be recruited for this project; (b)
              development of web page where micro instruments will be highlighted as well as
              new findings on nano materials will be posted through videos of experiments and
              animations (to clarify concepts),(c)development of new course for seniors and
              entering graduate students on new methods of studying materials at nano scale,
              (d)introduction of the topic of nano scale materials 'behavior in the
              traditional courses of mechanical engineering such s mechanics of materials,
              and design. University of Illinois hosts summer camps for school students. The
              concepts of nanotechnology will be presented to the visiting young audience
              through PI 's lab tour, the video series and informal discussions.

