Title       : Nanosegregation, Microtexture and the Control of Brittle Failure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0304738

Award Number: 0304738
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $610002             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Williams dbw1@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Masashi Watanabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant uses a novel combination of experimental techniques to determine the
              interplay between local microtexture and nanometer-scale segregation of
              impurities to grain boundaries, which may cause brittle failure. This
              inter-relationship has not been examined to date, but X-ray mapping in the
              analytical electron microscope offers both the high spatial resolution and
              atomic-level detection necessary for quantitative analysis of multiple,
              undisturbed boundaries (i.e. not fractured prior to study) in the same
              specimen. Automated crystallography for the transmission electron microscope
              can determine the misorientation across the same boundaries. The hypothesis is
              that local texture can control the amount and degree of segregation or,
              conversely, that segregation can control the local microtexture. The
              understanding obtained via these new techniques would permit development of new
              thermo mechanical treatments to mitigate the deleterious effects of segregants
              and this is a primary aim of the research. The change in segregant distribution
              will be measured in specific textures produced either via thin film formation
              on tailored substrates or via grain boundary engineering which creates a high
              fraction of low energy boundaries to which segregation is minimized. Ideal
              segregating systems in Cu and Fe will be studied.
%%%
A broader impact of the
              research is that, if successful, it may offer an alternative method of the
              current (and expensive) practice of reducing undesirable trace elements to
              levels where segregation does not cause embrittlement. If segregation can be
              minimized by grain boundary engineering, then the very thermo-mechanical
              treatments used to develop desirable properties may be modified to suppress
              segregation simultaneously, to levels where the connectivity of brittle
              boundaries is lowered sufficiently to prevent crack propagation leading to
              brittle failure. The techniques developed will be incorporated into classroom
              teaching material, a 2nd edition of a major textbook and Lehigh's annual
              microscopy courses for industrial and government researchers.
***

