Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Rural Domestic Economy and Chimu
               Political Economy: Household Organization at the El Brujo Site Complex, Chicama
               Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0304312

Award Number: 0304312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber kschreiber@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, Mr. James Tate will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation.  Mr. Tate will carry out archaeological
              excavations at the El Brujo Site Complex in the Chicama Valley, Peru.  The
              complex is of great interest archaeologically as it consists of a series of
              domestic habitations and ceremonial mounds that represent over four thousand
              years of human occupation spanning the Preceramic through Colonial periods, ca.
              3000 B.C. - A.D. 1532.  This investigation focuses on the later Chimu
              occupation of the site and the organization of the domestic economy of the
              residents.  The site is particularly significant given the existence of early
              colonial period documents that describe the economic and social organization of
              the site and the surrounding area.  In addition, the exceptional preservation
              of organic material at the site results in an unparalleled opportunity to
              observe archaeological patterns of production, processing, distribution,
              consumption, and disposal of craft goods and subsistence resources.  A primary
              recovery method will be the collection of soil samples that will produce data
              on diet and subsistence.  The investigator will then compare patterns of
              production and consumption to existing research, and ethnohistoric accounts of
              the Chicama Valley, El Brujo, and the nearby town of Magdalena de Cao, a method
              that has proven valuable to Inca studies.  

During the Late Intermediate
              Period (A.D. 1000-A.D. 1476) the Chimu culture developed on the north coast of
              Peru and established a hierarchically organized expansive state that eventually
              grew to control the coastal region from the Chillon Valley on the central coast
              to Tumbes in the north.  The Chimu are known archaeologically and
              ethnohistorically as specialized producers of elite goods such as metals and
              textiles that served in a redistributive economy based on the control of luxury
              goods, and financed by irrigation agriculture.  Little however is known about
              the relationship between the state political economy and the local domestic
              economy of communities outside administrative and political centers.  Mr.
              Tate's investigation will add a new dimension to existing research by
              presenting data gathered from household contexts.   Research carried out at the
              household level provides the opportunity to study aspects of human economic,
              political, and social organization invisible at a larger scale.  Accordingly,
              the study of El Brujo provides a necessary addition to existing research by
              identifying the range of domestic activities that characterize a household in
              the archaeological record, and contributing a detailed description of daily
              life in a Chimu community.  

This research is also important because it will
              integrate different approaches to the understanding of prehispanic culture at
              El Brujo, where the overwhelming focus of investigation has been monumental
              architecture.  Further, the research will contribute to a growing body of
              anthropological and archaeological literature on households in complex
              societies and will assist in training a promising young scientist. 



