Title       : Palladium-Catalyzed Alkylation of Unactivated Olefins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0304994

Award Number: 0304994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross A. Widenhoefer rwidenho@chem.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
The foci of this research involve the palladium-catalyzed hydroalkylation and
              oxidative alkylation of unactivated olefins.  The scope of hydroalkylation will
              be explored and the use of dialky ketones and electron-rich aryl groups will be
              used to develop processes for the formation of cyclopentanones, carbobicyclic
              and heterocyclic compounds.  Intermolecular hydroalkylation  processes will
              also be tested and the mechanism of palladium-catalyzed hydroalkylation wil be
              elucidated.  Procedures for catalytic, asymmetric hdroalkylation will be
              developed as will tandem hydroalkylation/carbonylation and
              hydralkylation/carbometallation methodology. The scope of oxidative alkylation
              with respect to carbon nucleophiles and substitution will be examined and
              oxidative alkylation procedures terminated by beta-heteroatom elimination will
              be developed.

With this award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program is supporting the research of Dr. Ross A. Widenhoefer of the Department
              of Chemistry at Duke University.   Professor Widenhoefer will focus his work on
              the development of methodologies for palladium-catalyzed alkylation of
              unactivated olefins.  The chemistry holds great potential as a new method for
              C-C bond formation and could have an important broader impact on organic
              synthesis, in particular on the ability of synthetic chemists to construct
              complex naturally occurring and biologically active molecules of interest to
              the pharmaceutical industry.  Aside from providing an excellent environment for
              the training of graduate students, the project will also involve participation
              of underrepresented minority undergraduate students from North Carolina Central
              University, a neighboring HBCU. 

