Title       : SGER: Fossil Bone as a Paleoclimate Indicator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0304181

Award Number: 0304181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24570              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Kohn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Funding is requested to test the hypothesis that the d18O of the CO3 component
              of fossil bone apatite can be used as a paleoclimate proxy analogously to
              paleosol carbonate. Trace element, crystallinity, and sparse isotopic data
              suggest that (a) bone recrystallizes significantly during fossilization, (b)
              the d18O of the CO3 component of bone may correlate with local carbonates, and
              (c) recrystallization occurs on a similar time scale as pedogenesis. That is,
              alteration of bone, including isotopic alteration of bone CO3, appears to be a
              pedogenic process.
If so, then the isotopic compositions of bone CO3 and
              paleosol carbonate should correlate, and fossil bone could be used as a
              paleoclimate proxy as an alternative to paleosol carbonate. Key to this
              proposal is comparison of coexisting paleosol carbonate and the CO3 component
              of fossil bone fragments. A collection of several hundred paleosols from the
              Oligocene John Day Formation, central Oregon, now housed at John Day Fossil
              Beds National Monument, uniquely provides the raw materials. Paleosol carbonate
              from each paleosol has already been analyzed by Retallack and coworkers, and
              data show isotope shifts that are both short-term (thousands of years) and
              long-term (millions of years). Outstanding age dating and stratigraphic
              contexts permit resolution of isotope shifts to tens of thousands of years
              (meters, stratigraphically). Most importantly, an estimated 50 of these
              paleosols also contain fossil bone fragments. Thus analysis of bone fragment
              compositions will readily permit comparison with coexisting paleosol carbonate.
              It is additionally important to identify the degree to which bone fragments
              adopt paleosol compositions. Compositional profiling will first be conducted
              with select (5-10) large bone fragments from the paleosol sequence to evaluate
              what portions of the bone are altered (e.g., the entire bone irrespective of
              bone type and location, cortical vs.
cancellous bone, outer iuexposedlv vs.
              inner inprotectedll portions, etc.). These data will help define a sampling
              protocol that will then be applied to bone from the remaining paleosols. If
              bones are in fact isotopically altered, compositional comparison with paleosol
              carbonate will reveal whether bones are partially or completely altered to
              paleosol conditions. Preservation of short-term (thousands of years) variations
              vs. only longer-term trends will help define whether the time scale for
              alteration is indeed thousands of years, as suggested by trace element and
              crystallinity studies, or instead millions of years.
Successful use of the CO3
              component of fossil bone as a paleoclimate indicator would be especially
              beneficial in areas that are fossiliferous but lack paleosol carbonates (e.g.,
              the Miocene of central Oregon). Other areas of the world that are
              fossiliferous, but perhaps not abundantly so, would become amenable to
              paleoclimate and tectonic research. A positive outcome would also foster
              greater synergy between stable isotope geochemists and paleontologists, as
              paleontological field prospecting crews are well trained to identify and
              collect fossil bone, but not paleosols or paleosol carbonates.

