Title       : Determining Species-Specific Seed Shadows Using Molecular Genetic Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0304909

Award Number: 0304909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38789              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bette A. Loiselle loiselle@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit: Measuring and analyzing seed dissemination into the
              environment is considered a major limitation in seed dispersal and plant
              recruitment studies. To date, seed shadows have been based on data collected
              from radio-tracked animals or from seed traps. In the former method, seed
              shadows are probalistic as dissemination is based on average gut passage times
              and distance moved during some time period, but data do not provide a means to
              evaluate species-specific differences in animal-generated seed shadows. In the
              latter case, seed rain provides a direct measure of seed arrival into
              microenvironments, although the contribution of different animal dispersers is
              not possible to discern. Dissecting out individual ecological roles of animal
              dispersers is necessary to understand the evolutionary impacts of seed
              dispersers on plant demography. This SGER proposal investigates a new method
              for directly measuring species-specific seed dissemination by birds using
              molecular markers and fecal samples. Fresh bird droppings that contain seeds
              are readily found in forest environments or collected in seed traps. In this
              exploratory research project we will collect fecal samples containing seeds
              from known species of birds (i.e., captured birds) and conduct genetic analyses
              on the bird dropping to get a "species signal". This preliminary work is
              necessary to test the ability of detecting microsatellite markers from bird
              droppings. Without sufficient evidence that this novel technique will function,
              any proposal relying
on this method to examine interspecific differences in
              seed dispersal function by birds is unlikely to be successful. If successful,
              this technique could revolutionize our studies on seed-dispersal efficiency in
              tropical lowland forests as it would provide a means to directly study seed
              dissemination into microenvironments that differ in seed and seedling
              establishment conditions. The application of this novel technique would allow
              us, for the first time, to develop the critical link between seed disperser
              behavior and plant demography, and thus, provide the key empirical data to
              determine the influence of animals on plant demography.
Broader Impact: The
              proposed research effectively combines the ecological,
behavioral, and
              molecular genetic expertise of the principal investigators and provides an
              avenue for new collaborative research that will enhance research programs of
              each senior investigator. If we can successfully develop the methods to obtain
              species signals using molecular genetic data from bird fecal samples, this
              method will likely become adopted by many researchers and applied to a wide
              range of ecological, population, and behavioral studies. Field and laboratory
              components of the research program will also provide key opportunities for a
              student from UM-St. Louis and from Latin America to gain research experience.

