Title       : Systematic Metallaborane Reaction Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0304008

Award Number: 0304008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Fehlner fehlner.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Thomas P. Fehlner, Department of Chemistry, University of Notre Dame,  is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the
              Chemistry Division for the synthesis of new clusters containing both main-group
              and transition-metal atoms. The project has several areas of focus. The first
              involves an experimental and theoretical evaluation of the electronic structure
              of  hypoelectronic metallaboranes, a set of metallaboranes of groups 6, 7 and 8
              metals that exhibit highly condensed structures that differ qualitatively from
              other polyhedral borane and metal clusters and do not follow Wade's Rules.
              Secondly, metallaboranes will be used to modify organic substrates in which the
              characteristic reactivities of B-H and M-H fragments operate sequentially on a
              single bound organic substrate to generate novel hydrometallation chemistry.
              Next, metallaborane derivatives that contain boron-coordinated Lewis bases will
              be prepared. The incorporation of the Lewis bases will provide a means for
              rationally varying the properties of the metallaborane. Finally, boron-carbon
              bond formation through the use of polyhedral iridaboranes will be developed as
              a route to the functionalization of hydrocarbons.
 
The chemistry of the
              transition metals, when combined with carbon-containing substituents, is the
              basis of the vast field of organometallic chemistry. Research in this area has
              led to many advances in pure and applied chemistry. This project aims to open a
              related area in which transition metals are combined with units containing
              boron. Preliminary results indicate that these "metallaboranes" will possess an
              extensive chemistry that in some ways resembles organometallic chemistry, but
              in other ways is very different. In this investigation new combinations of
              boranes and transition metals will be prepared and their chemistry 
              investigated. The new compounds will express the unique aspects of their
              electronic structures in new kinds of reaction chemistry. In addition to the
              scientific contributions this project will teach undergraduate, graduate and
              postdoctoral coworkers cutting-edge synthetic inorganic chemistry and will
              provide them with learning opportunities in oral and written research
              presentation. The project will involve women scientists, including faculty from
              less research-oriented institutions.


