Title       : Photoemission Study of Strongly Interacting Electron Systems: Cuprates and
               Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0304981

Award Number: 0304981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Xun Shen zxshen@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will study many-body effects in strongly interacting electron
              systems using high-resolution angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
              (ARPES).  A major focus of the program will be the high-Tc superconductors. 
              However, other novel materials such as MgB2 and the C60 family of compounds
              will also be investigated.  Together, these materials represent a formidable
              challenge to develop new theoretical concepts, and thus an opportunity for
              spectroscopic experiments to play an important role in helping the development
              of theory.  With much improved energy and momentum resolution, ARPES is ideally
              suited for this investigation due to its unique capability to measure key
              microscopic parameters that often reveal deep insights.  The project will also
              have broader scientific and technological impact by training students and by
              developing high precision scientific tools.

Materials in which the electrons
              interact strongly with each other exhibit a number of novel and interesting
              phenomena, including superconductivity at higher temperatures and a very large
              change in the electrical conductivity when exposed to a magnetic field. It is
              possible that some of these materials will prove to be of use to technology. 
              This individual investigator project will explore the universality and the
              diversity of phenomena seen in materials with strongly interacting electrons.
              Understanding these materials, and the phenomena they exhibit, has been a
              formidable challenge. Using an advanced spectroscopic technique called angle
              resolved photoemission spectroscopy, this project seeks to increase our
              understanding of the materials.  This tool makes it is possible to gain insight
              into microscopic processes occurring in these interesting materials. The
              technique has proven useful in increasing our understanding of high temperature
              superconductors. The project will also have broader impact by training students
              and by developing high precision scientific tools.

