Title       : Study of Galactic Structure and Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9624924

Award Number: 9624924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Rudolph rudolph@hmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvey Mudd College
	      301 E. 12th Street
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8121

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1207,1216,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                   9624924  Rudolph    The study of galactic
              structure and evolution is one of the most  fundamental in Astronomy.  The
              research to be carried will focus on  studying the structure and evolution of
              our own Milky Way by comparing  observations of two distinct parts of our
              Galaxy, the local solar  neighborhood, and the  outer Galaxy.  The solar
              neighborhood is the best studied region of the  Galaxy.   The  outer Galaxy is
              less well understood, but its  proximity  and  differences  in physical
              conditions (e.g., low  gas  density,  low  metallicity) make it an ideal place
              to study contrasts with  the  local  neighborhood.    The  areas of study be:
              1) searches for and studies of atomic  hydrogen  (HII)  regions  in the outer
              Galaxy; 2) a study of Galactic  abundances  and  how  they  vary  in  the 
              Galaxy; 3) studies  of  molecular  cloud  structure; and 4) studies of the
              stellar content of regions  of  active  star-formation.   A  Very  Large Array
              (VLA)  and  Australia  Telescope  Compact Array (ATCA) radio continuum survey
              of HII regions in the outer  Galaxy has begun, and this work will be continued
              by analyzing the data  to  determine  HII region properties.  These data can be
              compared  with  similar data taken in the inner Galaxy.  The survey will be
              carried out  to observe lower luminosity radio sources.    A study of outer
              Galaxy abundances (N,O,S) in HII regions measured from  the  Kuiper  Airborne
              Observatory.  The Infrared Satellite  Observatory  (ISO)  will  be used to
              observe additional lines of Ar and Ne  in  some  outer  Galaxy  HII regions,
              and to measure abundances in  the  furthest  known HII region at a distance of
              28 kpc from the center of the Galaxy.    A  third objective will involve new
              molecular-line observations of  two  star-forming  regions  in the outer Galaxy
              in order  to  determine  the  structure  of  the molecular clouds.  In
              particular, it is  planned  to  measure  the spectrum of clump masses (initial
              clump function, or  ICF)  in  t hese clouds in order to compare with the
              numerous measurements  of  the ICF parameter in local clouds.    The  final
              objective is to obtain JHK photometry of a number of  nearby  star-forming 
              clouds using a near-IR camera mounted  on  the  Claremont  Colleges l-m
              telescope.  With this telescope and camera, entire  clouds  could  be mapped
              (such as rho-Oph), thereby obtaining a complete census  of  the  embedded 
              cluster.  Models of the observed cluster  luminosity  function  will  allow  us
               to determine the  underlying  IMF.   Similar  cluster membership data for the
              outer Galaxy will be obtained, allowing  one  to  compare the IMF in two
              regions of very different  metallicity.  Also, comparison of the ICF and lMF in
              both the local neighborhood  and  in  the  outer  Galaxy  will  help  one
              understand  how  star-formation  proceeds from molecular cloud clumps to stars
              of various masses.    The educational component of this project will focus on
              course  development and modernization.  The Observational Astronomy course 
              offered at Harvey Mudd College has, in the past, neglected including  recent
              advances in non-optical astronomy.  New lecture material and  computer
              laboratories are being developed to introduce non-optical data  into the
              course.  The Advanced Astronomy course will be redesigned into  a series of
              topical half-semester courses (e.g., Star-formation and the  Interstellar
              Medium, Cosmology, Extragalactic Astronomy, Galactic  Structure, etc.) to
              introduce modern astronomical topics into the  curriculum and to increase
              student interest in advanced Astronomy.  The  educational component of this
              project will also continue K-12 outreach  work begun in the last year, through
              a partnership with two local  Claremont School District teachers.
