Title       : Electronic Properties and Growth of Novel InSb Based Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9624699

Award Number: 9624699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Santos msantos@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ryan E. Doezema  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Furneaux  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1775,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624699 Santos  This research project aims to advance the materials science of
              InSb/AlInSb heteroepitaxy, and to explore the properties of two-dimensional
              electron systems confined within InSb quantum wells.  The extreme properties of
              InSb--small energy gap, high intrinsic electron mobility, small electron
              effective mass, large g-factor, and non-parabolic conduction band--are expected
              to lead to novel magneto-optical and magnetotransport behavior of electrons in
              InSb quantum wells at low temperatures.  MBE growth of fully strained
              heterostructures on InSb substrates will be pursued and growth conditions
              optimized to achieve higher crystal quality than obtainable with GaAs
              substrates; growth conditions will also be studied to achieve high quality
              InSb/AlInSb heterostructures.  Far IR laser spectroscopy will be used to assess
              effects of non-parabolicity on electron confinement.  By combining results of
              magneto-optical and magneto-transport measurements, the conduction and valence
              band offsets in InSb/AlInSb heterojunctions will also be addressed.  The
              freedom to change quantum well width, barrier composition, and strain will be
              employed to study mechanisms of spin splitting.  Because of the low disorder
              anticipated in these materials combinations there is expected to be an unusual
              opportunity to explore the possibility of electron correlation effects in
              narrow-gap semiconductors. %%% The research will contribute basic materials
              science knowledge at a fundamental level of technological relevance to several
              aspects of advanced electronic, photonic and magnetic devices and integrated
              circuitry.  Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this
              research project is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the
              performance of advanced devices and circuits by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fund amentally and technologically
              significant area. ***
