Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Advances in Resampling and Data-Depth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9624940

Award Number: 9624940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kesar Singh kesar@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               DMS 9624940   Singh                               This research is on six
              subtopics in the area of resampling and  data-depth:  robustification of the
              bootstrap; second order  balanced confidence regions and bands based on
              resampling and  data depth; semiparamtric models and the bootstrap; resampling
              on  bioequivalence; inference spectrum; and descriptive statistics  and
              inferences based on data-depth.  These areas have been the  investigator's main
              focus of research in the past decade.   Efron's bootstrap in particular is the
              dominant subject  throughout the research.  The research may seem mathematical
              in  nature, however the potential impact on statistical methodology  has been
              the key factor in the selection of these research  problems.  Besides being of
              independent interest, the notion of  data-depth has an important application in
              bootstrap methodology.   The use of data-depth in multivariate
              descriptive-statistics is  being further explored in the research.    Bootstrap
              is a new technology in statistics, discovered by B.  Efron in 1979, which has
              made tremendous advances in the eighties  and the nineties.  This PI has been
              involved with these advances  since the early years of this discovery. 
              Bootstrap has had  impact in nearly every area of statistical sciences and this
               research is geared toward its further advancement.  One of the  ideas included
              in this research is the construction of a spectrum  of statistical conclusions
              using bootstrap when some of the  responses in a survey are missing.  One other
              thrust of this  research is towards pictorial and other types of summaries when
               data have many, many components.  The latter research is based on  what is
              known as data-depth, which is essentially a measure of  centrality of a datum
              with respect to the totality of the  data-cloud.  Other topics involve
              efficient computing when a  methodology is too computer intensive.
