Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Investigations of Light Scattering in Fullerenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9624102

Award Number: 9624102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Menendez jose.menendez@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                         w:\decs\decs96\num.doc  9624102 
              Menendez    This   project   comprises   an  experimental/theoretical   light 
              scattering  study of the dynamical and electronic  properties  of  fullerenes.
              Experiments on systems ranging from molecular  solids  to  isolated  molecules
              in the vapor phase, using both  resonance  and   off-resonance  incident 
              radiation,  will   elucidate   the  interplay between molecular vibrations and
              rotations, the effects  of solid-state packing and disorder, and the
              electron/vibrational  coupling. The experiments will be analyzed theoretically
              by means  of  first-principles  calculations and  powerful  time-correlator 
              techniques  for light scattering. Results from this project  will  contribute 
              to  the  understanding of  technologically  important  problems,  e.g. details
              of the dynamical Jahn-Teller  interaction  thought   to  be  responsible  for 
              superconductivity  in   doped  fullerenes, and will shed light on fundamental
              problems, such  as  vibrational localization induced by defects or
              anharmonicity.  %%%  This  project comprises an experimental/theoretical study
              of  the  properties  of fullerenes, a new class of carbon-based materials. 
              Fullerenes are of great scientific and technological interest due  to  their 
              unusual  properties and the possibility  of  important  applications,  ranging
              from superconductivity to the  fabrication  of diamond films. Experiments
              involving scattering of laser light  will  be  performed on systems ranging
              from molecular to isolated  molecules in the vapor phase, in order to elucidate
              the interplay  between molecular vibrations and rotations, the effects of
              solid-  state  packing  and  disorder, and the interactions  between  the 
              electrons  and  vibrations. The experiments will  be  interpreted 
              theoretically  by  means  of powerful  computer  techniques.  The  results 
              will  contribute  to  understanding  of  technologically  important  problems 
              such  as the quantum  mechanical  mechanisms   responsible  for
              superconductivity in fullerenes, and  will  also  shed   light   on  
              fundamental  problems  such  as   vibrational  localization.  ***
