Title       : Investigations of Unconventional Superconducting and Magnetic Order-Parameters
               in Heavy Electron Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9624468

Award Number: 9624468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bellave S. Shivaram bss2d@Virginia.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624468  Shivaram    The  superconducting  and  magnetic  properties  of  a 
              new  class  of  intermetallic  compounds formed from rare earth and actinide 
              elements  will be investigated. In these materials, the low temperature
              behavior  is  dominated by the interactions between the electrons. A  number 
              of  advanced   instrumentation  and  techniques   such   as   ultrasonics, 
              superconducting  quantum  interference devices  as  well  as  scanning 
              magnetometry,   and   transport  measurements  will   be   used.   The 
              measurements will be performed on high quality single crystals as well  as  on 
              thin  film samples. Extreme physical conditions such  as  high  uniaxial 
              pressures,  high magnetic fields and very  low  temperatures  will  be  chosen 
              as  appropriate to elucidate the  unique  nature  of  superconductivity and
              magnetism in these materials. For this purpose a  special low temperature
              apparatus where uniaxial pressure up to  8,000  atmosphere and magnetic fields
              close to a million times stronger  than  the  earth's  magnetic filed, will be
              utilized. The  results  obtained  will  be  relevant to many areas in materials
              science  including  high  temperature  superconductivity, magnetic storage,
              high field  magnetic  materials etc.  %%%  The  superconducting and magnetic
              phases of rare  earth  and  actinide  based intermetallic heavy fermion
              compounds will be investigated  with  ultrasonics, force as well as SQUID
              magnetometry (both macroscopic and  microscopic)  and transport measurements.
              These measurements  will  be  performed  on  high quality single crystals as
              well as  on  thin  film  samples.   A  combination  of  experiments  involving 
              high   uniaxial  pressures,  high  magnetic fields and ultra-low temperatures 
              will  be  chosen  as  appropriate  to  elucidate the novel  superconducting 
              and  magnetic  phenomena  in these materials. These phenomena  include  (i) 
              coexistence  of superconductivity and magnetism, (ii) multiple  order 
              parameters in the superconducting state, (i ii) magnetic filed vortices  with
              half a quantum of circulation, (iv) magnetism with non-Neel types  of  order, 
              and (v) novel magnetic and transport effects  due  to  the  presence of
              interfaces. The measurements will utilize a special ultra  low   temperature 
              apparatus  where  the  magnitude  and  the   mutual  orientations  of
              externally applied perturbations, uniaxial  pressures  upto  8 kbar and
              magnetic fields upto 16 tesla, can be controlled  in  situ.  ***
