Title       : CAREER: Nucleation and Assembly of Epitaxial Nanostructures on Silicon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9624456

Award Number: 9624456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Swenson dswenson@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohan Krishnamurthy  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1045,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624456  Krishnamurthy    This CAREER research project addresses fundamental
              issues in the control of nucleation and  ordering processes, and the use of
              morphological transitions during strained layer  epitaxial growth to create
              quantum-nanostructures.  A novel scheme for obtaining spatially  periodic Ge
              nanostructures on Si, by strain-induced preferential nucleation is propo  sed.
              Periodic strain fields provided by surface ripples in conjunction with coherent
               islanding are suggested for producing a self-assembled array of
              nanostructures.  The  experiments will be guided by a quantitative model
              describing how preferential nucleation  depends on strain and growth kinetics. 
              Structures will be grown by molecular beam epitax  y and characterized by
              electron microscopy and scanning probe microscopy.  %%%  Along with the basic
              research, this project incorporates an activity for structuring an  Electronic
              Materials Processing and Design course sequence for undergraduate seniors 
              involving the formation of interdisciplinary teams of students working on group
              projects of  current research or industrial relevance. Student teams will be
              advised by faculty,  a graduate student and an industrial collaborator. This
              offers a team-approach to research  problem-solving, enhances the understanding
              of the interdisciplinary nature of electronic  materials research, and offers
              research leadership training to students.  A laboratory-  intensive course
              sequence emphasizing atomic scale materials processing and chara  cterization
              will also be introduced.  The proposed basic investigations of nanostructures 
              are expected to contribute fundamental materials science knowledge of
              technological  relevance to advanced microelectronic devices and circuits.  The
              knowledge and  understanding gained from this research project is expected to
              contribute in a general way  to im  pro  vin  g  the  per  for  man  ce  of 
              adv  anc  ed  dev  ice  s  and  cir  cui  ts  use  d  in  com  put  ing  ,  inf
               orm  ati  on  pro  ces  sin   g,  and  tel  eco  mmu  nic  ati  ons  by  pro 
              vid  ing  a  fun  dam  ent  al  und  ers  tan  din  g  and  a  bas  is  for 
              des  ign  ing  and  pro  duc  ing  imp  rov  ed  mat  eri  als  wit  h  new 
              pro  per  tie  s  and  fun  cti  ona  lit  y.  ***  _
