Title       : CAREER: Improving the Design of Interactive Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9624846

Award Number: 9624846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Redmiles redmiles@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              For many years, the poor design of interactive systems has  been attributed to
              insufficient communication between  developers and end users. Usability
              practices from the field  of human-computer interaction are not currently
              integrated  into the theory and practice of software engineering. This 
              research project pursues three objectives:  1) developing a  model of software
              development as a process of on-going  communication; 2) providing support for
              this model through  active mechanisms in software tools; and 3) improving the 
              accessibility and acceptance of usability methods by  software practitioners. 
              In general, the objectives reflect  a process and philosophy of human-centered
              software  development.  Active support is being investigated through a
              mechanism  called expectation agents. Expectation agents are software 
              mechanisms that monitor the usage of prototype systems and  detect mismatches
              between actual usage and developers'  design assumptions or expectations.  Such
              breakdowns are  opportunities for communication which make explicit the 
              expectations of both developers and end users.  Expectation  agents serve as a
              test vehicle for supporting on-going  communication in software development,
              for adapting  usability practices to software practice, and for  reinforcing
              developers' understanding of human-computer  interaction.  This research
              proceeds along three dimensions: theoretical,  technical, and empirical. The
              research is developing a model  of ongoing communication in software
              development, refining  models of the software processes involved in developing 
              interactive systems, and improving understanding of  usability methods for
              workplace settings.  In the technical  dimension, the research provides new
              algorithms and  representations for capturing and communicating design  intent
              and active mechanisms such as expectation agents to  operate over design
              intent. These mechanisms involve both  formal and semi-formal representations.
              The empirical  component includes a critical analysi s of the approach as a 
              means of gathering usability information and supporting  communication in
              systems development.  This CAREER research project also addresses the software 
              engineering curriculum. First, the work seeks to improve the  curricula for
              educating software engineers in the methods of  human-computer interaction. 
              Second, adoption of systematic  practice is aided by tools and methods.  The
              research  project seeks to meet this need by adapting and, where  possible,
              automating usability methods for software  engineering.  ***
