Title       : Innovations in Giant Planet Evolution Theoretical Models and Undergraduate
               Science Literacy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9624878

Award Number: 9624878
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Marley mmarley@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1206,1214,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624878  Marley    New interior, atmosphere, and evolution models of Saturn,
              Uranus, and Neptune will be constructed.  This will be done in order to address
              several important, unanswered questions about these planets.  Atmospheric
              models and emergent spectra for extrasolar giant planets will also be computed.
              An innovative, Monte Carlo based interior modeling technique will be employed
              to evaluate the range of Uranus and Neptune models of their interiors that have
              not been identified by conventional approaches.  These models will then be used
              to constrain theoretical models of the evolution of these planets.  These
              models account for the role of double diffusive convection on internal energy
              transport and planetary evolution. In collaboration with Allen Grossman of
              Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, models of Saturn's evolution, which
              include helium immiscibility and rainout will be constructed.  The modeling of
              the evolution of all three planets requires new atmospheric models which will
              serve as boundary conditions.  Thus, new atmospheric models for the current and
              past atmospheres of these planets will be constructed, relying upon the most
              recent molecular absorption line databases.  These new calculations will
              replace twenty year old, but widely used, atmospheric models.  The new
              evolutionary model calculations, resulting from this work, will make it
              possible to address fundamental gaps in our understanding of these planets. 
              Specifically, why is the luminosity of Saturn so much greater than expected? 
              The separation of hydrogen from helium in its interior is the preferred
              explanation, but this hypothesis has not yet been rigorously modeled. 
              Secondly, why are the heat flows of Uranus and Neptune so much smaller than
              expected?  The new models will enable one to constrain the role of composition
              gradients in their interiors.  Such composition gradients have been offered as
              an explanation for their low heatflows.  The results of the  modeling will also
              provide a database of thermal emissi on spectra of evolving giant planets. 
              Such spectra can be compared with observations of the spectra of extrasolar
              giant planets, when they are found, to constrain their age, atmospheric
              structure, and composition.      Scientific literacy will be improved among New
              Mexico State University undergraduates.  The Principal Investigator will
              design, develop, and deliver a new upper division undergraduate course that
              stresses important scientific themes, rather than a single discipline (such as
              Astronomy). This course will stress student communication and interaction
              skills and is expected to provide students with a broader perspective of the
              scientific enterprise and its relation to current scientific and technological
              concerns. The Principal Investigator will also experiment, in this and other
              undergraduate courses, with innovative lecture approaches.  Traditional
              lectures, even when liberally supplemented by demonstrations, are certainly not
              the best way to deliver an introduction to science for non-majors.  Alternative
              lecture-delivery techniques will be tested and evaluated. Undergraduate
              students will participate in the research.  New Mexico State University's
              (NMSU's) enrollment is 37% minority, yet less than 10% of the students enrolled
              in the physical sciences are minority students. Research opportunities,
              mentoring, and contact with graduate students will be provided for the
              undergraduate students. These activities will make it possible to provide a
              supportive environment to encourage minority students to pursue  degrees in the
              physical sciences at NMSU.    The Astronomy Department NMSU is an emerging,
              vital department. Within the past few years, the department has added three
              tenure track faculty, the  new Apache Point 3.5-meter telescope has been
              completed, there is growth in the Astronomy Department's solid graduate
              applicant pool, and there is a continuing dedication to undergraduate
              education.
