Title       : The Quantum Physics of Nanostructure Single-Electron Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9624603

Award Number: 9624603
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark T. Tuominen tuominen@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624603  Tuominen    This  experimental research project is designed to  help 
              advance the  science  and  technology  of  nanostructure  single-electron
              devices.  The  first  research objective of  this  project  is  to utilize
              single-electron  device  techniques to explore and understand several key
              issues in  mesoscopic superconductivity:  even-odd  electron  number  physics,
              the physics of macroscopic quantum variables, and  coherent charge transport
              through superconducting-normal  metal interfaces. The second objective  is to  
              investigate  --  and  precisely  control  --   the   quantum interaction 
              `etween   single-electron   devices    and    their  electromagnetic
              environment by utilizing the powerful  techniques of cavity quantum
              electrodynamics. The 60  nanometer-scale devices used   in  this  work  will 
              be  fabricated  using  electron-beam lithography, thin-film  metallization, and
              microelectronics  clean room  techniques.  An ultrahigh vacuum thin-film
              deposition system will  be  constructed  to  provide a  major  advancement  in 
              the  nanostructure device fabrication technology. Measurements  will be
              performed  at cryogenic temperatures (10 mK to 10 K)  using  lownoise 
              electronic  transport  measurement  instrumentation.   The overall  goal  of 
              these research  activities is  to  establish  a strong  scientific  foundation
              for single-electron device physics, and help it  progress toward what may
              become the ultimate level in  electronics technology.  %%%  The objective of
              this experimental research project is to  advance the  science  and  technology
              of single-electron  devices.  These recently  developed  devices  are nanometer
               scale  structures  in which  electrical  charge can be  controlled
              electron-by-electron. In  the  first  part of  this project, single-electron 
              techniques will  be used to  explore superconductivity in ultrasmall devices.
              In  another  part, the interaction between single-electron devices and  their 
              electromagnetic environment will be investigated  and  c ontrolled  by
              utilizing a powerful, new technique called  cavity quantum  electrodynamics.
              The nanostructure devices  used in  this work  will  be fabricated using
              electron-beam  lithography,  thinfilm  metallization, and microelectronics 
              clean room  techniques. Collectively, these research  activities will help
              single-electron device physics progress  toward what may become the ultimate
              level in electronics  technology.  ***
