Title       : CAREER: Nonlinear Propagation of Optical Vortex Solitons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9624921

Award Number: 9624921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chiu-Tai Law lawc@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624921  Law  The soaring increase in network traffic has overwhelmed the
              transmission  capacity of current communications systems that use electronic
              switches and  copper wires. The use of optical fibers, switches and modulators,
               components of all-optical networks, could equalize not only this disparity 
              but also provide a gigantic increase in the speed of the information 
              superhighway. This proposal describes novel approaches to build these  optical
              components. All-optical switching and modulation enable one light  beam to
              control the orientation as well as intensity of another light beam,  and are
              hundreds of times faster than electronic processes. What is more, a  light beam
              can guide another light beam, which follows the guiding beam's  "footprints"-a
              process called light-induced waveguiding. These waveguides  are produced by
              special nonlinear waves called optical vortex solitons.  These solitons are
              peculiar vortex-like pulses that retain their shape and  height after traveling
              long distances. Vortex solitons form in  selfdefocusing Kerr nonlinear media
              when their tendency to spread  (diffraction) is counterbalanced by their
              ability to change the refractive  index of the media (Kerr nonlinearity).
              Recent experiment has demonstrated  the light guiding capability of vortex
              soliton in this kind of medium.  Optical transistor effect is another recent
              experimental result that  reveals the potential application of vortex solitons
              in optical switching  and modulation. Manipulating the size of a vortex
              soliton, another light  beam (gate signal) can control the guiding efficiency
              and sensitivity of  light-induced waveguide. As a result, a guided beam is
              modulated as well as  amplified by the gate and guiding beams. The proposed
              study will establish  the theoretical basis for light-induced waveguides,
              modulators and switches  as well as simulate their actions computationally.
              Particularly, the  propagation dynamics of vortex solitons in a CW laser beam
              as well as in a  laser pulse will be investiga ted. This study will concentrate
              on the  interactions among vortex solitons themselves as well as vortex
              solitons  with other light pulses. These interactions are crucial to practical 
              applications, such as optical interconnections. Vortex solitons not only  have
              tremendous application potential, but also constitute a new frontier  for the
              exploration of vortex physics. This may lead to discovery of novel  phenomena
              that will find applications in other areas. The outcomes of this  project will
              result in a general simulation package for designing nonlinear  devices.
              Simulation results will be verified by various numerical methods  as well as
              experimental data provided by co-works at Worcester Polytechnic  Institute,
              Naval Research Laboratory and Wright Laboratory.    A well-balanced education
              for engineering students should consist of  computational and experimental
              training. One of the proposed educational  activities involves the use of
              computer as a tool for learning and  communication in the undergraduate
              Electromagnetics class. Computer can  enlighten students on those abstract
              theories by presenting results on  visual display. As a communication tool,
              computer becomes another channel  for a two-way discussion between an
              instructor and students. This will be  achieved by setting up an electronic
              bulletin board and a home page for the  class. The role of computer in graduate
              research is even more sign)ficant.  Graduate training will include extensive
              exposure to different numerical  techniques and development of analytic sense.
              Graduate student, as a  researcher, should be capable of searching for
              information and  disseminating research results timely. Again graduate students
              will receive  in-depth training on using computers for communication.    For
              experimental training, a graduate student exchange program will be set  up with
              Worcester Polytechnic Institute which has a nonlinear optics  laboratory with
              state-of-the-art equipment. At UWM, an optics laboratory  will be set up for
              three opti cs courses-optical communication, laser and  nonlinear optics-with
              the help of graduate students who participate in the  exchange program. This
              laboratory will also be used to verify numerical  results for the research
              project. Experiments for the three courses will  focus on practical issues and
              design techniques as well as current research  topics. The list of experiments
              will be updated to keep abreast with  technology.    The proposed optics
              laboratory will be a magnet for attracting students to  involve in optical
              research. The intent of the experiments in the three  optics courses is to
              introduce research activities to undergraduate  students. Computational
              training is another component in the proposed  research and education plans.
              Computer will be used heavily as  communication tool and learning aid for both
              education and research.  ***
