Title       : CAREER: Native Oxides on the III-V Nitrides and Chemical Cleaning of the
               Semiconductor Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2000     
File        : a9624995

Award Number: 9624995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406198             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne E. Mohney mohney@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1045,1775,9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624995  Mohney    This CAREER research project addresses the formation and
              the chemical etching of native  oxides on III-V nitride surfaces.  The chemical
              and structural nature of intentionally and  unintentionally formed oxides on
              the semiconductor surfaces will be studied, and chemical  processing steps for
              the preparation of semiconductor surfaces for further devic  e processing will
              be developed.  Complementary techniques including spectroscopic  ellipsometry,
              Auger electron spectroscopy, x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and 
              conventional and high resolution transmission electron microscopy will be
              employed. The  nature of the oxide, which is currently unknown, will strongly
              influence which chemical  etchants w  ill be most effective for removing it.
              Appropriate chemical treatments for removing the  oxide and producing surfaces
              with the least residual oxygen and carbon contamination will  be developed,
              given that many processing steps, such as the formation of ohmic contacts and 
              Schottky barriers, are most conveniently accomplished when a brief exposure to 
              air is allowed  between chemical  preparation and  further processing. 
              Comparison of the  effectiveness of  the chemical  surface preparation 
              procedures will be  accomplished  through the  fabrication and 
              characterization of  non-reactive ohmic  contacts and/or  Schottky barriers  to
              GaN.  %%%  Along with the basic research activity, this project incorporates
              material on surface  preparation of semiconductors into an undergraduate
              laboratory course on electronic and  photonic materials. Other educational
              initiatives to be undertaken include updating a  senior-level laboratory course
              on metals science and engineering, increasing the use of c  omputer modeling
              and visualization in the undergraduate curriculum, and increasing 
              participation of undergraduates in research. The proposed basic investigations
              are expected  to contribute fundamental materials science knowledge of
              technological relevance to  advanced microelectronic devices  and circuits. 
              The knowledge and understanding gained fro  m this research project is expected
              to contribute  in a general way to improving the performance of  advanced
              devices and circuits used in computing,  information processing, and
              telecommunications by  providing a fundamental understanding and a basis  for
              designing and producing improved materials and  processes.  ***  _
