Title       : DNA Sequencing by Aerosol Laser Ionization Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1998  
File        : a9624616

Award Number: 9624616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kermit K. Murray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9178,9184,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, seeks to develop  mass spectrometry
              (MS) as a DNA sequencing tool using a  combination of aerosol liquid sample
              introduction and matrix-  assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)
              time-of-flight MS.   During the tenure of this four-year continuing grant,
              Professor  Murray and his students at Emory University will exploit the 
              advantages of this approach including no need for radioisotopes,  fluorescence
              or chromophore tagging of DNA, or sample  preparation.  This makes it easy to
              automate and single charged  fragments can be rapidly separated using the
              time-of-flight MS.   Problems inherent in aerosol MALDI to be obviated by the
              proposed  techniques include analyte fragmentation, poor limits of  detection
              and inadequate mass resolution.  Professor Murray's  educational plan involves
              revamping the undergraduate  instrumental analysis course at Emory University. 
              Introduction  of a MALDI MS into this course is planned.  On a broader scale 
              the entire undergraduate curriculum in chemistry at Emory  University is
              undergoing revision and reorganization due to the  rapid growth in faculty and
              in student enrollment.  Cross  disciplinary courses in biochemistry and
              enhanced opportunities  to have undergraduates engaged in research are planned.
                Professor Murray has already started a graduate scientific  instrumentation
              course that will be expanded to involve more  active use of the World Wide Web
              resources in this course.  He is  also in charge of the seminar program and the
              analytical  cumulative exam program at Emory University and these vehicles 
              will be used to promote research interest among the graduate  students.    The
              field of DNA sequencing is especially active in many areas of  science for a
              host of reasons.  Professor Murray's goal to  develop a better technique for
              DNA sequencing via this CAREER  research project will expose students at Emory
              University to a  research frontier that is moving quickly and that has the 
              potential for enormous impact.  The integration of this science  between the
              normal educational and research venues is exciting  and the progress of this
              work will be interesting to follow.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
