Title       : Galactic History- Old Stellar Populations in Edge-on Disk Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9624542

Award Number: 9624542
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $532369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather Morrison heather@vegemite.astr.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624542  Morrison    The ability to study old stellar populations in galaxies,
              the  results of which may be used to trace the formation and evolution  of
              galaxies, has benefited in several ways from the advent of  large-format
              Charge-Coupled-Devices (CCDs) and increased  computing power.  A major advance
              has been the development of  techniques of using deep CCD imaging of galaxies,
              which allows  one to study the old stellar populations of nearby galaxies in 
              unprecedented detail. The observations to be carried out will  reach more than
              2 magnitudes fainter than previous observations.    The results of the research
              will serve to delineate the older  stellar populations of a representative
              sample of nearby disk  galaxies, using  recently developed techniques.  A
              systematic  investigation of the properties of 10 nearby edge-on disk  galaxies
              with Hubble types ranging from Sc though Sa to S0 will  be carried out.  Of
              particular interest in this work are the  properties of thick disks and stellar
              halos of these galaxies,  when they exist.  The study of the thick disks
              observed in the  sample will able one to test the currently popular models of 
              thick disk galaxy formation by satellite accretion. If the models  predict
              successfully the thick disk properties of this sample,  there is the
              possibility of using thick disks as tracers of the  accretion history of
              galaxies.  The characterization of thick  disks and halos in this sample will
              allow us to test for the  first time whether the Milky Way's old stellar
              populations are  typical of nearby disk galaxies.    Most of the observations
              will be taken on Case Western Reserve  University's (CWRU) Burrell Schmidt
              telescope at Kitt Peak Natal  Observatory (KPNO), to which CWRU has special
              access.  An  improved CCD system for the Schmidt, with a factor of 5 
              improvement in quantum efficiency, will be purchased.  This  upgrade of the CCD
              system will enable surface photometry  observations in the blue region of the
              spectrum, and thus provide  color (and hence a ge and metallicity) information
              on the thick  disk and halo stellar populations.    Teaching development
              activities will include involvement of  undergraduate students in research and
              in course development of  the "Introduction to Astronomy for Majors" course. 
              This will  closely tie what is taught to current research, using a thematic 
              approach.  Two major areas of current astronomical research, how  the solar
              system was formed and the determination of the value of  cosmic distance scale
              problem, will be used as recurring themes  in the two-semester course. Other
              teaching-related activities  will include several innovative ways of improving
              teaching,  organized through CWRU's new teaching center (including active 
              learning techniques and a strong use of the World Wide Web).  A  program to
              allow undergraduates to accompany the PI on observing  trips to KPNO will be
              carried out.  ***
