Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  1998     
File        : a9624762

Award Number: 9624762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Sokol pes4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624762  Sokol    Neutron  scattering  studies  of  quantum  systems  will  be 
              carried out in this research project.  The behavior  of  the  condensed  phases
               of quantum liquids and  solids,  such  as  helium   and   hydrogen,  are 
              dominated  by   quantum   and  statistical  effects which are responsible for 
              many  unique  properties   such   as   superfluidity.    More    recently, 
              confinement  of  these systems in restricted geometries  has  shown  that  the 
              properties can be substantially  different  from  the  bulk.   Elastic and
              inelastic neutron  scattering  will be used to probe the microscopic structure
              and dynamics  of  these  phases.   This  work will  focus  on  the  helium 
              isotopes  (3He  and 4He), isotopic mixtures  (3He-4He),  and  hydrogen  (H2) 
              where the properties of the condensed  phase  are dominated by quantum effects.
               Elastic and total neutron  scattering  measurements  will provide  information
               on  the  spatial   correlation's.    Inelastic   neutron   scattering 
              measurements  will  be  used  to  study  diffusive   motion,  collective 
              excitations,  and the one-body  density  matrix.  (momentum  distribution). 
              Measurements will be carried  out  in  both bulk systems and for liquids and
              solids in confined  geometries such as porous Vycor glass, aerogels and
              solgels,  and zeolites.  %%%  Neutron  scattering  studies  of  quantum 
              systems  will  be  carried  out in this research project.  Quantum  solids  and
               liquids, such as helium and hydrogen to be studied,  provide  a  useful  model
               system for studying many  of  the  quantum  effects  that  are  found  in
              metals,  superconductors,  and  magnetic  materials.  However, they do not
              suffer  the  same  materials preparation problems so that the central  physical
               principles are more easily extracted. Elastic and  inelastic  neutron 
              scattering  will be used to probe  the  microscopic  structure  and  dynamics
              of these solid and  liquid  phases.  These  measurements will provide
              information on  the  static  and   dy namic  interaction  of  helium  atoms 
              and  hydrogen  molecules in the condensed phases.  This work will focus  on 
              the  helium isotopes (3He and 4He), isotopic mixtures  (3He-  4He),  and 
              hydrogen  (H2) in both the bulk  phases  and  in  confined geometries.  ***
