Title       : Probing Mesoscopic Phenomena in Novel Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9624536

Award Number: 9624536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lydia L. Sohn sohn@oberon.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                              w:\decs\decs96\career\0formcd.doc  9624536  Sohn
                 The proposed work involves probing magnetic and organic materials  ol  the 
              mesoscopic  length  scale for new,  unpredicted  quantum  phenomena.  Two 
              projects  dealing with mesoscopic  phenomena  in  magnetic  materials  are
              proposed. First, Andreev  reflection  in  ferromagnet-superconductor (FS)
              junctions will  be  investigated.  It  has  been  predicted that because spin
              is  not  conserved  in  Andreev  reflection and because ferromagnets do  not 
              have  spin-  rotation symmetry, there will be incomplete Andreev reflection at 
              the FS interface. As such, this will influence the conductance of  clean FS
              point contacts and lead to quanturn-interference effects  in  FS junctions.
              Second, arrays of interacting. ferromagnet dots  of  size  and  lattice 
              constant ~20nm  will  be  fabricated  The  interplay   between  magnetic 
              quantum  tunneling   and   quantum  fluctuations will be investigated in these
              arrays, as will  novel  collective   behavior   and   controlled-disorder  
              effects.   An  additional project, investigating chlorophyll, a
              photon-activated  electron-transfer  system, as a biomolecular  single 
              electronics  device  will be explored. It should be emphasized, however,  that 
              this latter project is exploratory.    %%%    The  work  proposed aims to probe
              novel materials, in  particular  magnetic  and  organic materials, on the
              mesoscopic length  scale  for  new, unpredicted quantum phenomena. Previously,
              magnetic and  organic  materials could not be fully explored for mesoscopic  or
               quantum  phenomena because their natural length scales, sub-fifty  nanometer, 
              could  not be easily accessed. However,  advances  in  nanofabrication
              technology, including scanning probe lithography,  have  recently allowed
              access to such small length  scales,  thus  providing  for the very first time
              the opportunity to investigate  these   novel  systems  on  the  mesoscopic 
              length  scales.   An  educational  program,  i n the form of an  undergraduate 
              advanced  laboratory   course   on  nanofabrication  technology,   research 
              seminars,  and  laboratory internships,  will  be  developed  and  interwoven
              with this proposed work. Such a program will serve  to  introduce students to
              state-of-the-art technology, thus preparing  them for future opportunities;
              more importantly, however, it will  serve  to develop students' analytical
              skills and self-confidence  which go well beyond the classroom.  ***
