Title       : Optical, Structural, and Dynamic Properties of Viscous Liquids, Glasses, and
               Crystalline Materials Under Extremes of Pressure and Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2001      
File        : a9624833

Award Number: 9624833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Oliver woliver@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                          w:\awards\awards96\career\0formca.doc  9624833 
              Oliver    An  academic  research  program aimed  at  exploring  fundamental 
              properties  of  important condensed matter  systems  in  new  and  interesting 
               thermodynamic  regimes  will   be   developed   and  integrated into the
              educational experiences of both graduate  and  undergraduate students at the
              University.  Fundamental studies of  the equations of state, optical
              properties, fragilities, and both  fast  and  slow  relaxation processes of 
              viscous  liquid  glass-  forming   systems;  and  the  optical,  mechanical, 
              and  dynamic  properties  of glassy, crystalline, and polymeric materials  will
               be  conducted using both high-pressure and powerful  optical  and  light
              scattering techniques.  Students in this program will  have  an  opportunity to
              conduct high-pressure viscosity experiments by  visiting  the Exxon Research
              and Engineering Laboratory under  an  existing  collaboration.  Integrally 
              related  to  this  research  program  will  be  the  development  of  a  unique
               upper   level  undergraduate  laboratory for the Growth and Characterization 
              of  Optical Materials (which is being developed in part under NSF-ILI  award
              number: DUE 9452409).  %%%  This program will have two integrally related
              components: (i) the  development  of an academic research program aimed  at 
              exploring  fundamental properties of liquids and solids under extremely high 
              pressure,  and  (ii)  the development of  a  unique  upper  level 
              undergraduate  laboratory for the Growth and Characterization  of  Optical 
              Materials. A common theme to both components is the  use  of  modern  laser 
              and  optical techniques. The  first  component  focuses  on  fundamental
              studies of viscous  liquids  and  melted  polymers  and the ways in which they
              solidify at low  temperature  or  high  pressure  into either a crystalline 
              material  with  an  ordered  arrangement of molecules or a glassy material
              where  the  arrangement   is   random.  The  s econd   component   will   give 
              undergraduate   science  and  engineering   students   "hands-on"  experiences,
               using  modern equipment, with  several  aspects  of  materials  research. 
              This  laboratory  course  will   focus   on  important  semiconducting  and
              optical materials  as  educational  vehicles   for   developing  skills  in 
              growing  materials   and  determining  their physical, electrical, and optical 
              properties.  Undergraduates will be involved in both components  and  graduate 
              students   will   have  opportunities  to  conduct  high-pressure  viscosity 
              measurements  at the Exxon  Research  and  Engineering  Laboratory under an
              existing collaboration.  ***
