Title       : CAREER: Plasma Chemical Vapor Deposition of Amorphous Silicon Thin Films near
               Room Temperature Using Inert Ion Enhanced Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9624612

Award Number: 9624612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory N. Parsons parsons@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Parsons - 9624612    Large area electronic systems, including active
              matrix liquid crystal displays, image sensors, and photovoltaic cells utilize
              active semiconducting layers that must currently be formed at temperatures
              exceeding 300(C.  Substrates which make up the device platform are limited,
              therefore, to materials such as fused silica, glass, or metals which are stable
              at these temperatures and can withstand temperature cycling.  New chemical
              processes that will allow for high quality semiconducting layers to be formed
              at lower temperatures will lead to new options for device platform materials,
              leading to a new generation of light weight and flexible large area electronic
              devices.  When conventional methods to form amorphous silicon thin films are
              attempted at very low temperature, a porous structure commonly results, leading
              to significant postdeposition oxidation and a high charge trap state density
              which limits its use as an active semiconductor.  Novel approaches for film
              synthesis have been identified that result in dense, non-porous materials near
              room temperature, and some of these materials show a reduction in charge trap
              density after 'activation' by a low temperature (150(C) anneal.  In addition,
              preliminary results indicate that an ion-enhanced hydrogen desorption process
              in plasma activated chemical vapor deposition, which has previously not been
              documented, may be critical for achieving high film density.  The objectives of
              this study include the description and analysis of these plasma activated
              deposition processes.  The results will lead to new low temperature
              copabilities in silicon thin film materials and devised, and extend
              understanding of  low temperature surface chemistry in plasma activated
              materials synthesis and plasma/surface interactions.      Undergraduate and
              graduate education in the area of electronic materials will be advanced by
              projects in: 1) the development of an upper level course in electronic
              materials; 2) a new electronic materials option  in the undergraduate chemical
              engineering curriculum; and 3) an emphasis on cooperative learning and learning
              styles in the classroom.  These will offer students and opportunity to broaden
              their education scope, and help prepare them for employment or graduate studies
              in an area where there is a growing need for engineers.
