Title       : Career: Si-Based Alloys an Heterostructures for Improved Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9624160

Award Number: 9624160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624160  Berger  This research project will examine and develop the Group IV
              alloy system (Si, Ge, C and Sn) studying material properties, fabrication
              techniques and electronic and photonic devices unique to the Si1-x-y-zGexCySnz 
              system.  Special attention will be focused on Si1-x-yGexCx alloys due to their
              inherent lattice matching ability to   Si substrates, but not be limited to
              these alloys.  Vegard's law predicts that an 8.2 to 1 ratio of Ge to C will be
              lattice matched to Si substrates.    Among the benefits gained would be
              development of high performance Si-compatible heterostructure electronics as
              well as Si-based alloys and heterostructures with enhanced optical properties. 
                The project commences with development of material issues related to these
              alloys by probing their optical, electronic and structural properties. 
              Concurrently, the project will develop processing techniques such as etching
              and metalization, which could be unique to this material system.    Optimized
              fabrication techniques will be applied to manufacture electronic and
              optoelectronic devices and circuits.  High performance electronic devices such
              as heterojunction bipolar transistors (HBT) and modulation-doped field effect
              transistors (MODFET) would be ideally suited to the bandgap engineering
              possible with development of lattice matched heterstructure on Si substrates. 
              Devices with enhanced photonic properties such as optical detectors and
              emitters will also be a primary focus.    In addition to the research plan
              outlined above, and educational plan will involve four main thrusts.  These
              four goals will be:    1.   to attract women, under-represented minorities and
              persons with disabilities to get     involved in research at the undergraduate
              level in order to promote future teachers  from these groups;     2. to
              strengthen the undergraduate curriculum on semiconductor materials and  devices
              by building lab demonstrations and competitive lab resources for the 
              undergraduate teaching lab;    3. to develop a new M aster's degree in
              Electrical Engineering on Interconnect  Technology;    4. to build a support
              structure for the retention engineering majors.  ***
