Title       : Extended Metal-Metal Interactions: d8 Stabilized Multiply Bonded Dimers and
               Oligomeric Pt-Bipyridine Springs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1999  
File        : a9624281

Award Number: 9624281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent J. Catalano vjc@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9161,9178,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Vincent Catalano, Department of Chemistry, University of Nevada,   Reno, is
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic   Program of the
              Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career   Development Award  for
              studies of extended metal-metal interactions.   Multi-metallic complexes will
              be prepared by bridging multiply bonded   metal-metal dimers to late transition
              metal complexes using bidentate or   multidentate ligands.  The reactivity of
              these systems with small   molecules such as carbon dioxide will be explored. 
              Also, helical shaped   platinum bipyridine complexes will be prepared by
              covalently linking   multiple bipyridines through alkene linkages.  These
              complexes have the   potential to act as vapo-, baro-, or solvato-chromic
              sensors. The   educational plan is aimed at increasing science literacy at all
              levels of   education through simple programs that can be implemented based on
              a   `think globally-act locally` approach, which includes tying chemical  
              concepts to topical issues, integration of teaching with research, and   public
              outreach through chemistry club and science fair activities.  Synthetic systems
              will be designed in which metal atoms can interact with   one another in
              extended linear networks.  These systems are expected to   be unique in their
              reactivity and in their physical properties due to the   extended metal-metal
              interactions.  They are of fundamental interest from   the standpoint of
              understanding metal-metal bonding and through-space   interactions, and they
              may have applications as sensors and in small   molecule activation.  The
              educational plan focuses on modifications of   traditional chemistry courses to
              include topical issues and to integrate   teaching with research.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
