Title       : Fermi-Liquid and Nonfermi-Liquid Properties in Weakly Hybridized 4f
               Intermetallic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9624778

Award Number: 9624778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254664             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward P. Beyermann Ward.Beyermann@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex Lacerda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul C. Canfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624778  Beyermann    This  project  is  an  experimental investigation  of 
              predictions  of  theories   based   on   an  antiferromagneticaly   coupled  
              spin-spin  interaction between the electrons. The project is divided  into 
              three  parts. The first part deals with the low-temperature thermodynamic and 
              transport  properties in prasedymium systems where the lowest  crystal 
              electric-field   level  of  the  localized  4f  electrons   has   only 
              quadrupolar,  rather than magnetic, internal degrees of  freedom.  The 
              evolution   of   the  correlated-electron  ground  state   in   weakly 
              hybridizing  prasedymium intermetallic compounds  is  studied  in  the  second 
              part.  The  last part seeks to determine how the  renormalized  ground  state 
              at low temperatures changes under the influence  of  an  applied  magnetic 
              field large enough to suppress the  magnetic  Kondo  interaction.  This  part 
              of the research will  be  conducted  at  the  National  High Magnetic Field
              Laboratory using pulsed magnetic  fields  up  to  50  T.  The  results  are
              expected  to  provide  an  important  understanding  of the correlations
              associated with the low-temperature  hybridization  of magnetic and quadrupolar
              states with the  conduction  electrons.  %%%  The  PI  investigates the
              magnetic and electrical properties of  rare  earth-intermetallic  systems with
              unusual ground  states.  Correlated  electron  behavior  in
              praseodymium-intermetallic  compounds  will  be  studied.  Praseodymium is
              uniquely positioned  to  act  as  a  logical  intermediary  between the
              strongly hybridizing cerium and  the  purely  trivalent  heavier rare earths.
              The observation of  this  behavior  in  certain systems with unique
              crystal-electric-field ground states would  indicate  a new interaction between
              the 4f orbitals and the conduction  electrons.  Applied  magnetic fields also
              significantly  effect  these  ground  states,  the low-temperature properties
              will  be  investigated  using  pulsed  fields  that are large enough  to  
              greatly  modify  the  correlated  behavior.  This project is a collaboration 
              between  three  investigators at three different institutions. Sample
              preparation  and  basic  characterization  will be performed at  Ames 
              Laboratory.  Once  suitable compounds are made, they will be sent to UC
              Riverside for low  field  magnetic and electrical measurements down to ~50 mK
              and to  the  National  High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Los Alamos for 
              high-field  measurements up to 50 T.  ***
