Title       : Theoretical Studies of Near-Critical Fluids in Dilute Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9624090

Award Number: 9624090
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea J. Liu liu@chem.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Andrea Liu is supported by a Faculty Early Career Development Award from   the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to study equilibrium   phase
              behavior and diffusive transport in near-critical fluids, such as  
              vapor-liquid systems or binary liquid mixtures, confined in dilute porous  
              media such as silica gels.  In general, the behavior of a near-critical   fluid
              in a porous medium is an extremely difficult theoretical problem,   because the
              surface of the medium strongly prefers one phase of the fluid   and because the
              structure of the medium is highly disordered.  The   approach used by Liu
              focuses on the strong interaction between the fluid   and the surface; previous
              theoretical work has assumed that the   interaction is weak and that disorder
              is the dominant factor.   The   keystone of the proposal is a model of the
              confining medium as a simple   periodic network of cylindrical strands, which
              Liu has solved within the   mean-field approximation. The proposed work builds
              on this basic model by   using a coordinated combination of analytic and
              numerical techniques to   investigate the effects of critical fluctuations and
              long-wavelength   disorder in the gel structure, as well as the nonequilibrium
              behavior.     This approach represents the best hope of isolating the effects
              of   surface interactions and of disorder in the geometry of the medium in  
              order to determine their relative importance for equilibrium and  
              nonequilibrium behavior.  The proposed education plan is centered around  
              effective scientific communication. The objectives are to demystify   science
              for non-majors and to convince them that chemistry is an   important and
              interesting part of daily life, and to teach majors and   graduate students how
              to communicate their work more effectively.  Nearly critical fluids in dilute
              porous media, such as those studied by   Liu, are models for more general
              multiphase fluids in more realistic   porous media.  Applications that are of
              industrial importance range from   catalysis in porous beds, to storage of
              liquid wastes and liquid fuels in   porous glasses, to the extraction of
              liquids such as oil from porous   media like sandstone.  An improved
              theoretical understanding of transport   in porous media could have a
              significant impact in several of these   strategic areas.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
