Title       : CAREER: Electromagnetic Simulation, Modeling and Characterization of Complex
               Composite Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2000       
File        : a9624486

Award Number: 9624486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Whites   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624486 Whites  There are a number of common, themes shared between the two
              major components (research and education) of this project.  Both involve
              electromagnetics (EM),  materials characterization and the use of computer
              modeling and visualization.  In summary, the research components of this
              project is directed at producing the first known rigorous model to accurately
              predict  the effective constitutive parameters (ECPs) for physically realistic
              composite materials and effective media.  The goals of the education component
              are to integrate interactive computer tools into the study of introductory EM
              and to integrate modern materials modeling techniques (analytical and
              experimental) into a senior-level course in properties of materials.    It is
              envisioned that this research effort will produce the first model to accurately
              predict the ECPs for physically realistic composite and effective materials. 
              Effective media predict the ECPs for physically realistic composite and
              effective materials. Effective media modeling impacts a broad spectrum of
              disciples including such diverse areas as geophysics, remote, sensing, EM
              shielding, planetary surface composition, electrophotography and thin-film
              solar filters.  The knowledge of the ECPs for composite and effective materials
              and their frequency dependence are absolutely critical in EM design work. 
              Without this knowledge, any type of EM analysis is not possible since one would
              be forced to model the scattering by all of the particulates which is certainly
              impractical.  Current  methods for macroscopic characterization are limited to
              simplifying assumptions such as spherical inclusions with sparse distributions
              in cubic arrays.   This new model will provide a numerical  environment in
              which scientist and engineers could fabricate, design and evaluate various
              mixtures of particles to form new composite materials or analyze effective
              media.  All of this would be done using accurate numerical analysis and would
              obviate the for traditional "cut-and-dry"  methods.  The Reason this proposed
              model does not have the same intrinsic limitations as all other is that a
              numerically "exact" scattering solution from the basis of the model.  The
              complexities inherent in a physically realistic effective materials model are
              all accounted for within the numerical solution.  This computationally-based
              effective media modeling is a new approach and would not have be feasible a few
              years ago because of the tremendous computational resources that will be
              required.  For the educational component, the first principle goal is to
              increase the effectiveness of introductory EM courses through the use of
              interactive computer visualization tools.  Because such an introductory course
              forms the foundation for all other EM courses, it is imperative that students
              develop an intuitive appreciation for the basic of this field.  As is often the
              case, students enter such a course with negative preconceived impressions of
              EM.  The use of interactive computer visualization can help students overcome
              some of the difficulties in such a course.  The tools to be developed in this
              effort are designed to help the students understand  the basic concepts in EM,
              rather than more advanced topics as is the case with other currently available
              EM  visualization tools.  It is envisioned that these tools will be directly
              integrated into a textbook.  The second principle educational goal is to revise
              and update a senior elective  properties of materials course.  This revision
              will encompass an integration of modern materials analysis (classical and
              quantum) as will as experimental methods into the course.  Many of the topics
              of effective media theory used in research component of this project will
              pertain directly to this course since, as mentioned previously, composite
              materials are in such wide-spread use today.  Furthermore, the introduction of
              experimental techniques will expose the students to modern instrumentation and
              will reinforce the classroom instruction. ***
