Title       : CAREER: Combining Genetic Algorithms with Case-Based Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9624130

Award Number: 9624130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sushil J. Louis sushil@cs.unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The project involves designing systems that combine genetic algorithms with
              case-based  principles. Broadly speaking, the case-base does what it is best at
              -- memory organization;  the genetic algorithm handles what it is best at --
              adaptation. The resulting combination  takes advantage of both paradigms; the
              genetic algorithm component delivers robu  stness and adaptive learning while
              the case-based component speeds up the system. A series  of increasingly
              complex prototypes in various application areas are used to mark progress. 
              Results from a simple prototype on open-shop scheduling and re-scheduling,
              combinational  circuit design, and designing control circuitry for simple
              robots, indicate th  e feasibility and usefulness of this approach and raise a
              host of interesting issues.  What  cases are useful? How many are needed? How
              to parallelize the system and do robust  indexing? An electronic repository
              available over the world wide web is used to chart  progress, disseminate
              results, and introduce undergraduate and graduate students, and in  dustrial
              representatives to the research and development efforts in this project.
              Combining  genetic algorithms with case-based principles will lead to systems
              that decrease design  cycle time, increase throughput, speed up product
              development and thus impact a wide  variety of application areas from
              engineering design and combinatorial optimization  to computational science
              problems in the physical and earth sciences.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
