Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Thermoreversible Gelation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9624596

Award Number: 9624596
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grzegorz Szamel szamel@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Grzegorz Szamel is supported by a Faculty Early Career Development Award   in
              the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop a   theoretical
              understanding of thermoreversible polymer gelation and the   properties of
              thermoreversible gels. The specific problems to be studied   are: 1) existence
              and properties of a thermodynamic transition underlying   the observed gelation
              transition; 2) structure of the sol and gel phases;   3) elastic properties of
              the gel phase; and 4) viscoelastic properties of   the sol and gel phases.  The
              method to be used is a generalization of a   recent statistical mechanical
              approach to rubber vulcanization (formation   of a permanent polymer network)
              to the case of reversible crosslinking.     Specifically, a statistical
              mechanical theory of chemical association   will be used to describe reversible
              bonding of specific monomers   distributed randomly along polymer chains. A 
              replication approach will   be used to facilitate averaging over the positions
              of specific monomers.   Finally, an order parameter field (related to frozen
              density   fluctuations) will be introduced, and an effective free energy
              functional   will be derived. The free energy functional will be analyzed using
                methods similar to those used in the study of the vulcanization   transition.
               The goal of the education plan is to teach students the   value and
              significance of quantitative reasoning in physical chemistry,   and chemistry
              in general.   In particular, recitation classes will be   introduced into
              teaching the physical chemistry courses in order to   improve student's ability
              to solve chemical problems using the relevant   mathematical formalism.  
              Moreover, a new course on mathematical and   computational methods for chemists
              will be instituted in order to expose   students to the applications of
              numerical and simulational methods in   chemistry.  Polymer gels have attracted
              a lot of interest because of the wealth of   their potential practical
              applications.  Examples include drug delivery   devices, chemical valves and
              sensors, and magnetic resonance monitoring   agents.  Their properties can
              change drastically in response to external   stimuli such as temperature,
              electric field, or light.  Szamel's research   concentrates on one class of
              polymer gels, thermoreversible gels. These   gels originate from reversible
              crosslinking of polymeric systems.      These gels are reversible, i.e. they
              liquify upon heating, and are   regenerated upon cooling.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
