Title       : The Electronic Structure of the High Temperature Superconductors Studied by
               Angle Resolved Photoemission
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9624048

Award Number: 9624048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan Carlos Campuzano jcc@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624048  Campuzano    Angle-Resolved   Photoemission will be used to  study 
              many-  body   effects  in   high  temperature superconductors.  The  technique 
              will  provide clues on  (1)  the  nature  of  the  spectral function of the
              quasiparticles  in the  normal  and  superconducting  states,  (2) the momentum
               distribution  of  the   normal  and superconducting states, (3) the dependence
               of  the quasiparticle  lifetime on temperature, momentum and  energy,   (4)  
              the  relationship   between   the  van  Hove  singularity    and    the   
              normal    and   superconducting  properties,  (5)  the  nature of  the 
              superconducting   gap  function  in  the  clean limit. Limited preliminary 
              results  indicate   that   these     properties    exhibit    unusual 
              behavior,      and     that     the      high    temperature  superconductors  
              still  have  many   interesting    Physics  surprises in store for us.  %%% 
              Angle-Resolved   Photoemission will be used to  study  many-  body   effects in
               high temperature superconductors. In this  technique, the sample is irradiated
              with ultra-violet light.  This  causes the electrons in  that sample  to  be 
              ejected.  By  analyzing  the  energies  of  those  ejected  electrons,  the 
              state  of the electrons in the sample can be  obtained.  This   information
              can, in conventional materials, lead   to  understand  how  the  material
              carries current, and  how  it  becomes   superconducting  upon   cooling.  
              However,   high  temperature  superconductors do not behave like conventional 
              materials.  The electrols in these materials  interact  with  each  other  and 
              the  motion of one  electron  is  strongly  correlated with the motion of other
              electrons. Materials  in  which   this   occurs   are  called   "Strongly  
              Correlated  Materials".  The  proposal  seeks  to  provide   a    direct 
              measurement  of  the "spectral  distribution".  The   latter  measures   the
              probability of adding or removing an electron  from   the sample.  This  will
              lead to the understa nding  of  the   novel    electronic  properties  of  high
               temperature  superconductors.  ***
