Title       : CAREER: A Comprehensive Rewriting Framework for Compilation, Optimization, and
               Run-Time Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2001   
File        : a9624711

Award Number: 9624711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zena M. Ariola ariola@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  research plan pursues the development of a unifying  framework for
              reasoning about execution, compilation, and  optimization of programs. The goal
              is to provide the  programmer, compiler writer, and implementor with an 
              abstract laboratory in which to investigate the interplay  among various
              techniques and to reason about their  correctness and efficiency with respect
              to both time and  space. Specifically, the aim is to formalize an evaluator, a 
              compiler, an optimizer, and a parser as a rewriting process.  This requires
              enhancing current rewriting technology with  the ability to deal with graph
              structures, including cyclic  and disconnected graphs. This is important since
              graphs are  ubiquitous in a program development system.  They occur at  the
              source level, after parsing, in the intermediate program  representation and
              during program execution.    A rigorous study of graphs is thus fundamental for
              reasoning  about both run-time and compile-time issues. The rewriting 
              technology will be enhanced further by associating  priorities and conditions
              to the rules. This will allow us  to directly analyze the impact of different
              application  schemes on efficiency. Both strict and nonstrict languages  will
              be considered, and also their extensions to handle  state.    The development
              of the abstract framework addressed in this  CAREER research project is also
              important for educational  purposes, since it provides a simple yet rigorous,
              basis for  introducing students to concepts, practical issues and, at  the same
              time, to formal reasoning about properties of  programs without having to
              introduce complex mathematical  machinery. A strong, formal background is
              important  regardless of whether a student is seeking higher degrees or 
              immediate employment. The proposed research will allow an  integration across
              the undergraduate language-compilation  implementation sequence, establishing a
              connection between  abstraction and application. Exposure of students to 
              research is planned through collaborat ions with other  institutions and
              student exchanges, which can serve to  encourage students to consider advanced
              education and  research careers.    This study constitutes a first step towards
              providing  automatically generated tools, such as optimizing compilers. 
              Moreover, through use of the results of the proposed  research in the
              classroom, their value as a tool for  introducing and reasoning about language
              issues can better  be evaluated.  ***
