Title       : Career Program: A Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of Novel
               Interfacial Instabilities in Thin Spreading Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9624776

Award Number: 9624776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra M. Troian stroian@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624776  Troian    In parallel with the technological push toward
              miniaturization of processing and instrumentation, there has developed renewed
              interest in the behavior of thin fluid films in confined geometries. 
              Particular attention is being drawn to the question of how transport in
              ultrasmall geometries can cause a system to behave in ways significantly
              different than its behavior in bulk.  In chemical engineering this focus has
              translated directly into investigations of the structure and dynamics of
              liquids at interfaces.  Even for the case of simple Newtonian liquids, novel
              transport behavior has been recently uncovered related to the interplay between
              surface tension, surface tension gradients, evaporation, and Van derWaals
              forces - forces which have been studied for over a century but whose coupling
              can lead to interesting and unexpected instabilities in very thin films.    The
              general objective of this research is to develop a complete and fundamental
              understanding of the spreading kinetics of one liquid on the surface of a
              supporting liquid higher surface tension with particular focus on issues of
              stability.  The first project involves the characterization of a hydrodynamic
              fingering instability which occurs during the advance of spreading surfactant
              solutions along a moist support. Given the implications of this simple
              laboratory marker to differentiate surfactant solutions providing stable
              homogeneous coverage from those yielding unstable, dendritic, and inhomogeneous
              coverage.  The second instability involves Marangoni stresses coupled to
              evaporative effects.  A novel fingering instability develops spanwise along the
              thickened receding edge of a volatile hydrocarbon liquid film receding from a
              bulk water support after spontaneous hole nucleation and growth.  Understanding
              how to prevent such an instability can lead to a new technique for hydrocarbon
              separation involving Marangoni stresses.    The four year experimental and
              theoretical program will characterize these instabilities wh ich can
              significantly affect transport behavior in system ranging from surfactant
              transport in pulmonary flow, to the fabrication of organic films used in
              optical microdevices, to the separation of hydrocarbon mixtures in the films. 
              These two types of instabilities and their characteristics pattern formations
              develop at the advancing or receding front of a thin liquid film coating the
              surface of a liquid support.  The challenge is to fully characterize the flows
              from a liquid mechanical point of view and more importantly to use this
              knowledge to develop practical schemes with which to enhance transport
              properties and reduce inhomogeneous surface coverage in thin spreading films. 
              Suggestions for such schemes are described.  ***
