Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis On Locally Symmetric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1996  
File        : a9624387

Award Number: 9624387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Stanton stanton@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract    Stanton  DMS-9624387    Stanton will continue his investigation of
              spectral invariants    associated to elliptic differential operators in various
              settings of    homogeneous and locally symmetric spaces. In particular, he
              shall    examine a formula for the holomorphic torsion of a holomorphic vector 
                bundle over a locally symmetric space, obtained in earlier work, in    order
              to isolate in it the contribution from the R-class defined by    Bismut and
              Gillet-Soule. He will attempt to extend his earlier work    on locally
              symmetric spaces, in which he related torsion to special    values of geometric
              zeta functions, to a class of compact, Kaehler,    homogeneous spaces. For the
              class of quaternionic-Kaehler symmetric    and locally symmetric spaces he will
              seek a new spectral invariant,    and he will attempt to develop an associated
              geometric zeta function    to detect this invariant. In a different direction
              of research, he    will continue his investigation of various topological
              properties of    real flag manifolds using geometric representation theory.    
                Following upon the success of the index theorem in the 60's to    provide an
              analytic framework to compute topological invariants of    manifolds, beginning
              in the 1970's, spectral invariants were    associated to elliptic differential
              operators in an attempt to    formulate more subtle topological and geometric
              invariants of    manifolds in the language of analysis, i.e. differential
              equations,    on the manifold. The importance of these newer invariants is   
              underscored in their appearance in the emerging theory of the    fundamental
              forces by theoretical physicists. While these invariants    are difficult to
              compute for general spaces, for those spaces arising    from the action of a
              group, such as locally symmetric spaces, the    harmonic analysis coming from
              the well-developed theory of the    representations of the group provides a
              powerful tool to investigate    these invariants. The introduction of geometric
              zeta  functions serves    to connect in a not-yet-understood way the topology
              of the manifold,    via the fundamental group, to these invariants through the
              values of    the zeta function at distinguished points. The goal to understand 
                topological properties through differential equations then begins on    a
              formal level to make contact with number theory.
