Title       : Organic Thin Films Suspended Across Microfabricated Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9624114

Award Number: 9624114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ingrid Fritsch ifritsch@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, aims to focus on  the synthesis and
              characterization of stable thin films that will  be suspended across
              microfabricated structures.  During the  tenure of this four-year continuing
              grant, Professor Fritsch-  Faules and her students at the University of
              Arkansas will test  these structures for application in novel devices for
              sensing and  for biomimetric applications.  Submicron structures will be 
              constructed to support suspended films such as artificial  biomembranes.  The
              inorganic substrates will be both insulators  and conductors depending upon the
              particular function they are  intended to serve in these structures.  Studies
              of these surface-  confined materials will probe their stability and function
              with  variables including electric field strength, solvent character  and ionic
              composition of these systems.  Professor Fritsch-Faules  will include a host of
              activities that are designed to involve  students in the K-12 grades. 
              Educating these students in the  high-order thinking abilities and
              problem-solving skills that are  part of science and mathematics will be
              emphasized.  Community  Access Television and the World Wide Web will be used
              to  disseminate such programs to diverse audiences.  The ability to construct
              new three-dimensional microfabricated  structures with wells having geometries
              for supporting suspended  thin films will be an important outcome of this
              CAREER research  project.  The characterization of these suspended thin films
              will  be a challenging scientific and engineering problem that depends  on
              Professor Fritsch-Faules' unique background in  electroanalytical chemistry and
              in microfabrication science.  Her  integrated educational plan is no less
              ambitious and it has the  potential for immense societal impact upon the K-12
              students in  her immediate geographic area in the near-term and upon a much 
              more broadly distributed cohort in the long-term.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
