Title       : The Effect of Hierarchical Cluster Formation on Galaxy Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1998       
File        : a9624716

Award Number: 9624716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Henriksen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1207,1217,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Henriksen  9624716  A  five-year research and education plan will be carried
              out.  The goals of the activities are to (1) establish and maintain a  research
              program which produces a significant contribution to an  important and
              interesting area of astronomical research, (2) to  strengthen educational
              opportunities in astronomy at the  University of North Dakota, (3) to increase
              the involvement and  interest of Native Americans in astronomy research and in
              the  University of North Dakota, (4) to stimulate interest in  astronomy
              research within the University and within the state of  North Dakota.  The
              understanding of galaxy evolution in clusters of galaxies has  posed a
              persistent challenge to astronomers for approximately 20  years, beginning with
              discovery of the Butcher-Oemler Effect.  Photometric and spectroscopic
              observations of galaxies in  clusters showing this effect have confirmed this
              observational  enigma and increased our understanding of the problem.  The 
              problem stated succinctly is, "How does the galaxy population in  clusters
              change from being dominated by late-type spirals at a  redshift of  z = 0.2 to
              being dominated by early-type galaxies in  the galaxy population at the present
              epoch".  The recent  discovery that substructure is found in many clusters of
              galaxies  in both the optical and the X-ray region of he  electromagnetic 
              spectrum suggests that galaxies must experience violent mergers  of subclusters
              as rich clusters are formed.  Even well known rich  clusters, such as the Coma
              cluster of galaxies and the A2256  cluster of galaxies, are still accreting
              groups of galaxies so  that mergers must be an ongoing phenomenon in cluster
              evolution.  The study of the evolution of galaxies in clusters through the 
              analysis of the data from observations of  the X-ray emission  from clusters 
              of galaxies with  substructure will be carried  out.  Simulations of the
              cluster tidal effect on disk galaxies  during mergers and accretions will be
              developed and analyzed.  The simulations wi ll be formulated to emphasize
              predicting  observable quantities, such as changes in the galaxy disk due to 
              star formation, disk deformation, and loss of metals to the  intracluster
              medium.  These quantities will be compared to data  obtained at current
              ground-based observatories, space-based  observatories (ASCA and the Hubble
              Space Telescope), and future  observatories such as the Advanced X-ray
              Astrophysics Facility  (AXAF).  The analysis of these data will contribute
              significantly  to our understanding of two important and closely linked areas: 
              evolution of the intracluster medium and galaxy evolution.  Educational
              activities to be carried out outside the classroom  will include (1) upgrading
              and modernizing the curricula in three  courses, which are currently severely
              underenrolled, when  compared to the same courses taught at other Universities,
              (2)  providing undergraduate and graduate students research  opportunities in
              astronomy, and (3) providing astrophysics  graduate students the opportunity to
              gain practical experience in  the laboratory working on high energy detector
              development.  It  is a stated future direction of the University of North
              Dakota to  include more computer-based, interactive learning  for students  and
              to strengthen ties with the Native American community in  North Dakota.
