Title       : Reasoning About Program Interactions in the Presence of Mobility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1996      
File        : a9624815

Award Number: 9624815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gruia C. Roman roman@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Mobile computing is emerging as an important new paradigm  which has the
              potential to reshape thinking about  distributed computing. Mobility has
              far-reaching  implications for what designers and users can assume about 
              communication patterns, resource availability, and  application behaviors.
              Components move from one location to  another, joining or leaving groups of
              other components in  their vicinity. New distributed algorithms are expected to
               be required as the nature of applications shifts with the  emergence of this
              new kind of computing environment. Formal  methods have an important role to
              play in the midst of these  developments, both in terms of helping the research
               community better understand fundamental issues germane to  mobile computing
              and in providing practical solutions to new  design problems. Ad-hoc wireless
              networks (AWNs) supporting  context-aware applications are studied in this
              research.  Such networks have practical signifcance for crisis  management,
              communication for small enterprises, and  organization of transient
              collaborations.  The somewhat  extreme characteristics of AWNs provide a
              challenging  testbed for studying mobile computing.    This research examines
              whether existing models of  concurrency can be extended to mobile computing and
              thus  provide appropriate means for the specification, design and  verification
              of mobile systems. It also considers related  support system software, such as
              communication protocols. To  accomplish this, the notion of location must play
              a more  central role in the treatment of concurrency, even in cases  where the
              ultimate goal is location-transparency. New forms  of modular interaction are
              investigated in this research. Of  particular interest are techniques to gain
              the advantages of  formal methods without the costs of developing formal 
              proofs. Design schemas and patterns with desirable  properties are verified
              once and reused in many  applications.  ***
