Title       : Role of Calmodulin-domain Protein Kina–e in Arabidopsdis Trichome Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9624811

Award Number: 9624811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estelle M. Hrabak emhrabak@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             J                    C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    J       J
                         4 @                                                                 
                                                                                           $ 
               %   &   '   (   )   *   +   ,   -   .                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  9624811
              Hrabak  Trichomes of Arabidopsis are differentiated epidermal cells found on
              leaves and petioles, stems or bolts, and sepals.The development of Arabidopsis
              trichomes has been studied genetically by the isolation of mutants blocked at
              different steps in the developmental pathway. Two of the early genes in this
              pathway (GL1 and GL2) have been cloned and encode putative regulatory proteins
              containing a myb DNA binding motif and a homeodomain motif respectively. The
              expression pattern of GL1 and GL2, as assessed by promoter-GUS fusions or in
              situ hybridization studies, is very similar to the expression pattern observed
              with GUS fusions with the gene that is the subject of this proposal, CPK2. CDK2
              is an isoform of the family of calmodulin-domain protein kinases. The
              hypothesis here is that CPK2 is involved in determination of epidermal cell
              fates or in the process of trichome development. The following questions will
              be addressed to test this hypothesis: Is CPK expressed in trichome mutant
              backgrounds? Does increasing or decreasing the amount of CPK2 mRNA and protein
              affect trichome developmen t? Other isoforms of CPK genes have been cloned but
              there is a lack of information on their function. The above studies may help
              provide clues to function for one member of this family. ***                   
                   ;                                              Oh     +'  0               
                                     $       H       l                                       
                     D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9624811    
                                      Judith P  S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n          
                              (                                                   #          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              lesset         
                          Judith Plesset              @     &H                            @  
                 k                            @                                              
                                                                          @     Ik           
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              2                                                              
                                      ;                                                      
                                e =       e                                                  
                                          j       j   j       j       j       j       j      
                                                                              :   1          
                                                                                             
                  #                           k   T       7   :                       j      
                                                                                :            
                 j       j                                                                   
                 j               j                                       ~               j   
                 j       j       j                           /                               
                                                                                 9624811
              Hrabak  Trichomes of Arabidopsis are differentiated epidermal cells found on
              leaves and petioles, stems or bolts, and sepals.The development of Arabidopsis
              trichomes has been studied genetically by the isolation of mutants blocked at
              different steps in the developmental pathway. Two of the early genes in this
              pathway (GL1 and GL2) have been cloned and encode putative regulatory proteins
              containing a myb DNA binding motif and a homeodomain motif respectively. The
              expression pattern of GL1 and GL2, as assessed by promoter-GUS fusions or in
              situ hybridization studies, is very similar to the expression pattern observed
              with GUS fusions with the gene that is the subject of this proposal, CPK2. CDK2
              is an isoform of the family of calmodulin-domain protein kinases. The
              hypothesis here is that CPK2 is involved in determination of epidermal cell
              fates or in the process of trichome development. The following questions will
              be addressed to test this hypothesis: Is CPK expressed in trichome mutant
              backgrounds? Does increasing or decreasing the amount of CPK2 mRNA and protein
              affect trichome development? Other isoforms of CPK genes have been cloned but
              there is a lack of information on their function. The above studies may help
              provide clues to function for one member of this family. ***
