Title       : CAREER: Adaptive Higher-Order Error Correction of NonlinearDiffusion Generalized
               Perturbation Theory Via a Neural Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9624687

Award Number: 9624687
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo I. Maldonado Ivan.Maldonado@gnf.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624687 Maldonado  The general objective of the proposed research is to initiate
              a research program that would promote, extend, and improve recent advances in
              Generalized Pertarbatium Theory Techniques.  The long-term goal of this project
              targets to exploit more general and multidisciplinary applications, while the
              near-term goal will target the development of an adaptive -and computationally
              economic- error reduction technique applicable to an nth order perturbation
              theory methodology.  The preliminary results herein presented strongly suggest
              that a relatively rudimentary two-hidden-layer artificial neural network (ANN)
              can be suitably trained for  this type of application.  In fact, the GPT
              methodology previously developed by the PI provides a unique framework for the
              systematic training and adaptive implementation of  an ANN designed to predict,
              and thus correct, the error associated with an nth order GPT solution. 
              Moreover, identifying all portions of these calculations which can take
              advantage of massively parallel or scalable computers will also be addressed. 
              The main objective of the PI's education plan revolves around nurturing four
              major ongoing career activities which he has identified as key contributing
              factors to the future success of his education plan.  Furthermore, these
              activities have been selected exclusively by the PI based upon several moths of
              hands-on assessments and observations, and re in full agreement with his
              personality, background, and known talents.  The PI enjoys these activities and
              seeks no personal gain from them other than selfulfillment as a person and as
              an educator.  These activities, listed in no particular order of preference or
              implied importance, are:   Active Learning Techniques. Encouraging
              Underrepresented Groups into Science and Engineering. Involving Undergraduate
              Students in Research. International Extensions of Research Efforts.  The
              education plan of this proposal elaborates further on each of the above topics.
