Title       : U.S.-India Cooperative Research: Development of Rules for Synthesis of Hindi
               Speech, Award in Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9624339

Award Number: 9624339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3871               (Estimated)
Investigator: S S. Agrawal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Elec Eng Res Inst
	      
	      Pilani, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0315000   Social Data & Comm Development          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:   This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist,
              Dr. Kenneth Stevens, from the Research Laboratory of Electronics at the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA and Dr. S.S. Agrawal of
              the Central Electronics Engineering Research Institute (CEERI) in New Delhi,
              India.  The two scientists plan to conduct synthesis of Hindi speech by
              computer, and to develop rules for synthesis and concatenation of basic Hindi
              phonemes to generate words and sentences.  The results of these studies would
              be subsequently used to develop a text-to-speech synthesizer for the Hindi
              language.  The KLSYN88, a cascade-parallel format synthesizer developed at MIT
              will be used as the basic tool to analyze and synthesize the sounds.  Since
              Hindi speech posses several types of special sounds that differ from the sounds
              in European languages, the most important of these are the stops and
              affricates, special attention will be paid to the analysis and synthesis of
              these sounds.  In addition to the two senior scientists, a post doctorate and a
              junior researcher from MIT will also participate in the research and will work
              with the Indian scientists in the New Delhi Laboratory.  Scope:  This project
              allows cooperation of two well known scientists whose capabilities complement
              each other to do important scientific work.  The major experimental work
              related to analysis and synthesis of Hindi speech will be carried at CEERI,
              while some experiments will also be conducted at MIT.  There will be frequent
              exchange of ideas, review of data, techniques and results through
              correspondence and through exchanges of visits by the P.I.'s and by the U.S.
              junior scientists. This project meets the objectives of the Division of
              International Programs in fostering international collaboration and increasing
              the exposure of young scientists to the international scientific scene.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
