Title       : CAREER: Integrated Traffic Management Based on Accurate and Practical Packet
               Fair Queueing Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9624979

Award Number: 9624979
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hui Zhang hzhang@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9217,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Multiple network services include guaranteed real-time service, predicted 
              real-time service, and best-effort service. While there has been extensive 
              research on designing traffic management algorithms for each individual 
              service, it is unclear how these algorithms can be integrated into one  network
              and how they will interact with each other. This problem becomes  more complex
              when the network also needs to support link-sharing, which  allows resource
              sharing among applications that require different network  services but belong
              to the same administrative class.  The service  disciplines at the switching
              nodes, which determine the order in which  packets are serviced, play a
              critical role in controlling the interactions  among different traffic streams,
              different service classes, and different  link sharing classes. The
              hypothetical Fluid Fair Queueing (FFQ)  discipline, which can serve multiple
              traffic streams simultaneously  according to pre-specified service shares,
              provides an ideal framework to  integrate traffic management algorithms for
              different services and link  sharing. Since FFQ uses an idealized fluid model
              that cannot be implemented  in the real-world, Packet Fair Queueing (PFQ)
              algorithms are needed to  approximate its behavior. Previously proposed PFQ
              algorithms including the  most popular Weighted Fair Queueing all introduce
              substantial inaccuracy in  approximating FFQ, which significantly affects
              traffic management and link  sharing algorithms. It is unclear whether accurate
              PFQ's exist, and if they  do, whether they can be simple enough to be
              implementable at high speed.  The goal of this research is to demonstrate that
              accurate and practical PFQ  algorithms can be designed and that they provide
              the foundation for a  framework under which traffic management algorithms for
              different services  and link sharing can be supported in an integrated fashion.
              Aspects treated  include (a) the fundamental tradeoff between complexity and
              accuracy of PFQ  algorithms; (b) issues in integrating different traffic
              management  algorithms and link-sharing into one framework and fundamental
              tradeoffs  between accuracy of PFQ algorithms and the efficiency of
              link-sharing and  traffic management algorithms; (d) admission control
              algorithms for  providing end-to-end performance guarantees using PFQ
              algorithms under not  only rate-proportional but also general resource
              assignments; e) more  flexible real-time services such as renegotiated service
              and rate-adaptive  service based on PFQ algorithms.  The study is conducted via
              a combination  of analysis, simulation, and implementation. The results of this
              work will  have a significant impact on the design of integrated traffic
              management  algorithms in both the Internet and ATM environments.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
