Title       : Career Program: Molecular Design of Surface Modified Vesicles and Liposomes: A
               Theoretical Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9624268

Award Number: 9624268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igal G. Szleifer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9162,9183,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624268  Szleifer    Vesicles and liposomes are aggregates formed by spherically
              closed bilayers of amphiphilic molecules.  The ability of the lipsome to
              dissolve large quantities of molecules in their core and its solubility in
              aqueous environments makes them ideal systems for drug delivery.  In recent
              years it was found that grafting polymers to the surface of the liposomes
              increases the longevity of these aggregates in the blood stream.  Furthermore,
              by chemically modifying the grafted polymer free end-group with molecules that
              have large affinities to specific cell receptors, the liposomes can be used for
              targeted delivery.  Despite the importance of polymer-modified liposomes as
              premier drug carriers, there is no systematic understanding of the factors that
              govern their stability, longevity, and ability to target specific cells.    A
              systematic theoretical study of the behavior of liposomes and vesicles modified
              by grafted polymer chairs will be performed.  The single-chain mean-field
              theory will be used to study the behavior of the chain molecules (surfactants
              and polymers) that comprise the aggregates.  This approach provides accurate
              conformational and thermodynamic information as compared with experimental
              measurements.  The aim of the work is to systematically study the conditions
              under which modified aggregates can achieve longevity, thermodynamic stability 
              and specific targeting.  The work consists of finding the compositions of
              surfactants ( or lipids), cholesterol and polymer that will form stable
              vesicles within a range of size that is optimal for drug delivery.  The ability
              of the grafted chains to prevent protein adsorption on the surface of the
              vesicles will be studied.  Specific polymer chains that combine the ability to
              prevent protein adsorption with conformational properties that enhance
              targeting of the carrier to specific cells.  The microscopic understanding of
              the behavior of polymer modified vesicles that will be achieved should able the
              development of new types of ag gregates for use as reagents that can be used in
              separation processes, such as protein separation and solubilization of small
              hydrophobic molecules in aqueous media.  Theoretical studies will be carried
              out in close collaboration with three experimental groups that are
              investigating:  1)  the use of end-functionalized polymer-modified liposomes
              for targeted drug delivery, 2) vesicle-membrane fusion induced by chemical
              modification of the vesicle and 3) protein adsorption on polymer-modified
              surfaces.    The teaching plan is divided into two parts.  One describes the
              approach to be taken in formal classroom teaching.  The other presents the
              different projects that go beyond the formal teaching requirements.  In the
              former, the basic idea is to provide the students with the links between
              physical processes, mathematical tools and experimental measurements. 
              Understanding this relationship enables students to quickly grasp new concepts
              based on previously learned subjects.  The informal activities that will be
              undertaken include special topic discussions, lectures and research for
              undergraduate students interested in specific applications  of the general
              field of physical chemistry.  These activities will be confined to select small
              groups of students; the aim being to provide the personalized attention that is
              not generally available in large formal classes.  Furthermore, the teaching
              plan also includes special topic research projects for undergraduate and
              graduate students.  ***
