Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems Theory Motivated by Bubbles,
               Accelerators and Split-Operator Numerical Schemes".
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9624471

Award Number: 9624471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tasso J. Kaper tasso@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624471  Kaper    This work is supported by a National Science Foundation
              Faculty  Early   Career Development Award.  The research component will focus
              on  the   development and application of dynamical systems theory to  physical 
               problems in bubble dynamics and accelerators, as well as the  study of split- 
              operator numerical schemes.  In the area of bubble dynamics, the  research  
              will focus on the strongly nonlinear differential equations  modeling one-  
              and two-bubble systems.  In particular, a Hamiltonian formulation  of two- 
              bubble systems is proposed that reveals the salient features of  their  
              interaction and facilitates a quantitative global analysis of  these systems.  
               An improved criterion for the cavitation of isolated bubbles is  also sought. 
                In the area of accelerators, the work comprises a broad array of  analytical 
               and numerical questions that involve the rates of nonlinear  growth of shear  
              layers, the magnitudes of their saturation amplitudes, the  development of  
              Melnikov theory for integro-differential equations, and the  dynamics of  
              amplitude-modulated beams in a Radio Frequency Quadrapole.  The  work   on
              split-operator schemes will involve identifying the explicit  structure of  
              Nth order partitioned split-operator schemes.  The education plan  aims to  
              incorporate into the classroom several aspects of the principal  investigator's
                experience in applied dynamical systems theory.  On the graduate  level, a  
              multi-tiered effort is underway through which current graduate  students in  
              mathematics are trained to conduct applied dynamical systems  research, and  
              students from other disciplines (mechanical engineering,  cognitive and  
              neural science, and economics) acquire tools from dynamical  systems for  
              their research.  The effort also includes the development of a  new course in  
              nonlinear dynamics of bubble oscillations, research group  activity in  
              singular perturbation theory, and a complete revision of an   advanced  
              undergraduate course in  the methods of applied mathematics.    The National
              Science Foundation strongly encourages the early   development of academic
              faculty as both educators and  researchers.  The   Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) Program is a  Foundation-  wide  program that provides for
              the support of junior faculty  within the   context of their overall career
              development.  It combines in a  single   program the support of quality
              research and education in the  broadest sense   and the full participation of
              those traditionally  underrepresented in science   and engineering.  This
              program enhances and emphasizes the  importance   the Foundation places on the
              development of full, balanced  academic   careers which include both research
              and education.
