Title       : High Pressure Magneto-Optical Studies of Novel Localized States in Compound
               Semiconductors and their Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9624029

Award Number: 9624029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard A. Weinstein phyberni@nsm.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce D. McCombe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                              9624029  Weinstein    The   program   investigates the effect of
              high hydrostatic  pressure  on  the   energy  and  competition of shallow
              (hydrogenic)  and  deep  impurity states in III-V semiconductors and
              heterostructures, as well  as  on  the  possible occurrence and properties of 
              stable  excitonic  states  in  these systems. The work will involve far 
              infrared  (FIR)  magneto-spectroscopy and  near  infrared/visible optical 
              experiments  carried    out   using   a  unique   diamondanvil   apparatus   
              that  achieves  in-situ  tuning of pressure, temperature and magnetic field 
              over  the  ranges 0150 kbar, 2300K  and  0-17T.  The  approach   will  permit 
              direct  comparison  of spectroscopic results recorded over  a  wide  range of
              energies from  the FIR  to  the  visible on  the  same  samples  under  the 
              same  conditions, which has not heretofore  been  possible.  Such studies
              should yield  (1) a much  clearer picture  of  the   competition  between 
              shallow  and   deep  (both   stable   and  metastable)  impurity states in
              semiconductors  for  many   different  substitutional  species,  (2)  should 
              help  establish   the  carrier  density   dependence of many-body effects in 
              doped   aluminumgallium  arsenide/gallium-arsenide quantum  well  structures, 
              and (3)  should  enable   the   exploration   of   conditions   and  properties
                 for  possible stable excitonic ground states in indium-arsenide/aluminium- 
              gallium-antimony systems.  %%%  The  program investigates the effect of high
              hydrostatic pressure  on  the  energy and competition of shallow (hydrogenic)
              and deep impurity  states  in III-V semiconductors and hererostructures, as
              well  as  on  the possible occurrence and properties of stable excitonic states
               in  these  systems.   The work will involve far infrared  (FIR)  magneto- 
              spectroscopy  and  near infrared/visible optical experiments  carried  out 
              using  a  unique diamond-anvil apparatus that  achieves  in-situ  tuning of
              pressure, temperature and magneti c field over the ranges 0-  150  kbar, 
              2-300K  and  0-17T.   The  approach  will  permit  direct  comparison  of 
              spectroscopic results recorded over a wide  range  of  energies from te
              far-infra-red to the visible.  The experiments  will  be conducted on the same
              samples under the same conditions, which has  not heretofore been possible. 
              Such studies should yield:  (1) a much  clearer  picture of the competition
              between shallow  and  deep  (both  stable  and  metastable) impurity states in
              semiconductors  for  many  different  substitutional  species, (2)  should 
              help  establish  the  carrier  density  dependence of many-body effects in
              doped  aluminum-  gallium-arsenide quantum well structures, and (3) should 
              enable  the  exploration   of  conditions  and  properties  for  possible  
              stable  excitionic   ground   states   in  indium-arsenide/aluminium-gallium- 
              antimony systems.***
