Title       : CAREER: Design and Implementation of a Knowledge-Based Agile Manufacturing
               Information System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9624309

Award Number: 9624309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rakesh Nagi nagi@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9624309    Naji   This CAREER award emphasizes the combined aspects of research
              and education in the area of Agile Manufacturing Information Systems to manage
              and control information flow among collaborating companies of a virtual or
              multi-partnership enterprise.  The research component of the study proposes a
              framework in which: (1) Information is modeled in a hierarchical fashion using
              Object-Oriented Methodology.  (2) Information flow between partners is
              controlled by a set of distributed Knowledge-Based Systems (KBS, one for each
              partner) which reflect partner specific information control policies.  (3)
              Implementation of the system is based on a Client-Server architecture. 
              Research issues are being considered with an industrial partner on item (1), on
              design, modeling and validation of multiple KBS for item (2), and on
              distributed computer implementations.  The education component of this work
              focuses on two specific activities that will ultimately allow a broader range
              of instructional and developmental activities.  (1) Course and laboratory
              development for a multi-purpose agile manufacturing simulation.  In a simulated
              setting, participants will act as agile companies and either develop or "run" a
              design-to-manufacture life-cycle of a product.  (2) Course and educational
              material development of a topics course in agile manufacturing which will focus
              on the fundamentals of information technology tools and concepts to support
              agile practices.    This work will facilitate collaboration and synergism for a
              competitive US manufacturing base.  It will enable manufacturing industries to
              establish information-based (paperless) and policy governed relationships among
              application systems of an agile enterprise.  This will enable them to
              collectively and competitively respond to cost, quality and lead-time pressures
              being imposed in a fierce global economy.  Practical benefits are the paperless
              information integration, elimination of data inconsistencies, and reduction in
              product lead-times and asso ciated costs.
