Title       : CAREER: Optically-Interconnected Fully-Adaptive Network Router
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9624251

Award Number: 9624251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Pinkston tpink@charity.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624251  Pinkston  The precursor to building general-purpose teraflop computer
              systems is the  advancement of network technology to reach much higher levels
              of  performance. In parallel processor systems, where multiple high performance
               processors work cooperatively as one connected unit, performance is 
              determined by the effective utilization of processor nodes which, 
              predominately, depends upon communication efficiency. The backbone for 
              communication in parallel processing environments is the interconnection 
              network. We propose to design and implement in a hybrid GaAs/silicon chip a 
              flexible fully-adaptive deadlock-free optical network router featuring a  new
              packet routing algorithm universally applicable to any network  topology. This
              proposed research serves to further advance the  state-of-the-art in
              interconnection network technology by exploring  hardware-based solutions for
              increasing parallel processor communication  efficiency. This work leverages
              ofd of current trends in interconnection  network router architecture and
              continuing advancements in optical/photonic  technology.    Our proposed
              optical router provides a flexible framework for exploring  many design
              alternatives never before imagined due to its high degree of  resource
              decoupling and topological independence. Interesting issues to be  investigated
              in the building of the router include how to accurately detect  deadlock, how
              to efficiently implement the deadlockfree recovery lane, how  to implement low
              overhead internal and external flow control for optical  interconnects, and how
              to integrate optical transmitters, optical  receivers. and complex electronic
              router logic circuitry onto a single  optoelectronic VLSI router chip.
              Interesting issues that can be further  understood once the router is built
              include the performance and/or fault  tolerance advantages of fully adaptive
              wormhole routing, misrouting  capability, the use of the DB resource for not
              only recovering from  potential deadlocks but also for relieving n ormal
              network congestion, and  the use of dense high bandwidth optical I/O for fully
              adaptive network  routers. We will systematically address these and other
              important issues as  we go about designing, building, and experimenting with
              this novel network  router.    This research adds significantly to optical
              interconnect/photonic switching  infrastructure. This work is pioneering in
              that, to our knowledge, we are  the first to propose research that encompasses
              advanced switching, flow  control, and routing functionality in optical
              interconnection network  design. The principal investigator will lead a
              dedicated research team  ranging in research experience consisting of
              undergraduate, graduate. and  post-graduate collaborative researchers.
              Moreover, important research  achievements will find use in the classroom to
              serve as excellent  illustrations in teaching. Hence, we will demonstrate that
              current and  next-generation interconnection network techniques such as
              wormhole  switching, virtual channel flow, and adaptive routing are feasibly 
              incorporated in optically-based interconnection networks. This will provide  a
              platform on which to build optically interconnected parallel processing 
              systems, impacting the applicability of this technology to future systems.  ***
