Title       : CAREER: Molecular Modeling Studies of Poly(ethylene oxide) and Poly(propylene
               oxide) in Aqueous Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1996   
File        : a9624475

Award Number: 9624475
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grant D. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624475  Smith  This is a new CAREER award for an integrated research and 
              education program.  Due to dramatic improvements in computer  hardware and
              computational algorithms, molecular modeling of  polymers has seen significant
              advances in the last few years.  As  these techniques become increasingly
              utilized tools in materials  research, the need for force fields which
              accurately describe  intermolecular and intramolecular interactions will 
              correspondingly increase, as will the need to expose both  graduate and
              undergraduate students to the power and utility, and  limitations, of these
              methods.  In this grant, the properties of  poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and
              poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) in  aqueous solution will be investigated via ab
              initio quantum  chemistry calculations and molecular dynamics simulations.  The
               main questions to be answered relate to the interactions of these  polymers,
              one of which is water soluble (PEO) and the other which  is not (PPO), with the
              water solvent.  These issues are of great  interest because PEO and PEO/PPO
              copolymers are used in a wide  variety of applications where the desired
              properties are  determined by the behavior of the polymers in aqueous solution.
               Among these is the modification of surfaces to provide protein  and cell
              resistance for many important applications, including  controlled release
              agents, encapsulated enzymes and injectable  therapeutic and diagnostic agents.
               The excellent protein  resistant properties of PEO polymers are believed to be
              a result  of the unique solution properties of PEO and its molecular 
              conformation in aqueous solution.    In order to expose undergraduate students
              to these modeling  techniques, a Computational Materials Science Program will
              be  instituted.  The program will consist of a new materials  science/molecular
              physics course for upper-division undergraduate  and graduate students.  The
              course will emphasize the  relationships between molecular properties and
              materials  behavior.  Both semi-empirical and ato mistic methods for 
              predicting materials properties will be introduced, and the  strengths and
              limitations of the methods will be examined at  length.  In the Computational
              Materials Research Laboratory  (CMSL), the students will gain hands-on
              experience using these  techniques in well-defined molecular modeling
              laboratory  projects.  The CMSL will be equipped with powerful workstations 
              and modeling software which is well suited for undergraduate  education and
              research. Undergraduate students interested in  research in computational
              materials science will have the  opportunity to design and perform projects
              using CMSL facilities.  %%%  This is a new CAREER award for an integrated
              research and  education program.  Due to dramatic improvements in computer 
              hardware and computational algorithms, molecular modeling of  polymers has seen
              significant advances in the last few years.  As  these techniques become
              increasingly utilized tools in materials  research, the need for force fields
              which accurately describe  intermolecular and intramolecular interactions will 
              correspondingly increase, as will the need to expose both  graduate and
              undergraduate students to the power and utility, and  limitations, of these
              methods.  In this grant, the properties of  poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and
              poly(propylene oxide) (PPO) in  aqueous solution will be investigated via ab
              initio quantum  chemistry calculations and molecular dynamics simulations.  The
               main questions to be answered relate to the interactions of these  polymers,
              one of which is water soluble (PEO) and the other which  is not (PPO), with the
              water solvent.  These issues are of great  interest because PEO and PEO/PPO
              copolymers are used in a wide  variety of applications where the desired
              properties are  determined by the behavior of the polymers in aqueous solution.
               Among these is the modification of surfaces to provide protein  and cell
              resistance for many important applications, including  controlled release
              agents, encapsulated enzymes and inje ctable  therapeutic and diagnostic
              agents.  The excellent protein  resistant properties of PEO polymers are
              believed to be a result  of the unique solution properties of PEO and its
              molecular  conformation in aqueous solution.    In order to expose
              undergraduate students to these modeling  techniques, a Computational Materials
              Science Program will be  instituted.  The program will consist of a new
              materials  science/molecular physics course for upper-division undergraduate 
              and graduate students.  The course will emphasize the  relationships between
              molecular properties and materials  behavior.  Both semi-empirical and
              atomistic methods for  predicting materials properties will be introduced, and
              the  strengths and limitations of the methods will be examined at  length.  In
              the Computational Materials Research Laboratory  (CMSL), the students will gain
              hands-on experience using these  techniques in well-defined molecular modeling
              laboratory  projects.  The CMSL will be equiped with powerful workstations  and
              modeling software which is well suited for undergraduate  education and
              research. Undergraduate students interested in  research in computational
              materials science will have the  opportunity to design and perform projects
              using CMSL facilities.  ***
