Title       : Collective Structural Dynamics of Disordered Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9624436

Award Number: 9624436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Toulouse JT02@Lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Beall Fowler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624436  Toulouse  This project employs Raman optical spectroscopy and neutron 
              spectroscopy as tools for the study of network topologies in  glasses.  The
              research will study the variation of  spectroscopic signatures from high
              temperatures to low  temperatures.  Of particular interest is the onset of low 
              frequency dynamics at lower temperatures.  In addition,  tests will be made of
              the spectroscopic predictions of  several recent theories of the liquid-glass
              transition.  The  glasses to be studied will have different fragility 
              parameters because of composition or as a result of imposed  variations in
              hydrostatic pressure.  The project should lead  to a better understanding of
              the relationship between the  topology of connected, random networks, and the
              strength of  individual bonds and vibrational dynamics.  The research is 
              fundamental in character but the results are potentially of  great practical
              interest because of the many applications of  amorphous and glass-like
              materials.  %%%  Amorphous solids or glasses are challenging objects for  study
              because of their complex network structures.  They are  of great practical
              interest because of their many commercial  applications.  Glasses have many
              properties that differ from  those of ordered crystals.  This project will use 
              spectroscopic techniques to study the low frequency  vibrational properties of
              glasses and to relate these  measurements to the structural conformation of the
               materials.  Because the atomic structure of the glass is  formed at high
              temperatures and because the glass is a  frozen liquid, the transition from the
              liquid to the glass  state will be followed as a  function of temperature -
              from  high temperature to low temperatures.  This should lead to a  better
              understanding of the vibrational dynamics of  disordered networks.  The results
              should have general  applicability to other more general disordered networks
              such  as the brain or as developed in economic models.  ***
