Title       : Stark Units
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9624057

Award Number: 9624057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31850              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Dummit dummit@math.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan W. Sands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Algebraic number theory concern the study of the fields obtained  by  adjoining
              an algebraic number to the field of rational  numbers. The Stark Conjectures
              postulate a deep connection  between special values of the analytically defined
              L-series of  such a number field and algebraic properties of the field. In 
              particular, these Conjectures predict that certain specific  elements of the
              complex numbers obtained from the L-series are  actually algebraic elements,
              the Stark units. In the case of a  relative abelian extension of number fields,
              the Conjectures  further predict that  these elements, which would be uniquely 
              defined by the analytic data up to a choice of a root of unity,  generate
              abelian extensions of the number field. The Stark  Conjectures are among the
              central questions in algebraic number  theory. This investigation is concerned
              with examining a number  of questions regarding these conjectures, continuing
              and  extending  prior work of the investigators.   This research falls  into
              the general mathematical field of Number Theory.  Number  theory has its
              historical roots in the study of the whole  numbers,  addressing such questions
              as those dealing with the  divisibility of one  whole number by another. It is
              among the  oldest branches of mathematics and  was pursued for many  centuries
              for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last  half century it has
              become an indispensable tool in diverse   applications in areas such as data
              transmission and processing,  and  communication systems.
