Title       : CAREER: Faculty Early Career Development Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9624991

Award Number: 9624991
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natacha DePaola depaola@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DePaola  9624991  This  proposal investigates fundamental issues of the  effect 
              of  physical stimuli on mammalian cell function and promotes Cellular 
              Engineering education at undergraduate and graduate levels.    The  main 
              research objective of this proposal is to  investigate  fundamental  aspects 
              of  mass  transport  and  fluid  mechanics,  involved  in endothelial cell
              dysfunction in steady and pulsatile  disturbed flow fields.    The 
              localization of atherosclerotic lesions in humans  coincides  with  the 
              presence of altered blood flows.  We hypothesize  that  the  complex 
              characteristics  of  these  disturbed  flows  (i.e.  variable  shear  forces, 
              flow  separation,  vorticity)  regulate  cellular  and  biochemical  events 
              close  to  the  vessel  wall,  promoting endothelial cell dysfunction and
              arterial wall lesions.  Endothelial  cell  cultures will be exposed  to  well 
              controlled  flows,  dynamically similar to those occurring in human  arterial 
              bifurcations   (preferred   sites  for   atherosclerotic   lesion 
              development).   Visualization  experiments  and  finite   element  simulations
              will be used to characterize the flow and to evaluate  fluid   forces   acting 
               on  the  cell  surface.    Flow-induced  alterations    in    endothelial  
              function,    including    cell  proliferation,    cell    migration,  
              monolayer    permeability,  cytoskeletal   fiber  reorganization,  expression  
              of   vascular  adhesion molecules, and distribution of leukocyte adhesion to
              the  endothelial   monolayer,  will  be  evaluated   using   in   situ 
              inrnunocytochemistry,   immunofluorescence,   time-lapse    video  microscopy  
              and   epifluorescence  microscopy.    The   physical  mechanisms  involved  in 
              the  modulation  of  endothelial   cell  function  will  be  identified and
              mathematical  models  will  be  constructed to describe the dynamics of
              endothelial function  and  local cell interactions in relation to the flow
              characteristics.    Cellular  Engineering  has developed into  a   highly 
              specialized  field  of research to which engineering students have very little 
              exposure  in  the  classroom and laboratory  courses.   The  main  educational 
              objective is to improve the exposure of  engineering  students  interested in
              biomechanics and biomaterials to Cellular  Engineering  as a discipline of
              study.  This will be accomplished  by  course  and  curriculum  development 
              aimed  to  provide  the  students  with the principles and tools of cellular 
              engineering,  in-class  discussion  of  the state  of  the  art,  and  hands-on
               research experiences.  New courses in Cell Biomechanics  will  be  developed. 
                The   senior  level  Biomechanics  and   Biomedical  Engineering  Laboratory 
              courses  will  be  revised  to   include  cellular  aspects  and  state of the
              art cellular  mechanics  and  transport  experiments.   A  module  of 
              "numerical  experiments"  relevant  to cellular engineering will be developed
              for  students  to  work  in  a  simulation laboratory.  A course on
              experimental  cell  biomechanics  will  also  be  developed  and  undergraduate
               research opportunities will be available to provide students with  hands-on
              exposure to research findings.  Finally, a journal  club  will  be organized in
              order to bring together individuals  across  campus  who  work  in  problems
              relevant to cellular  engineering  within different fields of expertise .   
              The   proposed  research  activities  will  contribute   to   the 
              identification  of  the  physical  mechanisms  involved  in  cell 
              pathobiology, in the rearchitecturing of the vessel wall surface,  and  in  the
               cell  injury/dysfunction associated  with  arterial  diseases.   Better
              understanding of the effects of  physiological  flows   on   endothelial  cell 
              cultures  will   facilitate   the  development of hybrid vascular grafts (graft
              performance  appears  to   be   highly  dependent  on  the  complex  flow  
              environment  experienced  after  implantation).   The  developed  methods  and 
              procedures  may  prove   to be useful to the bioprocess  industry,  which 
              relies  on the ability of predicting cell behavior  and/or  manipulating  cell
              function to manufacture biochemical  products.  Finally,    the   evaluation  
              and   quantification    of    cell  function/dysfunction in controlled unsteady
               disturbed  flows  (a  mechanical environment similar to that in which
              endothelial cells  reside  in vivo) will advance the state of the art in
              engineering  the cell environment for cell culture studies.    The  educational
              component of this project is expected to set  up  the basis for a comprehensive
              exposure to Cellular Engineering at  undergraduate  and  graduate levels, It
              will  prepare  biomedical  engineers   to   satisfy  the  increasing  need  of 
               the   modem  bioengineering,   biotechnology  and   medical   industries   for
               individuals who can successfully apply the principles and methods  of
              engineering to problems in cell and molecular biology.  ***
