Title       : CAREER: Improving the Access-Execute Balance in High Performance Processors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9624378

Award Number: 9624378
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anand R. Tripathi                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lizy K. John   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Program behavior studies reveal that most current high  performance processors
              spend more time computing addresses  and accessing data than performing the
              functional operations  required by application programs. This research consists
              of  investigating issues in the design of a balanced multiple  issues
              architecture that improves the access-execute  balance, maximized the
              decoupling between the various  functional units, exploits higher concurrency
              and achieves  higher performance.  The techniques used to alleviate access- 
              execute imbalance include (I) executing multiple access  tasks in parallel,
              (ii) providing architectural support for  complex access primitives, and (iii)
              providing application-  specific access primitives.  Also performed will be 
              investigations on improving concurrency between access and  execute processes. 
              Concurrency between access and execution  has been exploited by queues in many
              decoupled access-  execute architectures, but data dependent control 
              dependencies  often prohibit prefetching of data to queues.  This research will
              investigate techniques to facilitate  anticipatory loading to queues even in
              presence of data  dependent control dependencies. The research will build on 
              the PI's previous studies on accessexecute decoupling and  other schemes to
              improve the performance of memory  accessing.    The PI is incorporating
              innovative techniques such as active  learning, and cooperative learning into
              the classroom.  She  wants to emphasize design, design automation, and 
              experimental aspects in her courses.  As part of curriculum  improvement, a new
              graduate course on Advanced Computer  architecture and an undergraduate course
              and laboratory on  Digital Design using FPGAs are being developed.  The PI also
               plans to participate in outreach activities for high-school  students and
              special programs for women and minorities.  The  overall objective is to
              stimulate efficient learning at  graduate, undergraduate and pre-college levels
              of education.  ***
