Title       : CAREER: The Development and Application of Hybrid Computations for Interfacial
               Problems in Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1997       
File        : a9624634

Award Number: 9624634
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624634  Thompson  This is a CAREER grant which integrates research and 
              education activities.  The research component is aimed at  understanding how
              microscopic structural and dynamic effects  at solid/fluid interfaces impact
              macroscopic fluid flows.  Of particular interest are flows involving the
              spreading of  fluid on a solid substrate.  Such flows are ubiquitous in  nature
              and are encountered in many important manufacturing  processes.   Examples
              include coating, fabrication of  metal/ceramic composites and containment of
              molten alloys.  To model these systems a new computational method will be 
              developed.  The method will link a molecular dynamics  simulation in the
              vicinity of the solid interface with a  continuum model on larger length
              scales.  By using a  molecular dynamics simulation near the solid, the detailed
               flow can be modeled without imposing phenomenological  boundary conditions. 
              By using a continuum description such  as the Navier-Stokes equations away from
              the solid, the flow  at experimental length scales can be resolved.  This 
              discrete-continuum hybrid computation in and of itself  represents an important
              advance in simulational techniques.    Integrated with this research is a
              teaching program that  includes the development of a multidisciplinary
              curriculum  on computer simulation of systems at the molecular/particle  level.
               Interesting results from research in molecular  hydrodynamics and
              computational materials science will be  integrated into the undergraduate
              curriculum in fluids and  thermodynamics.  %%%  This is a CAREER grant which
              integrates research and  education activities.  The research component is aimed
              at  understanding how microscopic structural and dynamic effects  at
              solid/fluid interfaces impact macroscopic fluid flows.  Of particular interest
              are flows involving the  spreading of fluid on a solid substrate.  Such  flows
              are ubiquitous in nature and are  encountered in many important manufacturing 
              processes.   Examples include coating,  fabrication of  metal/ceramic
              composites and  containment of molten alloys. To model these  systems a new
              computational method will be  developed.    Integrated with this research is a
              teaching  program that includes the development of a  multidisciplinary
              curriculum on computer  simulation of systems at the molecular/particle  level.
               Interesting results from research in  molecular hydrodynamics and
              computational  materials science will be integrated into the  undergraduate
              curriculum in fluids and  thermodynamics.  ***
