Title       : CPMSA: "Partnerships To Enhance Student Achievement (PESA)"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a9624084

Award Number: 9624084
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2675458            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carlinda Purcell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Cecil Stroud  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              William S. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              George D. Thigpen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Jerry Congleton  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Shirley Turnage  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Roanoke River Valley Conso
	      222 County Farm Road
	      Windsor, NC  27983    252/794-3173

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Roanoke River Valley Consortium (R2VC), consists of five  predominately
              African American disadvantaged school systems  (Bertie, 78%; Hertford, 73%;
              Northampton, 79%; Warren, 77%; Weldon  City, 98%) located in rural
              poverty-stricken Northern North  Carolina.  Poverty has a reverberating effect
              on these children and  their families, and also on these school systems where
              the students  are in attendance.  To decrease the gap between these
              disadvantages  school systems and advantaged systems, the R2VC proposes to 
              implement a comprehensive regional science and mathematics K-12  project
              entitled Partnerships to Enhance Student Achievement  (PESA).  The goal of PESA
              is to implement systemic approaches to  increase the number of minority
              students enrolling in a  successfully completing precollege courses essential
              to preparation  for collegiate science and mathematics.  To achieve this goal,
              an  overview of the objectives are as follows: to deliver quality  instruction
              and to sustain interventions in school science and  mathematics education for
              minority students that will result in a  significant increase in those who
              graduate and who are academically  prepared to enter college and major in the
              sciences, mathematics,  or engineering; to substantially decrease tracking and
              improve  academic counseling to facilitate the successful transition of 
              minority students from elementary to middle and from middle to high  school
              into undergraduate programs in SMET; to stimulate efforts  among secondary
              schools and colleges and universities, as well as  relevant informal science
              organizations (e.g., museums, aquaria,  etc.); to develop summer enrichment
              activities; to stimulate  efforts to establish mentorship programs among
              professional  organizations, business, and industry and network with programs 
              supported by the federal and private sector to avoid duplication,  to share
              resources, and to maximize available funding; to stimulate  the involvement of
              parents and guardians and the business community  throu gh partnerships in all
              aspects of the students' education; and  to function in a complementary and
              collaborative manner with other  funded educational activities (i.e., NSF,EPA,
              NIH, UDOE, etc.)  through continuous dialogue.    PESA has four major
              components: (1) staff development for educators  (i.e., teachers, counselors,
              administrators); (2) student  enrichment opportunities including field-trips,
              Saturday Seminars,  Leadership Conference, career counseling, mentorships,
              Summer  Enrichment Institute, and a challenging high school course of study 
              (Ronald McNair Academy); (3) parental partnerships; and (4)  business/industry
              partnerships.    With support from the N.C. State Department of Public
              Instruction,  Elizabeth City State University, North Carolina Central
              University,  University of N.C. at Chapel Hill and business/industry, through 
              memorandums of partnerships, this project will influence each  entire school
              system in the areas of curriculum reform, curriculum  enhancement, teacher
              enhancement, strategic use of resources,  student enrichment activities, and
              summer enrichment activities.   The curriculum shall be enhanced through such
              activities as Family  Math, Family Science, Science and Technology for Children
              (K-5),  Science and Technology Program (6-8), the Bob Moses Algebra  Project,
              EQUALS, and the Ronald McNair Academy (9-12).  Teachers  shall upgrade their
              skills through training in the aforementioned  areas as well as Gender/Equity
              Expectations for Student  Achievement.  In addition, teachers will be
              encouraged to accept  summer internships in business/industry, higher education
              and  federal agencies such as NASA and EPA.  The students will be  provided
              expanded opportunities in science and math.  These  activities consist of the
              following: Super Stars (K-5); Math Counts  (6-8);  Bob Moses Algebra Project
              (6-8); Student Challenge (9);  Summer Enrichment Institute (9); Math Science
              Education Network  Seminars (10); Math/Science Leadership conference (11);
              Mentorships  (12); and  Ronald McNair Academy course of study (9-12).  Parents 
              will be encouraged and supported in the establishment of a parent  Partnership
              Program to function as a resource to the school systems  and to enhance their
              involvement in their children's education.      The evidence of program
              effectiveness in schools and classrooms  used for validation by the National
              Diffusion Program Effectiveness  panel shall be used for evaluation.  The
              program effectiveness  areas are specified in claim types.  They are as
              follows:  Claim  Type 1, Academic Achievement; Claim Type 2, Teacher Learning 
              Process; Claim Type 3, Positive Change Student; and Claim Type 4, 
              Instructional Delivery.  The evaluation results will show  institutionalization
              os systemic changes which will result in an  increase in minority students
              enrollment in and successful  completion of precollege courses in science and
              mathematics;  minority student academic performance; minority students choosing
               careers in science and mathematics; teachers using innovative  instructional
              and motivational strategies; parental involvement;  business/industry
              partnerships; and, utilization of available  resources to enhance instruction. 
              The results of implementing PESA  will depict a project that can be implemented
              in whole or in part  to meet the needs of students in rural and/or urban areas.
               ***
