Title       : Observational Tests of Mixing in Low Mass Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9624680

Award Number: 9624680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael M. Briley mike@maxwell.phys.uwosh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    414/424-1234

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9624680  Briley      A program of research in stellar spectroscopy and
              photometry will be carried out.  The research efforts are specifically targeted
              at providing observational constraints on the chemical abundance modifying
              mechanisms believed to be operating in evolving low mass stars.  The objects to
              be observed will include galactic globular cluster stars.  These stars are
              known to vary in their light-element abundances.  Stars which are in evolving
              members of old open clusters of stars will also be observed.  These types of
              stars are the among the brightest stars and are most often observed to obtain
              data for use in chemical abundance determinations.  An understanding of the
              processes which alter the distribution of important elements, such as oxygen
              and lithium, from their primordial values is required before conclusions can be
              drawn regarding the chemical history of our galaxy.    In collaboration with
              researchers at other institutions, a series of observational programs will be
              pursued which will use some of the most recent techniques in astronomical
              instrumentation.  The programs include:    1) A study of isotopic carbon and
              other light element abundances in cluster stars as probes of deep mixing in the
              stars and to obtain the sensitivity of the mixing mechanism to stellar mass and
              composition.    2) The determination of the location of the onset of mixing in
              moderately metal-poor globular cluster stars.    3) Measurement and analysis of
              ultaviolet wavelength Nitrogen Hydride (NH) band strengths among bright
              globular cluster stars to directly determine nitrogen abundances (a crucial
              input required to assess the role of deep mixing).    4) Placing constraints on
              the limits of primordial oxygen variations in the globular clusters through the
              widths of their color-magnitude diagrams.    The development of collaborative
              programs with scientists at other institutions to obtain data, with local
              reduction and analysis of the data, benefits not only the resident faculty (by
              stimulating profess ional growth), but also benefits the undergraduate students
              through early exposure to fundamental research.    As a complement to the
              research projects, a course in basic astrophysics (stellar atmospheres and
              interiors) is being developed for the Physics/Astronomy Department.  A series
              of animations of complex astrophysical processes will be developed, using
              current stellar model atmospheres, as a supplement to the course.  The
              resulting animations will be developed in the Mpeg format and made available to
              other teachers over the Internet.  ***
