Title       : New Techniques and Applications for Solid-State NMR Studies of Heterogenous
               Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9624161

Award Number: 9624161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Munson munson@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, seeks to develop  four new techniques
              with which to study solid surfaces that serve  to catalyze reactions. 
              Professor Munson will develop an in situ  flow magic-angle spinning (MAS) solid
              state nuclear magnetic  resonance (NMR) spectrometer probe.  Two dimensional
              pulse  strategies will also be developed to follow chemical species  during
              catalytic reactions.  Spin-polarized xenon will be used to  study low to medium
              surface areas catalysts where sensitivity is  a problem and a large volume MAS
              probe will be constructed to  increase the allowed sample size by at least an
              order of  magnitude.  During the tenure of this four-year continuing grant, 
              Professor Munson and his students at the University of Minnesota  will apply
              these new techniques to the study of partial oxidation  catalysis reactions
              that incorporate functional groups such as  epoxides, aldehydes and carboxylic
              acids into products.  Olefin  metathesis reactions that break carbon-carbon
              double bonds with  the formation of two new carbon-carbon double bonds will
              also be  studied during this CAREER research project.  Professor Munson's 
              educational plan involves exciting students at the high school,  undergraduate
              and graduate level about topics in chemistry.  An  NMR spectrometer has already
              been built at the University of  Minnesota that will be available for loan to
              local undergraduate  institutions in order to help create excitement about the
              field  of chemistry.  Incorporation of multimedia materials for use in  the
              classroom at each of these levels is also planned.  The field of heterogeneous
              catalysis is extremely important to  the future vitality of the scientific
              enterprise as the need to  do chemistry under lower energy consuming conditions
              and to  minimize the environmental impact of chemical synthesis becomes  more
              critical.  Through the planned work of Professor Munson's  CAREER research
              project, a concerted effort will be directed to  problems of this type.  This
              activity will be enriching for the  students involved in doing this science and
              it will provide  exciting examples to students elsewhere about the power of the
               chemical sciences.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                      
