Title       : CAREER: Seismic Response Suppression Using Materials with Controllable Stiffness
               and Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9624949

Award Number: 9624949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Scalzi                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269124             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henri P. Gavin henri.gavin@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,1045,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9624949  Gavin  The primary goal of this career research program is to  develop
              a control system for seismic structural vibration  suppression which is simple
              to implement, robust to  uncertainties in the structural model, requires very
              little  external power, and has guaranteed closed loop stability.  Structural
              members with adjustable stiffness and damping  will be installed in a lumped
              parameter structural system to  achieve this goal.  These members will make use
              of  electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological (MR)  materials.  These
              materials behave like Newtonian fluids in  the absence of external
              electrostatic or magnetic fields but  quickly become visco-electic plastic
              solids when strong  fields are applied.  A model for the controllable
              structural  members will include a detailed model for ER and MR behavior  at
              low shear rates.  Experiments on ER and MR devices will  be used to refine the
              analytical models.  Models of a  structure with interacting ER or MR devices
              will be used to  derive control rules to suppress vibrations in these 
              nonlinear systems.  The performance of the control will be  judged by the
              attenuation of deformations and absolute  accelerations.  Control synthesis
              will be carried out by  using various control methods.  The companion
              educational  program is designed to capture the interest of young  students to
              give them the opportunity to indulge their  academic curiosities and to prepare
              graduate students for a  productive career in structural control.  A lecture
              and  portable hands-on demonstration will be prepared to be  delivered at area
              high schools and elementary schools.  Powerful problem solving tools will be
              given to  undergraduates computer packages.  Undergraduates will have 
              opportunities to conduct research of their own choosing or  as part of this
              research program.  Facilities will be in  place to provide laboratory support
              to their projects.  Graduate students will profit from a cummiculum in control 
              that is coordinated across all engineering departm ents at  Duke University. 
              Local industries will be involved in both  the research and education programs
              through collaborations  and summer internships.  This is a FY 96 Career award. 
              ***
