Title       : CAREER: Building and Searching Data Structures for Spatial Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9624315

Award Number: 9624315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Amato amato@cs.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years geometric modeling and simulation techniques  have become
              essential tools for applications involving  physical objects.  Although much
              progress has been made,  there are important applications that cannot be
              realized  with current technology. Examples include controlling  autonomous
              robots operating in dynamic situations, training  an employee for a dangerous
              task in a virtual reality  environment, and helping an engineer interactively
              analyze  design choices using a threedimensional model of a complex  product. 
              The general objective of this research is to  design and implement practical
              algorithms for such  applications.  Toward this goal, the applicability of 
              techniques developed in the field of computational geometry  to the following
              target applications will be studied:  performing robotic path planning and
              planning manipulation  tasks with contact, and analyzing product designs for 
              manufacturability, assembly, and disassembly. The research  will be performed
              in collaboration with an ongoing research  effort at Texas A&M in dextrous
              manipulation and with  researchers at GE R&D analyzing product designs for and 
              maintainability.  Two educational activities will be undertaken.  First, 
              mentoring and general support programs will be initiated for  undergraduate and
              graduate women in the Computer Science  Department at Texas A&M. The goal of
              these programs is to  encourage more women to pursue graduate studies and
              careers  in computer science and engineering. Second, group learning  methods
              will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate  courses in theoretical
              computer science.  The change from  the standard lecture format is motivated by
              research that  has shown that group learning can increase student interest  and
              help them to understand concepts more fully.  ***
