Title       : Simple Molecular Solids at Ultrahigh Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9624050

Award Number: 9624050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $428044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell J. Hemley hemley@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ho-kwang Mao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9624050  Hemley    The behavior of solid hydrogen and related molecular systems 
              will  be  investigated  with  newly  developed  experimental  techniques   to 
              pressures  in  excess  of   300   GPa   and  temperatures  down  to  2 K.  Both
              recently  discovered  and  theoretically predicted novel transitions in these
              materials  will  be  examined, including metallization at  the  highest 
              pressures.  The experiments will be conducted with  diamond-  anvil  cells 
              used  in  conjunction with  synchrotron  x-ray  diffraction and synchrotron
              infrared, Raman, Brillouin,  and  optical  spectroscopic  methods.  The 
              diamond  anvils  will  include high-strength, high-purity synthetic crystals.  
              The  experiments will probe the crystal structures, orientational  states,  
              phase   diagrams,   and   vibrational   electronic  properties  of the
              high-pressure molecular and non-molecular  states.   The  high-pressure
              behavior  of  newly  discovered  stoichiometric hydrogen compounds will also be
              investigated,  and  new  techniques for exploring matter  at  still  higher 
              pressures  will be developed.  The results of  this  project  will  provide 
              critical  tests of  fundamental  theories  of  condensed  matter  physics, will
              aid in the  design  of  new  materials,  and  will provide important
              information  on  the  interiors of the large planets.  %%%  Hydrogen is the
              most abundant element in the cosmos and  the  key  to a wide range of
              fundamental problems in the physical  sciences.  At low temperatures and under
              moderate pressures,  the material crystallizes as a diatomic molecular solid. 
              At  sufficiently  high  pressures, however,  the  molecules  are  predicted  to
              break down to form an atomic metal with  novel  and   potentially  important 
              properties   such   as   high-  temperature  superconductivity.  At high
              temperatures,  this  material in the fluid state is the major constituent of 
              the  large gaseous planets, and at still higher temperatures,  of  stars.  
              Information  on  the behavior  of  hydroge n  as  it  evolves  towards these
              novel states requires detailed  study  with  high-pressure techniques.  Resent
              advances in diamond-  anvil  cell  techniques  have  permitted  materials  to  
              be  compressed and studied to pressures in excess of 300 GPa  (3  Mbar   or  
              three  million  atmospheres  pressure).    These  techniques  will  be used
              together with x-ray  and  infrared  radiation   from   high-energy   electron  
              storage   rings,  synchrotrons, laser techniques, and other optical methods to 
              probe  the nature of hydrogen and related substances in  the  newly  accessible
              range of pressures.  The  results  of  the  work will provide critical tests of
              fundamental theories  of  condensed  matter  physics, will aid in the  design 
              of  new  materials,  and  will provide important information  on  the 
              interiors of the large planets.  ***
