Title       : New Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Techniques for the Study of Incommensurate
               Insulators and Incommensurate Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1998  
File        : a9624962

Award Number: 9624962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Ailion Ailion@mail.physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624962  Ailion    NMR  (and  NQR)  techniques for the study of  the 
              ultraslow  diffusion  of  large topological. defects  will  be  further 
              developed  by the PI and applied to detecting the  diffusion  of   the 
              modulation  wave  in  structurally  incommensurate  insulating and
              incommensurate glasses.  These techniques are  based  on  measurements of the
              magnetization decay over  the  incommensurately  broadened  NMR  lineshape.  In
                addition,  rotating-frame relaxation time techniques will be  developed  for
              measuring the slow motions of quadrupolar nuclei.  These  techniques will be
              applied to elucidating the nature of such  motions  during the transition from
              a perfect incommensurate  crystal to an incommensurate glass. The techniques
              developed  in  this  project should be applicable to motions  of  other 
              topological defects such as dislocations in deformed solids,  domain  walls in
              magnets, superconducting flux lines, charge  and  spin  density waves, and
              layered boundaries in  layered  structures.  %%%  Nuclear   magnetic  resonance
               (NMR)  techniques   will   be  developed  further and applied to the study of
              the ultraslow  motions of large massive defects in solids, which can not be 
              detected  by  other techniques. However, a novel  technique,  recently
              developed by the principal investigator, can detect  motions that are several
              orders of magnitude slower than can  be  observed  by the conventional
              techniques. In particular,  these methods will be applied to the motions of a
              particular  defect.  called  the  modulation wave,  which  exists  in  a 
              special     class    of    disordered    material    (called  incommensurate), 
              which has properties intermediate  between  that of a perfect crystal and a
              glass. This research touches  on  the  transition between perfect crystals and 
              disordered  matter  as  well as on the nature of glasses.   The  insight 
              gained  may be important in understanding the properties  of  magnets  and
              superconductors, and the new techniques  should  be  app licable  to motions of
              other large-scale  defects  in  widely different solid state systems.  ***
