Title       : CAREER: Compiling for Heterogeneous Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1999      
File        : a9624209

Award Number: 9624209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathryn S. McKinley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Heterogeneous parallel systems incorporate diverse models of  parallelism within
              a single machine or across machines.  These systems provide high performance
              for large, diverse  applications. Heterogeneity unfortunately complicates 
              software development. Users currently hand parallelize each  task for each
              architecture. These programs are not portable  and must be recoded if changes
              occur (e.g., machines are  added or removed).  The user is also burdened with 
              performing the appropriate optimizations to achieve high  performance. A
              compiler can solve these problems. The most  important advantages of a compiler
              based approach are:    (1) Portability and Ease of Use: Users program the 
              appropriate model of parallelism for their algorithms. The  compiler
              automatically maps them on to the specifics of the  available architectures.
              (2) High Performance: The compiler  optimizes with aggressive, target specific
              optimizations and  coordinates diverse hardware to achieve excellent 
              performance.    To manage heterogeneity the compiler must: target diverse 
              architectures, adjust optimization strategies to suit  targets, exploit
              run-time changes in machine availability,  and allow languages to evolve.  The
              objective of this  research is to investigate a compilation system to support 
              these requirements. The system will use an innovative  compiler organization
              and representations in order to  provide the flexibility that heterogeneity
              requires.  This  project concentrates on the design and implementation of  this
              compiler infrastructure.  The system will be used to  investigate automatic
              parallelization and partitioning  strategies for a heterogeneous target.  It
              will address  issues such as how to map programmer models of parallelism  on to
              the corresponding machine and how to further optimize  it for total system
              performance.  This compiler-based  approach will provide an infrastructure
              capable of  performing the advanced dynamic and static optimizations  that
              heterogeneous systems demand for high performa nce.  ***
