Title       : The Gaseous Extent of Galaxies and the Origin of Quasi- Stellar Object
               Lyman-Alpha Absorption Line Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9624216

Award Number: 9624216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Lanzetta lanzetta@sbast3.ess.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lanzetta  9624216  The research to be carried out focuses on the gaseous extent
              of galaxies and the origin of Quasi-Stellar Object (QSO) absorption systems. 
              The foundation for carrying out the research is an existing imaging and
              spectroscopic survey of faint galaxies in the fields of the Hubble Space
              Telescope spectroscopic target QSOs.  The goal of the survey is to probe the
              gaseous extent of galaxies and the origin of Lyman alpha spectral line
              absorption systems by directly comparing redshifts of galaxies and absorbers
              along common lines of sight.  Nearly 2000 faint objects in 25 fields have
              already been targeted with low-resolution optical spectroscopy.  A wide variety
              of follow-up observations of galaxies identified in the survey have already
              been obtained, including broad-band optical and infrared imaging, broad-band,
              high-resolution optical imaging, and high-resolution optical spectroscopy. 
              Additional follow-up observations of galaxies identified in the survey are
              planned, including 21 cm radio spectroscopy observations and wide-field,
              low-resolution optical spectroscopy.  The existing and planned observations
              will constitute an enormously rich data set that was designed for the purpose
              of providing new insights into many different aspects of the relationship
              between galaxies and absorption systems.  The observations and measurements
              characterize, in more or less as much detail as is possible, the properties of
              an unbiased sample of galaxies that by chance occur near lines of sight to
              bright background QSOs.  This allows  one to obtain unique measurements of the
              presence or absence of corresponding Lyman alpha absorption lines.  The
              potential application of these observations and measurements is enormous, not
              only from the perspective of the relationship between galaxies and absorbers,
              but also from the perspective of faint galaxies generally.  Specifically, the
              observations and measurements will be used to determine how the incidence and
              extent of tenuous gas around galaxies depends on  the luminosity, mass,
              morphological type, stellar population and star formation history, and
              large-scale environment of the galaxies.  The luminosity function of Lyman
              alpha absorbing galaxies will be derived.  This is a crucial quantity that
              links the number density of Lyman alpha absorbers with the number counts and
              redshift distribution of faint galaxies.  Galaxy and absorber pairs are also of
              interest because they provide a new and utterly unique dynamical probe of
              galaxies that extends far beyond conventional rotation curves and can be
              applied to determine the dark matter content of galaxies to unprecedented
              spatial scales and redshifts.  The education plan focuses on the development of
              a new course and textbook to teach quantitative reasoning skills to non-science
              majors and the development of a new program to involve undergraduate students
              and high school students in astronomical research.  The goal is to exploit the
              natural tendency of students in all areas of study to take an interest in
              astronomical topics to teach concrete, tangible skills drawn from the areas of
              applied physics, applied mathematics, and applied statistics.  The new course
              is entitled "Impacts in the Solar System" and is specifically aimed at
              non-science majors who have had minimal but some background in physics,
              mathematics, or statistics.  The objective of the course is to apply simple yet
              rigorous quantitative reasoning to a variety of problems related to impacts in
              the solar system, concentrating especially on terrestrial impacts and their
              consequences for evolution of life on Earth, but also covering impacts on other
              solar system objects.  The objective of the program of undergraduate research
              is to allow students from all areas of study particularly those who will not
              become professional researchers to benefit from the experience of conducting
              research.
