Title       : CAREER: An Approach of Ordinal Comparison to the Design and Optimization of
               Discrete Event Dynamic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1998    
File        : a9624279

Award Number: 9624279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Liyi Dai liyi@zsch.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624279  Dai  Research Plan       Discrete event dynamic systems represent many
              important  engineering systems such as communications networks, computer 
              networks, manufacturing systems, and transportation systems.   This project is
              motivated by the need for effective performance  analysis, optimization, and
              design of such systems.  There are  two integrated major research thrust we
              propose to pursue:  (A) Characterization and investigation of mechanism of
              ordinal  comparison.  Recent research as demonstrated that ordinal  comparison,
              or comparing relative orders of performances of  different designs, converges
              very fast despite possible presence  of large estimation errors.  The indicator
              process turns out  surprisingly to be a fundamental concept with several
              important  implications.  Based on the notion of indicator processes, the 
              ordinal comparison converges exponentially fast in many important  situations. 
              The indicator process also provides useful insight  on the dynamical behavior
              of ordinal comparison.  In this  project, we shall further investigate dynamic
              properties of the  indicator process and its impact on optimization, design,
              and  simulation of discrete event dynamic systems.  (B) A new ordinal approach
              to optimization and design of discrete  event dynamic systems. Discrete event
              dynamic systems are  complex, stochastic, and nonlinear.  System design has to
              cope  with difficulties such as complex structure, slow convergence of 
              performance value estimates, and large discrete search space.  We  shall (i)
              investigate simulation planning for efficient  comparison; (ii) establish new
              optimization and control  algorithms utilizing the fast convergence of ordinal
              comparison.  These algorithms can allocate quickly good designs with minimal 
              budget.    Education Plan:  The PI has (a) opened a new course in manufacturing
              systems which  draws students from business school and local industry; (b) 
              introduced computer into classroom; (c) mentored students.  In  this project,
              the PI will:        (1) develop a software for his manufacturing systems
              course;       (2) further refine a computer program he has written for a      
              course on matrix algebra;       (3) establish a partnership with local industry
              in          undergraduate and graduate education.  ***
