Title       : Biomolecular Materials: Structure, Phase Behavior, and Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9624091

Award Number: 9624091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cyrus R. Safinya safinya@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip A. Pincus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc      9624091 
              Safinya    The   structure   of   artificially  developed   self   assembled 
              membrane-associating-proteins and peptides in multilayers will be 
              characterized  by synchrotron x-ray diffraction  techniques.  The  objective is
              to elucidate protein-protein interactions  in  these  artificial self
              assemblies and to develop a new class of advanced  materials consisting of
              functionalized interfaces manipulated  at  the  molecular  level.  This should
              lead  to  advanced  materials  useful  in  optical,  separations,  chemical 
              sensors,  and  high  temperature catalysis applications. We will explore the
              structure  and  hydrogel  behavior  in a newly invented  class  of  lamellar 
              hydrogels    based   on   fluid   membranes   and    end-anchored 
              polymer-lipids.  "bioactive  lamellar  gels"  useful  in   tissue  healing  or 
              drug  delivery applications will be  developed  with  activity derived from
              biomolecules and mechanical stability  from  the polymer-lipid component.  %%% 
              This project seeks to develop a new class of materials consisting  of  
              multilayers  of  functionalized  interfaces  which  can   be  manipulated  at 
              the  molecular level. The  components  of  these  materials will consist of
              surfactants (surface active molecules),  proteins,  and  peptides.  The 
              materials  should  be  useful  in  molecular  separations and purification
              technologies,  biological  and chemical sensors technologies, and high
              temperature catalysis  applications. A new class of recently invented hydrogels
              invented  in  this  laboratory will be explored further. The lamellar  gels 
              are  made  from liquid phases by the addition of water, a  highly  unusual 
              behavior. Because the gels contains no  solid  component  they   have  the 
              potential  of  incorporating  combinations   of  biologically active molecules.
              We will explore the development of  "bioactive   lamellar   gels"   useful   in
                artificial   tissue  development,   in   tissue   healing,   and   in   drug 
               delivery  applications.  ***
