Title       : Controlled Fluorescent Derivatization of Peptides and Proteins for
               Characterization by Capillary Electrophoresis Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9624884

Award Number: 9624884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry K. Krannich krannich@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen C. Beale  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the  development of
              novel, useful, fluorescent labeling strategies  that will permit
              biomacromolecule analysis, especially for  proteins and peptides, using
              capillary electrophoresis (CE).   During the tenure of this four-year
              continuing grant, Professor  Beale and his students at the University of
              Alabama at Birmingham  will develop a highly sensitive peptide mapping protocol
              using CE  with laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) detection, investigate  partial
              specific peptide cleavage schemes and pursue strategies  for putting a single
              fluorescent label at the n-terminus of a  protein without modifying the entire
              protein.  During this grant  period Professor Beale will expose undergraduates
              to research  opportunities and implement project-based laboratory experiences 
              in the senior level analytical course.  This course will be  tailored to
              students in forensic science, public health, pre-med  and chemistry.    The
              ability to characterize proteins by mapping peptide sequences  and to develop
              sensitive protein separation methods are important  objectives for a host of
              applications in biotechnology.  The  separations based on CE with LIF to be
              developed will be  sensitive and practical outcomes of this CAREER research
              project.   The enrichment of the undergraduate analytical curriculum and the 
              enhanced opportunities for undergraduates to participate in  frontier research
              projects are educational aspects of this CAREER  research project that will
              positively impact students at the  University of Alabama at Birmingham.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
