Title       : Career: Nonlinear Control: New Problems for Robust and Adaptive Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  1997    
File        : a9624386

Award Number: 9624386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miroslav Krstic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624386  Krstic       The research objective of the proposal is to develop new 
              control designs which exploit, rather than counteract, nonlinear  features of
              engineering systems.  The Principal Investigator's  previous research includes
              solutions to several long-standing  design problems in adaptive nonlinear
              control and a new monograph  on control of uncertain nonlinear systems.  These
              designs are  gaining popularity in a number of application areas, and are 
              included in commercially available control design software.  This  proposal
              addresses new problems of robust and adaptive control  for systems with severe
              nonlinearities and highly uncertain  models. (A) New designs will be developed
              which avoid  cancellation of useful nonlinearities.  This is a major 
              theoretical and practical problem which the PI was recently able  to solve for
              application to jet engine stabilization.  A general  solution to this problem
              is likely to have a technological impact  in application areas such as
              automotive systems, flight control,  electric motors, power systems,
              manufacturing, and many others.   Designs without cancellation will contribute
              to solving robust  nonlinear control problems of practical importance: limited 
              control power, sensitivity to noise and unmodeled dynamics, and  stabilization
              of bifurcated equilibria. (B) Design methods will  be developed to solve the
              problem of "peak seeking"-regulation to  peaks of uncertain nonlinear
              functions. Such problems occur in  many inherently nonlinear applications where
              maximum efficiency  is achieved at the peak but the uncertainty prevents the
              designer  from choosing the set point a priori.  (C) Existing methods of 
              adaptive nonlinear control will be redesigned to allow  nonparametric
              uncertainties and improve performances under  unmodeled dynamics.  The PI's
              recent finding that adaptive  controllers can converge to destabilizing
              controllers (while  guaranteeing global regulation) advances the fundamental 
              geometric understanding of adaptive systems and will  guide his  future robust
              redesigns.  The objectives of the proposal are  motivated by application
              problems, and will provide a theoretical  base for future collaborative
              projects with United Technologies,  Ford Motor Company, and Rockwell
              International.       The focus of the education plan is on developing a new 
              graduate course Nonlinear Control Design based on the PI's recent  book.  An
              effort will be made to introduce nonlinear control  results of engineering
              relevance into the graduate control  curriculum.  A particular emphasis will be
              put on making  nonlinear control attractive to a broader spectrum of control 
              students, especially those with interest in applications, so as  to enhance
              appreciation of control among future industrial  leaders.  The undergraduate
              teaching plan is a part of a major  innovative reform of the undergraduate
              curriculum at UMCP.  The  dynamics of the industrial environment are much
              faster than those  of the academic environment, consequently, the plan calls
              for  undergraduate control education which teaches a lasting set of  skills
              with enduring value.  Computer animation is proposed as an  important tool for
              teaching undergraduate control.  ***
