Title       : CAREER: A Concept Exploration System for Configuring Complex Systems with
               Quality Considerations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9624363

Award Number: 9624363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9624363  Chen   This Career Award provides support for research on developing a
              design system, called the Concept Exploration System (CES), for configuring
              complex systems at the early stages of design.  The CES can be used to quickly
              evaluate the design concepts and determine the top-level design specifications
              for those systems that require a large investment of resources, have long life
              cycles, have small production runs and are generally made-to-order.  Examples
              of such systems are aircraft, automobiles, launch vehicles, ships, and electric
              power generation plants.  The foundation of this research is the development of
              the Robust Concept Exploration Method which is an integrated design process
              that allows for decision making with quality consideration.  The key feature of
              this method is to integrate the robust design techniques, Suh's design axioms,
              and the Response Surface Methodology within the framework of the Compromise
              Decision Support Problem (a mathematical construct for formulating
              multi-objective design problems involving tradeoffs).  Educational focal points
              are to (1) orchestrate learning from a systems perspective in the undergraduate
              design education, (2) introduce quality engineering concepts and statistical
              methods in the graduate design curricula, and (3) encourage undergraduate
              student involvement with the research programs.   Because of growing costs and
              globalization of the marketplace, improvements in productivity require a
              reliable design in the shortest possible time.  In general, most design
              automation techniques have concentrated on relatively later design phases but
              little has been done to provide assistance in the early stages of design.  The
              development of this research will provide a prototypical tool that can be used
              by designers to do better in this area of design and ultimately enhance the
              competitiveness of American industry.  Successful implementation of the
              research is expected to affect the science and technology base in providing the
              capability of handling  design problems with a magnitude of complexity,
              reducing the risks of using uncertain information, facilitating continuous
              improvement, and assisting Concurrent Engineering and Multidisciplinary
              Optimization.
