Title       : Career Development Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9624154

Award Number: 9624154
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Daniel Frisbie frisbie@cems.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9624154     Frisbie      This proposal addresses two separate
              projects which are part of general investigations of  nanoscale materials
              chemistry. The first project, is concerned with the construction of  nanoscale
              molecular transistors (NMTs) to determine electrical conductivity mechanisms in
               individual molecules and molecular aggregates. These molecular devices will
              operate  analogously to recently developed single electron transistors based on
              quantum dots. To make  these devices, new methods for nanofabrication with the
              atomic force microscope will be  utilized as well as conventional electron beam
              writing techniques. Molecules can be placed  between closely-spaced source and
              drain electrodes by vapor deposition, or by molecular  self-assembly. The aim
              is to observe the Coulomb Blockade for the first time in organic  materials, to
              achieve room temperature operation, and to demonstrate transport spectroscopy 
              in which the energy levels available for charge transport in the molecules are
              revealed.  Completion of these studies will result in significantly new
              knowledge of conductivity  mechanisms in organic materials and will define an
              important prospective device technology  for molecular electronics. For the
              second project, a new scanning probe technique, near-field  scanning optical
              microscopy (NSOM), will be used to probe the optical properties of 
              electrochemical interfaces and nanostructures with high (<50 nm) spatial
              resolution. In  particular, the aim is to show that NSOM can be used to map
              current density at  electrochemical interfaces by imaging luminescence from
              certain electrochemical reactions.  Investigation of luminescence from porous
              silicon will be conducted to verify that the light  emission occurs from
              silicon nanostructures and to track the development of these  nanostructures
              during growth of the porous oxide. Finally, experiments are described to use 
              NSOM as a nanolithography tool and as a means for direct measurement of
              intermolecular  forces with simultaneo us tip-sample contact area measurement.
              %%%  Tremendous opportunities are arising for gaining new knowledge and
              developing new  technology by building and studying nanoscale structures.
              Recent developments in molecular  self-assembly technology and scanning probe
              microscopies in particular enable unprecedented  manipulation and investigation
              of materials on the nanoscopic scale. This research is aimed at  utilizing
              these new methods for probing nanoscale properties of materials and interfaces.
              In  the first project, nanoscale molecular transistors are constructed to
              determine electrical  conductivity mechanisms in individual molecules and
              molecular aggregates. These molecular  devices will operate analogously to
              recently developed single electron transistors and offer an  important
              prospective device technology for molecular electronics. In the second project,
              a  new scanning probe technique is to probe the optical properties of organic
              materials and  electrochemical interfaces with high (~50 nm) spatial
              resolution.
