Title       : CAREER: Vector Field Visualization with Engineering Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1999       
File        : a9624325

Award Number: 9624325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Banks   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project, the Vector Field Visualization (VFV) Project, is an integrated
              effort to apply new and existing visualization techniques to help understand
              the structure of vector fields, especially within areas of computational
              engineering.  The project will use visualization as means of improving research
              and promoting the sciences within Mississippi and the surrounding region.  The
              project will study vector field visualization for vector fields arising in a
              variety of engineering disciplines, including fluid mechanics, meteorology,
              materials science, and electricity/magnetism.  There are four components to the
              research in this project. (1) The VFV Project promotes VFV as a distinct
              subdiscipline of data visualization by devising new technique, applying and
              improving existing techniques, performing visualization analysis, and exploring
              parallelism to generate efficient and effective imagery to study vector fields
              and communicate results.  The research methods include multidimensional display
              of vector fields; optimal placement of flow lines; improvements to and analysis
              of Line Integral Convolution; mixed-dimensional illumination of tufts; iconic
              display of vector fields; and interpolation of visualization over time. (2) The
              Project will apply VFV techniques to real datasets of interest to researchers
              in engineering disciplines by soliciting datasets from researchers at the NSF
              ERC for CFS as well as from government research labs.  (3) The project will
              promote the development of a center of excellence in VFV at Mississippi State
              university. (4) The Project will disseminate research results nationwide
              through conferences, journals, and the internet.
