Title       : CAREER: Integrated Product and De- and Remanufacture Process Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9624787

Award Number: 9624787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bert Bras bert.bras@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 1045,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9624787  Bras   This NSF Career Award provides support for research on how to
              enhance the integrated design of products and de- and remanufacture processes. 
              Demanufacture is defined as the entire process opposite to manufacture involved
              in recycling, reuse, incineration and/or disposal of products after they have
              been taken back by one or more companies.  The specific objectives of the work
              are to establish (1) the operational parameters and models for an extended set
              of commercial and prototypical plastic-metal chemical and mechanical product
              de- and remanufacturing processes, (2) computer-based tools for integrated
              product and process design of plastic-metal products with associated
              appropriate high performance and robust de- and remanufacture processes, and
              (3) the efficient and effective integration of such new technologies in
              engineering education.  These objectives will be achieved by (1) classifying
              the technical, economical and ecological performance of appropriate de- and
              remanfacture processes, (2) developing models for de- and remanufacturability
              performance and robustness assessments, (3) developing tools for de- and
              remanufacturability process selection and synthesis, (4) integrating this
              process selection and synthesis with product design and synthesis models, and
              (5) enhancing the education and learning about new technologies in general and
              de- and remanufacture in particular through the development and assessment of
              new courseware and educational facilities.  Educational focal points are to (a)
              increase learning through doing by creating a facility where students can
              demanufacture real systems, (b) increase the outreach to practicing engineers
              (and others) by creating self-study (multi-media) courseware on product and
              process design for de- and remanufacture, and (c) increase the diversity of
              students and encourage holistic thinking by creating an international course on
              Environmentally Conscious Design.  A primary issue is assessing the
              effectiveness of the learning that takes  place by the students.  A secondary
              issue is the efficiency of the delivery of the educational material.   This
              award will provide advances in the field of recycling durable goods, like
              automobiles.  It will help to increase the US competitiveness with respect to
              designing products and cost-effective recycling processes that will meet
              current and pending product take-back legislation in Europe.  The research will
              contribute to new technologies for pursing recyclability, reusability, and
              other means of environmentally benign product disposal.  Other tangible
              outcomes will be computer-based tools that will provide decision support and
              enable designers to explore different recycling process scenarios in
              conjunction with the product design.
