Title       : Enhanced Sensitivity NMR Studies of Nanostructured Electronic Materials and
               Education in Physical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a9624243

Award Number: 9624243
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362500             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Russell Bowers russ@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this Faculty Early Career Development Program award funded by the  
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Bowers  
              will study nanostructured III-V semiconductor systems using enhanced  
              sensitivity nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR).  Ultrahigh  
              sensitivity NMR techniques will be developed, including solid-state   optical
              pumping, spin inject dynamic nuclear polarization, and   magnetoresistance
              detection.  Some of the examples that will be examined   include structural
              studies of dopant complex bonding geometries, the   detection of skyrmions in
              the fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), and   the determination of
              quasi-Landau level structure and magnetic moments of   composite Fermions in
              the characterization of ordering and phase domains   in semiconductor alloys
              including the III-V nitrides.  Some of these   experiments will be conducted at
              the National High Magnetic Field   Laboratory (NHMFL).  The education plan will
              include sponsorship of   undergraduate research at NHMFL, the development of
              computer-assisted   chemical education and the virtual classroom, and expansion
              of a highly   successful NMR seminar series.  One goal of this project is to
              demonstrate the potential of NMR to   provide new information about
              nanostructured electronic materials which   may not be available by any other
              analytical measurement.  All of the   systems of interest have novel device
              applications, such as in various   types of field effect transistors and in
              blue- or ultraviolet-light diode   lasers.  The educational part of this CAREER
              grant will promote an   understanding of nuclear magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy for both   undergraduate and graduate students through classroom
              work, seminars, and   hands-on research in one of the world's best a settings
              for research with   high magnetic fields.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
