Title       : CPMSA: "Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA)
               Project"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 2,  2001    
File        : a9624392

Award Number: 9624392
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3668979            (Estimated)
Investigator: Iris Metts   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome Clark  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Board of Ed of PG County
	      14201 School Lane
	      Upper Marlboro, MD  20772    301/952-6008

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project As A Component Of A Comprehensive Plan:  The Comprehensive  Partnerships
              for Minority Student Achievement (CPMSA) Project has  been designed to
              complement the extensive reform efforts in place  throughout the school
              district and state.  It reflects the  objectives of federal and state Goals
              2000 initiatives.  Through a  new restructuring plan within the school system
              that encompasses  "clusters" of school communities, direct services will be
              provided  that reflect the needs of each community and include parents and 
              school improvement teams as part of the decision-making process.      A
              Structure Designed To Deliver Excellence:  The new Superintendent  of Schools,
              Dr. Jerome Clark, has implemented a restructuring plan  that affects how the
              school system operates across every department  and division.  The new
              organization, "Communities Committed to  Children," provides the infrastructure
              for a natural pipeline for  students in science and mathematics K-12, with a
              goal of  significantly increasing the number of African American students 
              graduating from the school district prepared to pursue careers or  advanced
              studies in science, mathematics, engineering, and  technology (SMET). 
              Communities Committed to Children consists of  20 school communities or
              clusters that take ownership for the  schooling of thousands of students
              enrolled in a feeder pattern of  elementary, middle, and high schools.  Each
              cluster is directed by  a Chief Educational Administrator (CEA) who is
              responsible for  ensuring the quality of programming, K-12. Each cluster also 
              includes a designated school, or Oasis Site, which provides  instructional and
              support services after school hours and during  weekends to students, parents,
              and the general community.  It is  within this framework, a framework designed
              for success, that the  components of the Comprehensive Partnerships for
              Minority Student  Achievement (CPMSA) proposal would be implemented.    A
              Program Designed To Achieve Excellence:  Communities Committed to   Children
              works to achieve its goals of increasing the number of  students from
              underrepresented populations who leave the school  district prepared to pursue
              careers or advanced studies in SMET  courses.  A number of coordinated,
              comprehensive, and innovative  strategies and partnerships are offered through
              this CPMSA project  to attain this goal.    Extent Of Need For The Project: 
              The Board of Education of Prince  George's County is a multiculturally diverse
              school system in  Maryland, located east of Washington, D.C., and serves
              120,000  students.  This large school system mirrors many of its urban 
              counterparts in racial gender, and ethnic composition, as well as  size.  A
              number of initiatives have been implemented, and while the  performance gap in
              the school system between African American and  Caucasian students has been
              narrowed dramatically it has not been  eliminated.  The diversity of the school
              system reinforces the need  for attention to systemwide reform by: (1)
              increasing numbers of  students in science and math classes, (2) increasing
              student  academic performance, (3) improving career and technical education 
              training opportunities, and (4) enhancing staff development.  This  project
              strives to improve learning and teaching by providing a  framework for
              educational reform and accountability.  It promotes  research, consensus
              building, and systemic changes needed to ensure  equitable educational
              opportunities for all students, especially  students who are economically
              disadvantaged, limited English  proficient, and/or multiculturally diverse. 
              ***
