Title       : CAREER: Determining Parallel Complexity of Numerical Computation Problems via
               Dependency Graphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9624721

Award Number: 9624721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eunice E. Santos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research objective of this project is to determine the time  complexity of
              solving various numerical computation problems on  parallel distributed-memory
              machines in general by abstracting  the common properties of these problems via
              dependency graphs. To  that effect, two important topics are considered: (1)
              the design  and analysis of parallel numerical algorithms and (2) the 
              derivation of lower bounds on complexity. Working within LogP, a 
              recently-introduced model for parallel computation, parallel  complexity will
              be analyzed by taking into account three  important factors: (i) initial data
              placement, (ii) communication  scheduling, and (iii) local operations.
              Algorithms which are  efficient on LogP are portable from one parallel machine
              to  another and will be efficient on any parallel machine. Initially  several
              different numerical computation problems will be  considered and the parallel
              complexity for each specific problem  will be determined. The overall results
              will be used to help  extract the important criteria of dependency graphs and
              thereby  classify numerical computation problems via these criteria. 
              Furthermore, the parallel complexity for each classification of  numerical
              computation problems will be determined. The importance  of the results
              obtained lies in the ability to pinpoint what  types of data placements and
              communication schedulings are needed  in order to achieve efficient or optimal
              running times for large  classes of numerical problems.    Clearly, this
              research potentially impacts a wide variety of  applications and computational
              problems from various domains  which are currently difficult to address. In
              order to  successfully accomplish this research and apply it to these  domains,
              there must be education and training of people in the  parallel and numerical
              computing field. To that effect, a program  in parallel and numerical computing
              will be developed beginning  with course preparation at the undergraduate level
              and  culminating in a research program at  the doctoral level.  ***
