Title       : CAREER: Advanced Integrated Circuit Metallization: Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9624493

Award Number: 9624493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Alford alford@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              15        Metals, Ceramics & Electronic Materials 
Program Ref : 1045,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9624493  Alford    This CAREER research project addresses metallization and
              contact formation in silicon-based systems with the objective to create new
              fundamental knowledge in the science and engineering of interconnect materials
              systems and processes for future integrated circuit technologies. Interconnect
              materials systems to be studied include conductors, adhesion promoting layers
              and barrier layers. The research concentrates on metal conductor materials
              (silver and its alloys), but a substantial aspect of this investigation is the
              integrated systems approach to multilevel metallization that seeks greater
              understanding for addressing long term future solutions (lower resistivity Ag
              alloys) and more near term solutions (Cu alloys).  %%%  This research project
              will extend the investigator's preliminary advances in Cu metallization
              materials science and processing to integrate critical aspects of basic
              research advances with two Educational Innovations, Outreach to K-12, and a
              collaborative Community College activity with the Maricopa Community College
              District which includes courses televised to local industry.  In addition to
              the educational outreach activities, an important feature of the program is the
              general integration of research and education through the training of graduate
              students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The proposed
              basic investigations of metallization and contact formation are expected to
              contribute fundamental materials science knowledge of technological relevance
              to advanced microelectronic devices and circuits.  The knowledge and
              understanding gained from this research project is expected to contribute in a
              general way to improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits used
              in computing, information processing, and telecommunications by providing a
              fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
              materials with greater reliability and performance.  ***
