Title       : CAREER: Computer Graphics Techniques for Modeling and Rendering Weathered
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a9624172

Award Number: 9624172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie Dorsey dorsey@lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research Component  Photorealistic image synthesis is an important problem for
              such  diverse fields as architecture, lighting and industrial design, 
              scientific visualization, simulation systems, entertainment, and  advertising. 
              An important component  that has been missing from  image synthesis  is the
              effect of weathering.  Existing models of  materials  in computer graphics
              assume that the materials are in  pristine condition.  This research program
              will focus on the  development of computer graphics techniques for modeling and
               rendering weathered materials.    The research will proceed along four lines. 
              The first part of  the program involves the development of comprehensive
              material  models; and emphasis will be placed on models that can capture  the
              changing appearance of a given material over time.  The  second part of the
              program will entail the development of new  high-level representations for
              complex surfaces.  The third  aspect of the program includes creation of
              techniques simulating  the effects of the environment in both batch and
              interactive  modes.  The final stage involves developing techniques to render 
              weathered materials.    Educational Component  The pursuit of an integrated
              collection of educational  initiatives is an important goal.  The education
              plan proposes  the development of interactive pedagogical aids to augment 
              traditional classroom teaching, adaptive hypertext environments  for on-line
              student assistance, and interactive challenge-  response tools for student
              evaluation and certification.  Advanced courses in computer graphics are being
              developed using  these tools.  Mentoring and training of new researchers will 
              integrate the research and educational activities.    The principal
              investigator's track record of interdisciplinary  work, combining expertise in
              architecture and computer science,  will facilitate the work.  ***
