Title       : CAREER: Multi-user Receivers for Advanced Wireless Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9624375

Award Number: 9624375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Urbashi Mitra   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The broad goal of this research is to exploit the nature of both   the future
              communications traffic and the communications   channel in the construction of
              high performance receivers for   multi-user Code-Division Multiple-Access 
              (CDMA) signals.   Issues include bandwidth efficiency, receiver/transmitter  
              complexity, and quality of service (QoS).  Two main research   areas within
              CDMA receiver design will be investigated: multi   rate communications and
              channel equalization. In order to   accommodate a variety of potentially
              disparate sources (voice,   data and video signals), multi-rate communication
              schemes must   be developed. Possible sources such as voice, video, and data  
              communications have inherently different QoS requirements. QoS  parameters
              include: bit-rate, allowable delay, performance, and   source priority. The
              constant bit-rate paradigm of the current   wireless network will not serve
              such multi-rate services of the   future. The focus of this research is  to:
              (a) develop optimal   detectors for the various multi-rate access methods and  
              compared, (b) create performance measures which capture   QoS  needs will be
              constructed and (c) construct multi-user receivers to   explicitly exploit the
              redundancy in the mixture of narrowband and   wideband user signals. A major
              consideration is the distortion   induced by the propagation effects of  the
              radio channel. Receivers   to combat the effects of multipath and fading  will
              be developed and  analyzed. While equalization in the context of  wireless
              systems is a   well-explored problem, the novelty of this research lies in the 
               consideration of (a) parameter estimation methods necessary for   the
              accommodation of new users, (b) the specialization of   existing blind 
              equalization techniques for CDMA signals which are   achieved with moderate
              complexity, and (c) the development of   partially blind methods to fully
              exploit any information present   about the CDMA signals and the communication
              channel.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
