Title       : Career Program: Extensional Rheology of Polymer Solutions and Melts: Impact
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9624293

Award Number: 9624293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. F. Chen                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt W. Koelling   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    Proposal Number:  9624293  PI:  Koelling     This ward is for an
              integrated career development plan to educate junior high, senior high,
              undergraduate, and graduate students in the field of rheolgical behavior of
              complex fluids and conduct research on the extensional rheology of polymers.
              The research will involve four different extensional rheometers.  These
              rheometers will be used to study the extensional properties of polymer
              solutions over a range a range of temperatures.  This research is focused on
              determining the properties necessary to characterize the behavior of
              viscoelastic fluids.  It will address a range of issues such as what is the
              molecular conformation and steady-state extensional viscosity of  a polymer
              undergoing large Henky strains and whether existing constitutive equations are
              adequate for describing shear and shear-free material functions of viscoelastic
              fluids.  This information is of fundamental importance to many polymer
              processing operations including fiber spinning, blow molding,  and injection
              molding and in a variety of other phenomena including turbulent drag reduction,
              jet stability, anti-misting and flow through porous media.     An ambitious
              educational plan has been formulated.  Demonstrations will be developed to
              introduce students to the relationship between rheology and the behavior of
              materials in everyday use.  Examples include elasticity of rubber bands,
              Weissenberg effects in viscoelastic fluids such as cake batter and scrambled
              eggs, die swell with shampoos and yield stresses developed in mayonnaise and
              ketchup.  The PI plans to work with high school students in developing science
              fair projects and also plans to develop an interdisciplinary course and
              laboratory experience for both undergraduate and graduate students interested
              in the rheology of foods bio-materials, colloids, emulsions, foams, polymer
              melts, polymer solutions, elastomers, composites, waxes and metals.
