Title       : CAREER: Full Wave Analysis of Electronic Packaging on High Performance Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9624628

Award Number: 9624628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijay Jain                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen D. Gedney gedney@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624628 Gedney  In recent years, the speeds and densities of  semiconductor
              devices have increased dramatically, resulting in single chip devices with
              millions of transistors, digital devices operating  with clock speeds
              approaching 500 MHz, and microwave devices with operating frequencies upwards
              to 250.  In order to support such high speed devices,  the electronic
              packaging, namely, the electrical interconnect networks supporting the
              semiconductor devices,  must be miniaturized and their design optimized to
              maintain signal integrity.  Therefore, it is vital to develop rigorous methods
              to accurately analyze and design electrical interconnect networks of electronic
              packages.  This research effort will develop full wave analysis tools that this
              is capable of analyzing practical  large scale electronic packages for digital
              circuit and microwave circuit applications.  To this end, the principal
              objectives are: 1)  To provide the capability of full-wave electromagnetic
              field analyses of dense electronic packages.  2)  Develop explicit and implicit
              time-domain solutions of  Maxwell's equations specifically using  higher-order
              basis functions, and also utilizing Wavelet expansions.  3)  Develop a hybrid
              explicit/implicit solution of Maxwell's equations using the finite-difference
              time domain and finite-element time-domain methods.  4)  Extend the perfectly
              matched layer (PML) boundary condition to explicit and implicit time-domain
              schemes based on unstructured meshes.  5) Develop innovative parallel
              algorithms for implicit and explicit schemes for heterogeneous distributed
              multiprocessor computing environments, and for hybrid explicit/implicit
              methods.  6)  Establish industrial affiliates to mentor the practical
              applications of the full-wave simulation tools and to provide test beds for
              these tools to be applied in a design environment.  The teaching effort will
              initially focus on the modification existing courses in electromagnetics.  The
              objective of this effort is to provide an applied knowledge to  students
              through the use of interactive software toolboxes and the development of a case
              study library that can be presented for instructional purposes at the
              undergraduate and graduate level.  This will enable students to have a better
              physical understanding of electromagnetic field and wave interactions by being
              able to visualize understanding of electromagnetic field and wave interactions
              by being able to visualize  the physical phenomena in real world applications. 
              Furthermore, through case studies, students will be provided with a better
              applied knowledge of electromagnetics.  Finally, multiprocessor computers are
              reaching the point where they are becoming economical for industry and will be
              used more and more in engineering design.  However, only a select few engineers
              and computer scientists are trained on development of software on these
              platforms.  On of the goals will be to provide a course in the fundamentals on
              parallel computing, with hands on experience of parallel algorithm development
              using a number of platforms and paradigms.  This course will be
              cross-disciplinary and will provide a foundation and practical understanding of
              parallel algorithm development and parallel paradigms to engineering students
              at a number of Universities as well engineers in Industry in the Commonwealth
              of Kentucky. ***
