Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Method of Coleman and Chabauty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9624219

Award Number: 9624219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56652              (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. McCallum wmc@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     McCallum 9624219   The method of Coleman and Chabauty is a method for
              bounding rational points on curves. Over the last few years, the investigator
              has  developed a refinement of this method by bringing in descent in a  precise
              way. Until now, his work on this method has been restricted to  Fermat curves.
              He will now consider more general applications of this method, and will develop
              results of independent interest in multivariable Iwasawa theory and in the
              Iwasawa theory of p-adic representations.  Broadly, the refinement of the
              method of Coleman and Chabauty consists of two parts. The first is the
              construction of an element of a certain Selmer group attached to the Jacobian
              of the curve, and the second is the transformation of this element via a sort
              of explicit reciprocity  law into a p-adic analytic function that vanishes on
              the rational  points of the curve. The second part has, in the case of Fermat
              curves, yielded a new and beautifully geometric argument for Fermat's Last
              Theorem (not just the second case) for those primes p for which the necessary
              Selmer group element exists. The investigator has already proved that the
              necessary element exists when p is regular. The effort to construct it more
              generally has led to some interesting results in multi-variable Iwasawa theory.
              The investigator will continue to work on this line of inquiry, both for its
              independent interest and for its potential application to the general method.  
               This project falls into the general area of Arithmetic Algebraic  Geometry-a
              subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: Number Theory and
              Geometry.  This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful - having
              recently solved problems that withstood generations. Among its many
              consequences are new error correcting codes.  Such codes are essential for both
              modern computers (hard disks) and compact disks.
