Title       : A Program for CAREER Development at Chicago State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9624495

Award Number: 9624495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Seymour Lapporte                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354750             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Kanis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chicago State University
	      95th Street at King Drive
	      Chicago, IL  60628    312/995-2000

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award is made in the Office of Special Projects in support of   the
              research and teaching activities of Dr. David Kanis at Chicago State  
              University. The research will focus on two main objectives. First,   methods
              will be developed for the calculation of the third-order    response for
              nonlinear optical materials. Algorithms based on the   Fenske-Hall model
              Hamiltonian will be developed and compared to the ZINDO   methodology for
              computed third-order responses. These calculations are   expected to uncover
              generalities governing chromophore design and   identify specific molecular
              structures for synthesis and   characterization. The second element of the
              research will focus on the   use of neural networked based artificial
              intelligence to screen the   ZINDO-generated database for structure-activity
              relationships between   nonlinear optical response and electronic  and
              molecular structure.   Through the CAREER plan, undergraduates will be equipped
              and encouraged   to attend graduate school by involving them in challenging
              research   projects, implementing curricular reforms and encouraging student  
              participation at scientific meetings. A Physical  Science lecture class   will
              be transformed into a participatory, discovery-based course for   nonscience
              majors highlighting concepts rather than procedures. Outreach   activities
              toward the African-American community will bring outstanding   pre-college
              students and high school teachers to the university to   participate in
              laboratory studies. A `Science in the Hood` program will   provide outreach to
              a segment of the urban population not typically   served by science education
              programs.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
