Title       : CAREER: Effects of Cochlear Implants on Auditory Cortex Plasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9624636

Award Number: 9624636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268655             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl R. Kipke   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9231,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624636  Kipke  Cochlear implants are small wires inserted in the inner ear that
               can restore limited hearing to some profoundly deaf people.  However, our
              understanding of the neurological mechanisms by  which such implants work is
              far from complete.  While we know  that auditory areas of the cerebral cortex
              in adults continually  change in response to the sounds that are listened to
              and to the  onset of partial deafness, comparatively little is known about  how
              these parts of the brain respond to long-term use of cochlear  implants by
              hearing-impaired persons.  Yet, this adaptation (or  plasticity) of the
              cerebral cortex most likely plays a critical  role in determining the ultimate
              effectiveness of the implants,  and could provide a key to unlocking the world
              of sound for more  hearing-disabled people.    This project involves novel
              experiments and the development of  new computer models to investigate the
              dynamics (extent and rate)  of plasticity in auditory-related areas of the
              cerebral cortex in  response to long-term electrical stimulation using cochlear
               implants.  Array of hair-sized wire electrodes are implanted into  the
              cerebral cortex of deafened animals that have been fitted  with a cochlear
              implant.  These electrodes allow monitoring of  local neurological responses as
              the animals learn to "listen" via  their cochlear implant.  These responses are
              correlated with  behavioral performance to gain insight into the brain's
              responses  elicited by the implants and their functional significance. 
              Concurrently developed computer models of the relevant brain  areas and of the
              cochlear implant provide important analytical  and visualization tools for
              understanding the complex mechanisms  involved in cerebral cortex plasticity
              driven by the implants.    This research is complemented by an education plan
              in which a  graduate-level student internship is developed with a leading 
              cochlear implant company.  This internship extends beyond the  conventional
              walls of academia by providing an opport unity for  bioengineering students to
              gain substantive experience in a high-  tech industrial setting.  It is a
              mechanism for training students  in science and engineering to contribute to
              advances in the U.S.  medical device industry.    This project provides
              critical new insight into how the brain  adapts to long-term use of cochlear
              implants.  A better  understanding of cerebral cortex plasticity may lead to
              important  new advances in cochlear implant design and patient training 
              procedures.  The project also provides important new  opportunities for
              attracting talented bioengineering students who  are interested in neural
              prostheses.  Together these activities  will ultimately, help increasingly
              larger numbers of hearing-  impaired people regain the ability to enjoy the
              sounds of the  world.  ***
