Title       : CAREER: A Concurrent Design Paradigm for Small Companies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9624195

Award Number: 9624195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Carlson-Skalak s_skalak@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1045,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9624195    Carlson        This Career Award provides support for the development
              of a concurrent engineering methodology for small companies and educational
              activities to develop skills in team work, design, and product development. 
              Concurrent engineering has had a significant impact on the quality and
              development cycle of products in large corporations.  Even though small
              companies constitute ninety percent of all manufacturing firms in the United
              States, little work has been done to develop a concurrent engineering
              methodology that targets their needs.  An action research paradigm is used to
              gather information through interviews and participation in small company design
              teams.  Based upon this information, a methodology is proposed and taught to
              industrial participants and students.  After implementation of the methodology
              in companies and the classroom, revisions are made, starting the whole cycle
              again.  This action research paradigm allows practicing engineers and students
              to become partners in the development of a design methodology that uses teams
              of people to focus on the life cycle aspects of a product early in the design
              cycle. Educational activities include the development of a Technology,
              Management, and Policy minor that will be open to students across the
              university.  This minor will educate students on the development of
              technologies and products and the implication of these developments on the
              nation and the world, and will give the students an opportunity to work in
              multi-disciplinary teams on complex problems dealing with management and
              development of technologies.  These students will be better prepared to make
              tough decisions on how to govern and use technology as the nation faces the
              issues of global competition, sustainability, and diminishing resources.     
              This grant is likely to provide improvements in design within small companies
              and the education of students about design and interdisciplinary team work. 
              Similar benefits are expected from a concurrent methodology de veloped
              specifically for small companies that can be adopted without the expense of
              outside consultants.
