Title       : Electronic Properties of Amorphous Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9624002

Award Number: 9624002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Cohen dcohen@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9624002 
              Cohen    This project involves research into the fundamental properties of 
              defects  in  amorphous  semiconductors. First,  studies  will  be  carried  out
              to further verify and understand the novel  type  of  deep defect relaxation in
              hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H)  that has been suggested by capacitance
              transient measurements  in  the  previous phase of this research. These
              experimental  studies  will focus on (1) observing relaxation through its
              effect on  the  optical  spectra associated with deep defects in a-Si:H, and 
              (2)  comparing  modulated photocurrent spectra (which also indicate  a  defect 
              relaxation effect) with electron spin resonance  data  to  identify  the  deep 
              defect  sub-bands responsible.  Second,  the  project  will investigate the
              deep defect properties of  a  novel  form  of  carbon containing a predominance
              of tetrahedral bonding  (ta-C).  This  material has recently been made with 
              sufficiently  good  semiconducting properties to be amenable  to  our  junction
               capacitance  methods.  The disclosed deep defect  properties  are  likely   to
               be  fundamentally  different  than  those   of   the  tetrahedral amorphous
              semiconductors based on Si and Ge.  %%%  Amorphous or "glassy" materials
              represent a true frontier area to  test  our  understanding of solid state
              physics. One increasingly  important  class  of such materials are amorphous 
              semiconductors  such  as  hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H).   This 
              latter  material  is  finding  important  technological  applications  in 
              photovoltaics  and in thin film transistor arrays used  to  drive  liquid
              crystal displays (flat panel TV). However, the theoretical  understanding   of 
               a-Si:H  is  still  in  its   infancy.   This  experimental  research  is
              directed at  understanding  the  basic  electronic properties of defects in
              such materials. These defects  currently  limit  their  future  technological 
              exploitation.  Of  partic ular  interest are newly discovered aspects of  the 
              defect  behavior  in  a-Si:H  which  suggests  a  glassy  aspect  to  the 
              electronic structure itself. In addition, preliminary studies  of  the 
              electronic properties of a relatively new type of  amorphous  semiconductor,  
              tetrahedral  amorphous  carbon  (the   amorphous  counterpart of crystalline
              diamond) will be initiated.  ***
