Title       : CAREER: Coherent Microscopic Imaging and Spectroscopy in Bioengineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9624617

Award Number: 9624617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Izatt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,1045,5345,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9624617  Izatt  This CAREER proposal combines research and educational 
              initiatives in the field of biomedical engineering.  The proposed  research
              program is directed toward the development of new  techniques for sub-surface,
              optical tomographic imaging in  biological tissues with microscopic resolution.
               This will be  accomplished by developing advances based on optical coherence 
              tomography, a novel coherence-domain (interferometric) optical  measurement
              technique derived from state-of-the-art fiber-optic  optical communications
              technologies.  The proposed research will  have applications in biotechnology
              and minimally invasive medical  diagnostics such as endoscopy and laparoscopy. 
              Several novel  concepts are proposed for increasing the resolution and contrast
               of coherence-domain imaging.  Optical coherence tomography will  be combined
              with confocal microscopy in order to perform  microscopy with single micron
              resolution up to several  millimeters deep in intact biological tissues.  Novel
              digital  signal processing algorithms will be developed for improving the 
              resolution of optical coherence tomography images using  deconvolution.  A new
              ultra-broadbandwidth laser source will be  developed to enable combined
              high-speed and high-resolution  optical coherence tomography imaging.  The
              latter two techniques  will be particularly useful in applications such as
              minimally  invasive medical diagnostics in which the numerical aperture of  the
              optical imaging system is restricted.  Methods are also  proposed for
              increasing the contrast in coherence-domain optical  imaging by taking
              advantage of the spectral properties of light  scattered from tissues.  A
              unique system will be developed for  acquiring optical coherence tomography
              images at two different  optical wavelengths simultaneously.  This system will
              employ a  pair of wavelengths in the near-infrared with differential 
              absorption characteristics in water, and will generate images of  tissue
              hydration.  Finally, unique digital signal processi ng  algorithms will be
              developed for extracting the depth-resolved  backscatter spectrum of tissue
              samples over limited wavelength  ranges.  This last technique constitutes the
              first description of  simultaneous tomographic optical imaging and
              depth-resolved  backscatter spectroscopy for the first time, and may find 
              applications in early cancer diagnosis.  Each of the proposed  technical
              advances will be implemented in the laboratory and  tested for improvements in
              diagnostic potential against current  standard imaging techniques.    In
              addition to the proposed research program, two educational  initiatives will be
              undertaken.  A Case Western Reserve  University (CWRU) graduate Biomedical
              Engineering course on  Optical Sensing and Imaging in Biomedicine will be
              developed to  address a nationwide need for advances in teaching techniques and
               pedagogical materials in this field.  A continuing medical  education course
              on Endoscopic Imaging Technology will be  developed in collaboration with
              expert endoscopists and offered  to practicing physicians.  The latter
              initiative takes advantage  of the principal investigator's unique access to
              the medical  education environment to provide instruction to physicians in 
              physical science and engineering principles.  By providing  educational
              training for students and medical professionals, as  well as directly
              supporting participation of students in the  research program, the overall
              proposal closely integrates  research and teaching aspects of the principal
              investigator's  planned career development.  ***
