Title       : Electroanalytical Applications of Organically Modified Sol-Gel Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9624813

Award Number: 9624813
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maryanne M. Collinson mmc@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1045,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, aims to explore  and characterize the
              formation, properties and applications of  organically modified sol-gels.  The
              unique properties of these  hybrid inorganic-organic materials remain to be
              exploited fully.   The mechanism by which solutes become entrapped in these 
              materials and the control of this process will be studied.   Cyclic voltammetry
              (CV) with ultramicroelectrodes will be used to  follow local physical and
              chemical changes that occur during  hydrolysis and condensation of
              alkoxysilanes on the surfaces of  these materials.  CV and electrogenerated
              chemiluminescence will  be used to characterize the mobility and accessibility
              of small  charged redox probes entrapped in the sol-gel matrix under 
              processing conditions.  Practical results from this CAREER  research project
              will focus on the development of permselective  coatings for electroanalytical
              investigations and the fabrication  of electrochemiluminscent sensors. 
              Professor Collinson will  combine these research thrusts with an educational
              plan that  includes the development of a course in scientific ethics for  both
              undergraduate and graduate students.  A major revision of  the laboratory
              component of an undergraduate course in chemical  analysis is also planned. 
              Student interest is to be cultivated  by also employing more creative and
              realistic samples for  analysis in this course with particular attention to
              forensic and  environmental applications.    The development of a fundamental
              understanding of the  characteristics of the sol-gel matrix as an environment
              in which  to do chemistry is an important objective of this CAREER research 
              proposal.  In the long term being able to tailor these matrices  to a
              particular application using organically modified silicates  will have
              strategic impact.  The xerogels that are produced upon  drying of sol-gels have
              interesting properties in their own right  which could lead to useful
              applications in electronic, magnetic,  optical materials and derived products. 
              Professor Collinson's  aim to introduce formally contemporary issues in
              scientific  ethics and scientific conduct is timely, and this course will 
              enable the students at Kansas State University to more clearly  understand this
              topic.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
