Title       : US-Indo Cooperative Research: Design of Mineral Processing Reagents- Iron
               Oxide-Titania Separation, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1996      
File        : a9624562

Award Number: 9624562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16129              (Estimated)
Investigator: N C. Chaudhuri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tata Res Develop & Des Ctr
	      1 Mangaldas Road
	      Pune, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9624562  Chaudhuri  Description:  This award supports a US-Indo cooperative
              project  between US scientists, Drs. Brij Moudgil, postdoctoral fellow  Michael
              L. Free, Department of Materials Science and  Engineering, University of
              Florida, and Drs. N.C. Chaudhuri,  Pradip of the Tata Research Development &
              Design Centre  (TRDDC), Pune, India.  The objective of this research is to 
              understand the basic mechanism involved in selective adsorption of  hydroxamate
              and fatty acid reagents in the iron oxide-titania  systems.  Physical and
              surface chemical characterization would  involve x-rays, SEM, pore size
              distribution and electrokinetic  measurements.  Adsorption, FT-IR and
              microflotation tests would  be conducted to identify the conditions for
              achieving the desired  separation.  Selectivity observed would be explained on
              the basis of  conditional stability constants, crystal structure specificity
              and  molecular orbital considerations.  It is expected that the  fundamental
              knowledge base generated in this study would be  useful in scientific design of
              reagent schemes for processing of low  grade complex ores.         Scope:  This
              project allows cooperation between two well known  scientists whose
              capabilities complement each other and who work  in institutions with
              complementary facilities for the proposed  research.  Dr. Moudgil is the
              director of the newly established  Engineering Research Center for Particle
              Science and Technology,  University of Florida.  He has published extensively,
              including  several co-publications with Pradip.  The collaboration with Dr. 
              Chaudhuri is new and likely to benefit both institutions.  This  project meets
              a number of important objectives of the Division of  International Programs,
              especially the inclusion of a postdoctoral  fellow and a new Indian participant
              in the collaboration.
