Title       : Career: Uncertainty Management in Geoenvironmental Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9624544

Award Number: 9624544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $351539             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Gilbert bob gilbert.cemail@cemailgate.ce.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1045,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9624544    The goal of this career-development project is to
              facilitate  uncertainty management in geoenvironmental engineering  through
              both research and educational activities.  Uncertainty is significant in
              geoenvironmental engineering,  and its effective management is necessary to
              maximize  benefits and minimize costs.    The specific research objectives are:
               1. Develop and teach fundamental principles and practical  tools for managing
              uncertainty in geoenvironmental design.  2. Gain and disseminate knowledge
              about the performance  (both technical and economic) of remedial actions at 
              contaminated sites.  3. Create innovative educational units based on
              experiential  learning for teaching uncertainty management principles.  4.
              Provide unique educational and research opportunities for  undergraduate and
              graduate students, such as interactions  with private industry in internship
              programs and through  research collaboration. A key element of the project is 
              interaction between academia and industry; it is essential  in meeting each one
              of the stated objectives.    The project consists of integrated research and
              educational  activities, including the compilation of a data base of 
              performance information for remedial actions at contaminated  sites. Focus is
              placed on obtaining high quality, detailed  information for ten to fifteen
              sites, with selected sites  being used for case studies, both in research and
              in  teaching. Following the incorporation of an existing  groundwater flow and
              transport model into a simulation tool  to create hypothetical sites with
              complex, heterogeneous,  and transient subsurface conditions, this simulation
              tool is  used to study site investigation strategies, and as part of  an
              interactive software package for students to learn about  designing site
              investigation programs. Theoretical analyses  are conducted to develop
              practical guidelines and tools for  evaluating the extent of contamination and
              for predicting  design performance.    The education componen t includes, (1)
              the development of a  new graduate-level course and a continuing education
              course  to teach about uncertainty management in geoenvironmental  engineering,
              and (2) the incorporation into an undergraduate  course of a laboratory program
              that allows students to  experiment with the fundamentals of probability and 
              statistics through numerical simulation. Opportunities will  be created for
              student interaction with private industry and  other disciplines through
              internship programs, guest  lectures and research collaboration.    This career
              development project addresses an important  problem in geoenvironmental
              engineering, namely uncertainty  management. In addition, it will advance
              uncertainty  management in other engineering disciplines. The ultimate  product
              will be engineering students and practitioners who  have the capability to
              manage uncertainty effectively.  ***
