Title       : Dissertation Research: The Rocky Mountains as Part of a Regional Model of
               Paleoindian Adaptations in the Western United States.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9624373

Award Number: 9624373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11418              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Vance Haynes jovers@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. C. Vance Haynes MS Bonnie Pitblado will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. Working with already excavated archaeological
              materials she will study lithic artifacts from the U.S. Plains, Rocky Mountains
              and Great Basin. She will focus on the Paleoindian period - from approximately
              10,000 to 7,500 BP. - and conduct a detailed analysis of projectile points from
              Colorado and Utah since these two states together span the three geographic
              zones. She will also conduct a broad scale analysis of all lithic materials
              from nine sites, three from each of the areas. Through examination of raw
              material origin, manufacturing process and form of completed objects she hopes
              to determine the relationships between these three areas. A great deal of
              excavation has been conducted in both the Great Basin and the Plains and the
              archaeology of these areas during the Paleoindian period is fairly well
              understood. Much less however is known about the Rocky Mountains. Some
              archaeologists believe that this environmentally difficult area was inhabited
              year round and that separate groups of people developed a distinctive
              adaptation to this region. Others believe that cultures at a Paleoindian level
              of technology were unable to meet such a challenge. MS Pitblado will address
              this question through her analysis.  This research is significant for a number
              of reasons. First it will provide information of great interest to
              archaeologists and help to illuminate a little understood period of U.S.
              prehistory. Secondly, it will shed new light on human-environment interactions
              and the basic ability of populations to adapt at simple levels of technology.
              Third, the work has the potential to make a significant contribution to
              archaeological methodology since it will further the development and
              application of techniques for the analysis of lithic materials. Finally this
              grant will assist in the training of a promising young archaeologist.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
