Title       : CAREER: A Caching Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9624845

Award Number: 9624845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Hartman jhh@cs.arizona,edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is to develop an effective caching  infrastructure
              for the design and implementation of caches in  modular systems.  Caching is a
              well-known technique for  exploiting locality to improve performance;
              unfortunately, caches  are often added to systems in an ad-hoc fashion.  The
              caching  infrastructure will improve cache development in the following  ways. 
              First, it will define a set of practical and efficient  external cache
              interfaces for integrating caching into modular  systems, such as
              object-oriented operating systems.  Second, it  will allow the functions of the
              cache itself to be modularized,  defining internal interfaces that allow the
              functions to be  easily modified and replaced.  The flexibility this affords
              will  allow the cache infrastructure to serve as a test-bed for  caching,
              enabling different cache algorithms to be easily  implemented and studied. 
              Third, the use of a common cache  infrastructure will allow global resource
              allocation decisions to  be made among caches that are competing for resources,
              thus  optimizing overall system performance.  This resource management 
              functionality will also include mechanisms for efficiently  transferring
              resources, such as data blocks, between caches.  Finally, the caching
              infrastructure will contain a toolkit  to enable the cache control functions,
              such as the cache  coherency protocol, to be defined via a high-level
              specification  which can be verified and compiled into an efficient 
              implementation.  ***
