Title       : Dynamics of Highly Excited Hydrocarbons: From Supercollisions to Super-reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a9624533

Award Number: 9624533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy S. Mullin mullin@chem.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1312,9178,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this Faculty Early Career Development Program funded by the   Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Mullin   will use
              transient infrared absorption spectroscopy to examine dynamical   processes of
              highly vibrationally excited molecules.  Interconnected   processes such as
              unimolecular decomposition, collisional energy   transfer, and bimolecular
              reactions which accompany the relaxation of the   high energy species will be
              investigated.  The excited molecules will be   prepared in highly excited
              vibrational states by ultraviolet laser   excitation, and the final quantum
              state distributions of the products   will be determined using high-resolution
              infrared lasers with fast   optical detection.  Among the molecular systems to
              be studied are   s-tetrazine, benzene, and azulene.  In her efforts to increase
              the extent   to which young women engage in scientific study, Mullin will
              initiate a   series of community outreach programs designed to inform and
              better   prepare junior and senior high school girls for college science
              classes   and future careers in science.  At the university level, a program of
                classroom, research, and extracurricular activities will be designed to  
              improve the academic environment for women undergraduate and graduate   science
              students, and to provide increased access to senior women   mentors.  Our
              understanding of the chemistry and physics of numerous high-energy  
              environments will be enhanced from the results of Dr. Mullin's research  
              program.  These studies will follow the different possible paths that   energy
              takes as it leaves a molecule which has been highly excited   internally.  The
              results will lead to a deeper knowledge of the chemistry   of energetic
              environments in various high-energy systems, such as   plasmas, explosions,
              flames, combustion, and materials processing.  Dr.   Mullin's educational
              program is designed to provide outreach and   mentoring activities which will
              increase the participation of women in   scientific careers.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
