Title       : SBIR Phase I: Integrated Fire Modeling Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0232401

Award Number: 0232401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel V. Swenson swenson@thunderheadeng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thunderhead Engineering
	      1006 Poyntz Ave.
	      Manhattan, KS  665025459    785/770-8511

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 1038,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                  This SBIR project will develop an integrated fire modeling software package
              for use in building design and accident analysis. Modeling fires using a
              rigorous, scientific approach makes it possible to predict the course of an
              evolving fire and its impact on the building occupants, contents, and
              structure. The software will help designers implement new fire safety codes and
              standards that allow the use of Performance-Based design as an alternative to
              Rule-Based design. Performance-based design and post-accident analysis offer
              the potential to reduce injury, loss of life, property damage, and the overall
              cost of constructing and maintaining buildings through advanced technology. 
              The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has developed the
              Fire Dynamics Simulator (FDS) computer program.  FDS is research-oriented
              software with text-based input that is difficult to use for large-scale
              commercial applications. This project will integrate the FDS computation engine
              with an interactive, graphical interface for model setup and visualization,
              making the power of FDS accessible to a broader fire safety community and
              facilitating responsible engineering solutions.
    Potential markets include
              investigators performing post-accident analyses, architects and fire protection
              engineers designing the next generation of buildings, and local, state, and
              national authorities having jurisdiction (fire safety regulators). Applications
              also exist for wind-driven fire analysis, including tank-farm incidents and
              wildland fires. In addition to software sales, there is also an opportunity to
              provide training in performance-based design and analysis.

