Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Class of Transparent Coatings with Multiple Functionalities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0232551

Award Number: 0232551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohit Jain mohitjain@nanopowderenterprises.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanopowder Enterprises Inc
	      120 Centennial Avenue
	      Piscataway, NJ  088543908    908/885-5909

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research  (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              transparent conducting oxide (TCO) coating suitable for polymer substrates
              which are attractive alternatives to TCO coated glass, because of their low
              cost, reduced weight and enhanced toughness. Conventional techniques used for
              depositing TCOs require the substrate to be heated to elevated temperatures,
              since low temperature deposition leads to films with poor optical and
              electrical properties. However, polymeric substrates cannot be processed at
              elevated temperatures. Further, the surface of polymeric materials needs to
              possess adequate abrasion and scratch resistance. Accordingly, there is a need
              for a low cost coating technology that imparts multiple functionality to the
              surface, i.e. combined electrical, optical and mechanical properties. In this
              project it is  proposed to develop coatings composed of a high volume fraction
              of homogeneously dispersed conducting nanoparticles in an organic-inorganic
              matrix. The project team will develop coating formulations, deposit films on
              polymer substrates, characterize the structure, and determine the electrical,
              mechanical and optical properties. The properties will then be benchmarked
              against currently used coatings. 

Commercially, the proposed technology can
              be used in applications, such as, electromagnetic shielding, low emissivity
              windows, automobile side windows and aircraft transparencies because of their
              superior mechanical, optical and electrical properties. 

