Title       : SBIR Phase I: C5: An Educational Simulation Architecture For Wireless Handhelds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232669

Award Number: 0232669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Repenning alexander@agentsheets.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Agentsheets, Inc.
	      6560 Gunpark Drive, Suite D
	      Boulder, CO  803013374    303/530-1773

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0101000   Curriculum Development                  
Program Ref : 7256,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project uses wireless
              handheld devices that are interconnected to create an educational simulation
              architecture called C5, supporting simulations that are compact, connected,
              continuous, customizable, and collective.  C5 tightly connects four information
              technologies: handheld devices to run individual and distributed simulations; a
              desktop computer with a wireless network hub acting as the simulation manager;
              the Web as a live data and information source; and. end-user customization
              entailing customization of simulations and the integration of real time Web
              information into simulations.  Because next generation handheld devices are
              sophisticated regarding the following features: speed, networking, and display;
              they are capable, respectively, of running complex simulations, of running
              distributed simulations over fast wireless networks, and of displaying high
              resolution color.  Thus, handheld devices promise tools well beyond electronic
              versions of paper and pencil applications.  Individuals can run handheld
              versions of interactive simulations and collectively create advanced
              distributed simulations.  The research objectives of this project are to
              explore cognitive (interface), pedagogical (classroom), technical (hardware and
              software) and commercial issues for handheld-based simulations.  
     The
              proffered education simulation architecture portends the revolution to come; it
              has the potential to provide cost effective information technology enabling
              learning and scientific exploration in wide range of fields, such as life
              sciences, biology, health, political science, and economics.  While the project
              initially focuses on K-12, it ultimately aims to generate the more general
              lifelong learning markets that include distance learning, secondary education,
              home schooling and corporate training.

