Title       : SBIR Phase I: Automatic Classification of Magnetocardiograms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0232215

Award Number: 0232215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90518              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karsten Sternickel karsten@cardiomag.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CMI
	      450 Duane Ave
	      Schenectady, NY  123042627    518/381-1000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks development
              of novel machine learning capability for pattern recognition in
              magnetocardiography (MCG), which measures minute magnetic fields emitted by the
              electrophysiological activity of the heart.  The company has developed a
              revolutionary measuring device for early identification/diagnosis of heart
              disease, inside regular, magnetically unshielded hospital rooms.  However, 
              interpretation of MCG recordings remains a challenge for cardiologists, since
              there are no databases from which precise rules could be deduced.  Hence, there
              is an urgent need to automate and guide interpretation of MCG measurements, in
              order to minimize cardiologists' efforts to make meaningful diagnosis.  The
              company will explore the application of automatic pattern recognition and
              classification schemes to MCG data.  The goal is to develop a technique to
              accurately differentiate between abnormal and normal heart patterns and even to
              identify heart diseases.  The differentiation will be performed using Support
              Vector Machines because they can handle high dimensional data and are
              especially suitable for a small number of samples.  Since it is expected that
              different diseases will be located in separate clusters the investigative team
              plans to apply Self Organized Maps because they are suitable for multi-cluster
              formation.

The proffered technology, which has the potential to deliver a
              diagnostic system for the detection of ischemia and coronary artery disease,
              could lead to the production of devices for detecting small disturbances in
              cardiac function and thus may warn doctors and patients of impending
              malfunction.

