Title       : SBIR Phase I: Quality-Based Knowledge Discovery for Information Retrieval in
               Large Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0232777

Award Number: 0232777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Robinson grobinson@transpose.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Transpose
	      6 State Street, Suite 615
	      Bangor, ME  044015140    207/942-3463

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 5371,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will determine the
              feasibility of a novel, powerful technique to determine the quality of
              documents and the reliability of human reviewers in a large community, such as
              a company, government agency (particularly intelligence organizations), or
              university. Many organizations have difficulty locating their own knowledge.
              They cannot determine the quality of their internal documents nor the ability
              of their employees to evaluate those documents. Important information may get
              buried in layers of bureaucracy. This research seeks to address these problems
              by measuring document quality and user reputation, based on human evaluation
              and automated processing of those evaluations. The research objectives are:
              study and refinement of information theoretic techniques underlying the current
              technology; discovery of practical designs for expanding its scope; and
              creation of proof-of-concept demonstrations. The research will produce
              technical papers describing such systems and prove them feasible through
              software. Potential applications include stand-alone knowledge management
              products focused on document quality and plug-ins to add this capability to
              existing KM systems. Members of communities using these products will find the
              information they need more quickly and with greater confidence, enhancing
              efficiency and effectiveness in corporations, academic institutions, and
              government agencies.
The research will lead to marketable knowledge management
              software products and/or services which offer quality-based knowledge discovery
              and are targeted to large organizations in any sector (business, public,
              academic, or not-for-profit). This technology is not another kind of search
              engine. It is an evaluation system that identifies the best sources of
              knowledge, and the most valuable knowledge items, based on the experience of
              the users in the community. Today there are many vendors providing a variety of
              knowledge management solutions to large organizations, but we know of none that
              offers a knowledge discovery solution based on quality.

