Title       : SBIR Phase I: Generation of Metal Nanojets and Precise Monosize Nanospheres
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0232882

Award Number: 0232882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dean RCD@Synnovations.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Synergy Innovations, Inc.
	      PO Box 798
	      Lebanon, NH  03766    603/448-5454

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This  Small  Business  Innovation  Research  Phase  I  project  will
              develop  a  novel process  capable  of  high-volume  production  of 
              monodisperse  nanoparticles  of  arbitrary  metallic composition. Such
              highly-controlled materials are desired as components for engineered
              nanostructures. The  current  standard  precipitate  or  aerosol  processes 
              for  metal  nanoparticle  formation  are  limited  in available materials,  the
               particle  size  distribution,  or  productivity.    In this  project an 
              adaptation  to  jetting processes  will be used  to enable  formation  of metal
               nanojets  and  nanoparticles.  Because  this  is  entirely  a  physical
              process, it is expected to be able to be adapted to any metal alloy. second 
              The specific tasks  of the project will inolve survey   of possible approaches,
              analyzing the proposed process, and preparing the preliminary design of the key
              parts of a prototype apparatus.  The  objective  is  a  system  capable  of 
              the  precise  formation  of  nanojets  and  monosize nanoparticles at rates
              greater than one gram per second.
     Commerically, there  are  many 
              possible  long-term applications  for  metal  nanoparticles.  Nanoelectronics
              and high-density data storage are two appealing examples.  The established
              markets for the technology described with the most initial opportunity relevant
              to this proposal appear to be in the following  fields:  solid  propellants, 
              explosives,  and  catalysts.    Monodisperse  nanoparticles  will  allow
              
mechanical packing into ordered array structures for filtration.  The high
              surface area of nanoparticles enables  their  use  as  substrates  for 
              catalysis  of  chemical  reactions.    While  supported  by  these  initial
              markets, further innovation in many other markets and derivative technologies
              (such as oxide ceramic nanoparticles, and nano-patterning devices) will be
              developed from this new technology. This  technology  offers  a  means  of 
              producing  significant  quantities  of  monodisperse  nano-spheres  at 
              commodity  prices. It  also  enables  further  significant  innovations  in 
              nanoscale  fabrication, materials and processing. 




