Title       : SBIR Phase I: Highmarks Advanced Planning and Scheduling System for Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0232833

Award Number: 0232833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan S. Snyder jsnyder5@nyc.rr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Highmarks
	      730 Columbus Avenue Apt. 9E
	      New York, NY  10025    212/222-5131

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 7256,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project proposes to
              develop an innovative technology to radically change the organization of
              teaching and learning at schools; in particular, grade 7-12 public and private
              schools in the United States.  The main problem to be solved concerns the
              current .assembly-line. nature of most schools, whereby semester and quarterly
              classes force students with greatly different needs to proceed at roughly the
              same pace through a curriculum.  This largely inflexible pace, combined with a
              lack of transparency of student needs across semesters/quarters, leads to a
              greatly stratified typical class as each student accumulates his own unique
              gaps in meeting the learning objectives of the school.  Based on teacher
              interviews, Highmarks found a typical classroom of students in a given
              semester/quarter class can be broken down into 3-6 subgroups of readiness to
              learn.  Most teachers cannot effectively teach to these subgroups
              simultaneously, and they do not receive enough training from those teachers
              who, being masters in the art of teaching, can handle these classes.  A primary
              objective of the prototype proffered is to ensure that every class consists of
              a group of students fully ready to learn the material being taught; that is who
              have no key gaps in knowledge so far as the current material is concerned.  To
              enable this to happen, the proposed technology will overhaul how classes are
              assembled at a school, making the scheduling and organization of teaching and
              learning far more dynamic than it is today.  With a similar technique, the
              proposed technology will also have an impact on the learning disabilities and
              bilingual sectors, by making it far easier to integrate special needs students
              into regular classes.  The prototype will also overhaul teacher training at
              schools, because teachers will no longer be locked. into quarterly and semester
              classes; and in-house, hands-on training will become a much greater percentage
              of their daily schedules.  So not only will the standard .readiness to learn of
              a class be vastly improved; the standard .readiness to teach. of an average
              teacher will also be greatly enhanced.  The combination of enhanced readiness
              to learn and readiness to teach should build more effective and enjoyable
              schools, in a way that is measurable by all standard assessment regimens
              including standardized national, state or local tests.  The prototype will be
              highly scalable, aligned with K-12 content standards and will feature the
              direct, heavy involvement of curriculum and teacher designers.

The kind of
              radical change in school scheduling proposed could provide a critical step
              toward the goal of "leaving no child behind."

