Title       : SBIR Phase I: Highly Accurate Reconstruction Module For Multidisciplinary
               Computation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0232255

Award Number: 0232255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81636              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lei Tang tangl@zonatech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ZONA
	      7430 E. Stetson Drive, Suite 205
	      Scottsdale, AZ  852513540    480/945-9988

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              highly accurate reconstruction module for Godunov-type schemes to upgrade the
              capability of current multidisciplinary computational software packages for
              simulation of a class of engineering problems with small scales and high
              frequencies. The unique and innovative aspect of this work is to combine both
              Weighted Essentially Non-Oscillatory (WENO) concept and compact differencing
              into a single upwind algorithm.  Instead of using multiple polynomial
              candidates, a hybrid power-exponential spline is used as the underlying
              interpolation for a WENO scheme with local smoothness measures as the
              perturbation parameters. In this way, the weight functions of a WENO scheme can
              be analytically determined from the underlying interpolation.  Their Taylor
              series expansions around the smooth regions can be used for further accuracy
              improvement. The resulting piecewise quadratic reconstruction with compact
              difference computed slope and curvature can dramatically reduce numerical
              diffusion inherent in upwind schemes. By using this upwind scheme, the
              numerical simulation of vortex dominated flows, boundary layers, turbulence,
              acoustic waves, and electromagnetic waves, etc., can be significantly improved
              without loss of the shock-capturing feature. 
    The highly accurate
              reconstruction module, which is independent of physics, can be easily
              integrated into the current production and research codes and has the potential
              of providing cost improvement of at least an order of magnitude over the
              current versions.

