Title       : SBIR Phase I: Joblet: A System For Creating Software Development Exchanges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0232365

Award Number: 0232365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd C. Touris ttouris@netacc.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : T, Touris
	      501 Janes Road
	      Rochester, NY  146122323    585/784-1373

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
              the feasibility of a unique system, known as Joblet, which offers the potential
              to improve innovation and success in software engineering.  Joblet utilizes
              economic principles to address areas of software development that have been
              chronically problematic.  Failures in software development have been rampant in
              many technology industries.  This problem has grown as the complexity of
              software, and the number of developers needed to create it, have grown.  Open
              Source software has demonstrated the power of distributed collaborative
              development, and has shown that independent, creative individuals can join
              together to develop innovative products.  Joblet combines this power of
              collaborative development with the concepts of economic markets to enable a
              software engineering environment that will foster innovation, productivity and
              project success.  The aim of this research is to demonstrate the feasibility of
              a system that will support Joblet exchanges and study key mechanisms of Joblet
              that will lead to sustainability of markets for software development services
              and knowledge.  Such a system will have broad application in all areas of
              software development and can enable the creation of active communities for
              product innovation.

The commercial potential for the Joblet system includes
              application as a public website for hosted development services, as well as a
              product for application in private enterprises for internal and outsourced
              development efforts.
