Title       : SBIR Phase I: Non-Expert Conceptual Annotation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0232731

Award Number: 0232731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth B. Haase kh@beingmeta.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : beingmeta
	      68 Bailey Street
	      Boston, MA  021243725    617/929-0431

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores an
              approach to document indexing and search, which replaces conventional keywords
              with "concept terms" from a linguistically and semantically rich ontology.  Its
              direct research objectives will be to determine whether the use of such a rich
              descriptive language can allow non-experts (i.e., non-archivists/librarians) to
              effectively annotate media resources (especially non-textual media) with
              "concept terms" which usefully improve both the precision and recall of
              subsequent searches.  The research will prototype technologies and practices
              that enable semi-skilled workers (drawn from ethnically and economically
              diverse neighborhoods) to usefully and easily describe content using a
              conceptual language.  The results of this process will be evaluated as to the
              accuracy of the annotations and their effectiveness in guiding browsing and
              search. 

Enabling non-experts (especially content producers) to improve the
              quality of searches, that is, to create rich and useful metadata, will make the
              publication and sharing of content more effective and useful.  This could be a
              useful resource for the research community.  In addition, the development of
              the proffered technology may also mean that language technologies can be
              deployed by enabling a new segment of the work force to perform the important
              task of concept annotation.  Thus, supporting the creation of new semi-skilled
              entry-level positions in metadata production may broaden the impact of the new
              economy.

