Title       : Moving From Sea to Land Via the Freshwater Route: Larval Physiology and Mode of
               Recruitment in a Freshwater Fiddler Crab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0232094

Award Number: 0232094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24643              (Estimated)
Investigator: Renae Brodie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1148,1228,1305,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In this study, we will develop a molecular method to identify the cryptic larval
              forms of three fiddler crab species common in salt marsh communities of the
              southeastern United States. While the adults of these closely related species,
              Uca minax, Uca pugnax, and Uca pugilator, are among the most studied of salt
              marsh invertebrates, work on larval and juvenile crabs has been hindered
              because they are morphologically indistinguishable at these early life stages.
              Using a fast, inexpensive molecular assay, we will map the distribution of
              these three species starting in late spring when they begin to enter the mouth
              of South Carolina's North Inlet estuary after completing larval development in
              open coastal waters until late fall when the last of the year's young have
              joined the established adult populations.  From this information, we will
              produce a high-resolution model of the annual invasion of the marsh by Uca
              crabs. We will determine the timing, position, and degree of penetration by
              young of the three species into habitats preferentially occupied by their adult
              counterparts. We will learn if the three species migrate differently, or if
              their young penetrate all areas equally and differential mortality after
              settlement determines adult distributions within the estuary. Estimates from
              the field will be refined with lab-based experiments in which young crabs of
              the three species will be exposed to sediment from adult habitats under low or
              high salinity conditions. How young crabs respond to these environmental cues
              may explain their ability to locate adult habitats.

The broader impact of
              this study lies in the molecular assay that we are developing to differentiate
              young of these three crab species. Fiddler crabs heavily impact southeastern
              estuaries by modifying species composition, landscape topography, and water
              chemistry in areas where they burrow and feed. Also, adult crabs can comprise a
              large portion of the diets of wetland birds and crab larvae are important prey
              for small fishes that are eaten by larger fishes exploited by commercial and
              sport fisheries. Our assay will allow us to assess the stability of marsh
              ecosystems over time and will be useful in estimating crustacean biodiversity.
              The development of this assay will eliminate a large hurdle in our
              understanding of birth, recruitment, and death in the salt marsh by allowing us
              to investigate the full life cycles of these widely studied crabs in detail for
              the first time.

