Title       : SBIR Phase I: Automated Discovery and Removal of Hidden Data in Digital
               Documents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232955

Award Number: 0232955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald D. Hackett rhackett@stg.srs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRS Technologies
	      1800 Quail Street, Suite 101
	      Newport Beach, CA  92660    949/852-6900

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will demonstrate
              the information security risks posed by sharing desktop publishing documents,
              which occurs frequently over the Internet, and the feasibility of mitigating
              those risks using rigorous software techniques.  Microsoft's Object Linking and
              Embedding (OLE) and Component Object Model (COM) standards permit seamless
              integration of software applications to produce professional looking documents
              commonly described as Desktop Publishing.  Unfortunately, these standards do
              not consider privacy or security, leading to significant vulnerabilities. 
              These security problems are created during the routine use of an application,
              and the user is generally unaware that this information has been included in
              the file.  SRS Technologies will demonstrate the risks caused by embedded
              objects, Meta data, and file fragmentation using the Microsoft Office XP suite
              to generate digital documents with known problems that the average user is
              likely to unwittingly create.  Next, SRS Technologies will demonstrate why
              existing review techniques are inadequate for identifying and removing
              unintended data.  Finally, SRS Technologies will develop and demonstrate
              software techniques to decompose OLE/COM documents and expose the hidden data
              for sanitization.
     Information sharing over the Internet is expanding
              exponentially.  Any organization, Government or commercial, that has sensitive
              information to protect will benefit.  Society will benefit from the
              availability of simple, reliable, easy-to-use tools for use by professionals
              (law, health, financial, etc.) with sensitive client information. 

