Title       : SGER AWARD: A Potential Example of Fold Growth Due to Kink-Band Migration on
               Near Earthquake-Cycle Timescales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0232603

Award Number: 0232603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Meigs Meigsa@geo.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most active debates in structural geology over the last 20 years has
              focused
on the existence of folds formed due to kink-band migration (e.g. the
              fault-bend (FBF) and
fault-propagation (FPF) folds).A suite of folded
              geomorphic surfaces in western Argentina
have been identified that apparently
              display the essential geometrical characteristics of folding
due to kink-band
              migration.  Because the folded surfaces are closely associated with
              flexural
slip surface faulting in an earthquake in 1944,this site may contain
              the first evidence of kink-
band migration on near earthquake cycle time
              scales. The primary purpose of this exploratory
research is to establish
              whether the structural geometry of a suite of folded geomorphic
surfaces is
              consistent with fundamental predictions of kink-band migration fold growth. 
              The
present knowledge of their structural characteristics is limited, however,
              which precludes clear
definition of their potential for providing new insight
              into kink-band migration and folding
mechanisms in general.  Thus, an
              exploratory grant is sought to develop an initial data set from
these unique,
              superbly exposed surfaces to define more clearly the potential and direction
              for
future investigation.  Key objectives of this initial investigation
              include:(1)understanding the
geometrical evolution of folds at the spatial and
              temporal scale of successively younger
geomorphic surfaces;(2)detailed
              characterization of the geomorphology of the surface of an
actively growing
              emergent fold in which fold growth and erosion/deposition are
              out-of-phase;
and (3)determination of the extent to which kink-band migration
              folding is the mechanism by
which this fold is growing.  These data and
              analyses will help to frame more explicitly
questions regarding the structural
              and geomorphic evolution of this and other growing folds in
the region, the
              interplay between fold growth and intervening periods of erosion
              and
deposition, and the incremental growth of folds at near-earthquake time
              scales. Increased knowledge of fold growth on this time scale has potential
              impacts for understanding the earthquake hazard associated with active blind
              faults, the interpretation of fold growth history from syntectonic strata,
              petroleum exploration in basins characterized by syntectonic sedimentation and
              in regions of basement-involved thrusting, and fault-related fold models.

