Title       : SBIR Phase I: Computerized Tool for Baggage Screening
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232800

Award Number: 0232800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Sommer nrtinfo@nrt-inc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Recovery Tech Inc
	      566 Mainstream Drive
	      Nashville, TN  372281223    615/734-6400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is directed at
              homeland security and will determine the feasibility of developing a
              computerized tool for airport security checkpoint baggage screening that will
              assist baggage screeners in x-ray image inspection and which will provide
              networked electronic communications among security checkpoint personnel. 
              Current baggage screening methods at airport security checkpoints are
              essentially manual systems that take little advantage of today's computerized
              technologies, electronic communications, and data networks.  The proposed
              system introduces networked database capabilities to the airport enabling
              security personnel to analyze and correlate real time and/or historical data on
              passengers and their baggage throughout the airport and will significantly
              improve the airport's ability to run smoothly while enhancing safety.  With
              post 9/11 diminishing of consumer confidence, our nation's airports are in
              search of ways to make the air travel experience as streamlined as possible, so
              that the day-to-day economics of travel are profitable, and, at the same time,
              to make the entire system safer thus protecting lives, their investments, and
              promoting a national grassroots level perception of safety that enhances our
              lives, our consumer confidence, our economy, and our willingness to
              travel.

As a software product with a hardware platform that interfaces with
              existing and new hardware systems being utilized to meet security needs at
              airports, the proposed technology promises to offer a relatively low cost way
              to introduce significant improvements to the situation.  This technology brings
              screeners a communications infrastructure to build on each other's knowledge
              and expertise, and with the addition of such an infrastructure platform to
              daily processes, to be constantly evaluated on their statistical accuracy. 
              This will improve their performance while also speeding the process of luggage
              searchers, and thus improve security.  The proposed computerized inspection
              system can be utilized in any of the nations' 429 commercial service airports
              either directly or through relationships with security consultants and hardware
              manufacturers.  Similarly the technology can be used advantageously in
              international markets as well.

