Title       : Computational Complexity in Combinatorial and Algebraic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0232380

Award Number: 0232380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Satyanarayana V. Lokam satyalv@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Computational Complexity in Combinatorial and Algebraic Models

A
              fundamental goal of research in theory of computing is to understand the
              inherent computational complexity of specific problems. Progress in
              computational complexity is essential to establish limits to efficiency of
              algorithms, to understand the role of randomness in computation, and to build
              rigorous foundations for important areas such as cryptography and machine
              learning. This research program will study complexity questions in several
              combinatorial and algebraic models of computation. In particular, this research
              will develop lower bound techniques for these models based on linear algebra,
              communication complexity, and graph theory. Specific directions of research
              proposed are

1. Robustness Functions of Matrix Rank and their Applications:
              broad classes of functions that describe the robustness of the rank of a matrix
              have wide-ranging applications in computational complexity. In particular,
              several such functions can be used to attack lower bound problems on Boolean
              and algebraic circuits, decision trees, branching programs, and communication
              complexity. Known results by the PI and other researchers also indicate that
              spectral methods provide a unified approach to understanding rank robustness.
              This project proposes to extend these techniques and apply them to study
              combinatorial and algebraic complexity. Some alternative approaches that may
              overcome certain technical barriers faced by existing methods are also
              studied.

2.  Multiparty Communication Complexity: This fundamental model has
              applications to the complexity theory of circuits, branching programs, and
              time-space trade-offs.  Some weaker models of multiparty communication
              complexity have recently been investigated due to their continued relevance to
              circuit complexity and the apparent hope for stronger lower bounds. This
              project will study the relative strengths of the various multiparty models and
              their connections to complexity theory. General techniques such as discrepancy
              bounds and tensor rigidity will be explored to attack lower bound questions in
              these models. Recent discoveries of unexpected upper bounds in this area with
              critical consequences to some lower bound approaches motivate several new
              questions. 

3.  Graph Theoretic Approaches to Boolean Function Complexity: A
              combinatorial model that generalizes the models of both Boolean circuits and
              two-party communication complexity is obtained by considering computations on
              graphs. The research will explore the effectiveness of some graph-theoretic
              techniques to Boolean complexity using the framework of this model. In
              particular, various linear algebraic representations of graphs, with potential
              applications to other areas, will be studied to derive lower bounds on graph
              complexity that may have consequences to circuits. A unifying theme among these
              three topics is the use of communication complexity techniques to attack lower
              bound questions in computational complexity. Furthermore, each of these topics
              provides potential approaches to attack some long-standing open questions in
              computational complexity such as superlinear size lower bounds on log-depth
              circuits and ACC circuits. More generally, the research will advance the
              technology for lower bounds by targeting less restricted and/or more abstract
              models than those for which strong lower bounds are currently known. Techniques
              developed in these topics give rise to mathematical problems that have wider
              interest to other branches of theoretical computer science such as algorithms
              and cryptography as well as to subjects like linear algebra, combinatorics, and
              graph theory.

