Title       : SBIR Phase I: Industrial Scale Formation of the Stable and Processable
               Core/Shell Semiconductor Nanocrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0232976

Award Number: 0232976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99738              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongqiang A. Wang awang@nn-labs.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NanoMF
	      3468. W. Yale St.
	      Fayetteville, AR  72704    479/871-0707

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9150,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              new technology for the industrial production of high quality core/shell
              semiconductor nanocrystals, which have shown great potential for a variety of
              electronic, biological and medical applications. At present, all of these
              commercial applications are constrained by the availability of stable, high
              quality core/shell semiconductor nanocrystals on a large scale with an
              affordable price. Different from the existing organometallic approach, this
              project is built up on the greener, inexpensive and high performance Solution
              Atomic Layer Epitaxial (SALE) synthetic strategies developed by the NNL and the
              University of Arkansas. The SALE makes possible the scale-up and the high
              quality of the core/shell semiconductor nanocrystals by growing cationic and
              anionic ion shell materials on the core nanocrystals surface in the solution
              layer by layer alternatively.  This new synthesis scheme for producing the
              core/shell nanocrystals should be extendable to the continue batch (CB) method
              that maximizes the power of the existing synthetic schemes. The core/shell
              nanocrystals could be stabilized by dendron ligands and further crosslinking. 
              In this way, both the quality and the quantity of the resulting core/shell
              nanocrystals are guaranteed.  
 
The commercial applications and other
              benefits of this technology is in the value of the core/shell colloidal
              semiconductor nanocrystals in the field of electronic and medical applications
              lies on the large area display, portable electronic devices, medical devices
              and medical diagnostics, etc. A multi-billion dollar market for the production
              of those electronic devices and medical diagnostics is in rapid development

