Title       : SBIR Phase I: Modular Online Simulations for Math and Science with Integrated
               Assessment of Complex, Standards-Aligned Learning Objectives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232410

Award Number: 0232410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Cholmsky pcholmsky@explorelearning.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ExploreLearning, Inc.
	      P.O. Box 2185
	      Charlottesville, VA  229022185    434/293-7043

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 7256,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
              culminate in the design of a system that integrates assessment of complex,
              standards-based instructional objectives within interactive simulations and
              makes the resultant data available in a timely and efficient manner to teachers
              and administrators.  Standards-based educational reform efforts are currently
              impoverished by a lack of assessment instruments that measure complex
              instructional objectives.  Although complex objectives can be addressed through
              interactive simulations, these simulations neither explicitly assess students'
              competencies against these objectives nor make this information available to
              teachers. As a result, students' activity within simulations is largely
              invisible to teachers, relegating simulations either to an extremely limited
              role or to one that involves displacing the teacher.  The proposed project will
              analyze the practices of master teachers using simulations while tutoring
              students and index these practices against hierarchies of instructional
              objectives derived from state standards.  New simulations designed expressly
              for assessing complex instructional objectives will be designed, along with
              reporting mechanisms for communicating assessment results to teachers.  This
              innovation will foster alignment with standards-based curricula, support
              teachers in integrating technology effectively and efficiently into their
              classrooms, and provide a new approach for measuring the impact of educational
              technology on student learning.
     The proffered innovation in assessment
              capability addresses an important nation problem, the "assessment gap."  It can
              potentially be applied to any system involving interactive content that is used
              in the cont

