Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Approach for Effective Detection of Cyber Attacks Based on
               Anomalous Program Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232877

Award Number: 0232877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Umamaheswari Ganapathy uma@immunetsecurity.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Immunet Security
	      Stony Brook Software Incubator
	      Stony Brook, NY  11790    631/632-5758

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9102,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on the
              development of an Intrusion Detection System (IDS) based on recognizing
              anomalous system call patterns via finite state machines.  Networked
              information systems play critical roles in essential infrastructures such as
              power generation and distribution, transportation, commerce, and national
              security.  The continuing spate of security incidents from the CERT
              Coordination Center (the CERT/CC was originally the Computer Emergency Response
              Team)  demonstrates that existing approaches for securing systems against cyber
              attacks are not effective.  These approaches are focused almost exclusively on
              previously exploited vulnerabilities, and offer no protection against attacks
              that may exploit countless (as-yet-undiscovered) vulnerabilities that continue
              to exist on the target systems.  Whereas current threats are largely attributed
              to unskilled hackers (script kiddies), the future holds the threat of rapid
              escalation of cyber-warfare, cyber-terrorism and cyber-crime.  Attackers in
              these cases are highly skilled, organized and well funded, and can develop new
              kinds of attacks very quickly.  Thus there is an urgent need for developing
              approaches that can protect against unknown attacks launched by highly skilled
              attackers.  In previous research conducted at SUNY, Stony Brook, the key
              personnel have developed a new approach for securing systems against unknown
              attacks. Immunet Security's approach is based on a new algorithm for learning
              program behaviors using finite-state automata models and detecting attacks as
              deviations from this model. The approach has been show to be very effective in
              detecting known as well as unknown attacks and produces significantly fewer
              false alarms than previous approaches.  This proposal seeks to develop the
              approach into a commercial intrusion detection system (IDS).  

The market
              for commercial Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) is large, running into
              billions of dollars, and is growing fast.  Given the market for IDS and the
              heightened national interest in security, this technology offers the
              possibility of more sensitive detection than currently exists.

