Title       : SBIR Phase I: Authentication of Mobile Video Recordings (MVRs) Based on
               Real-time Hybrid Digital Watermarking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232246

Award Number: 0232246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99768              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenyu Wu zhenyu.wu@ieee.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MY EZ Communications LLC
	      142 Hampshire Dr
	      Plainsboro, NJ  085364325    609/713-3465

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is aimed at
              developing an authentication technology that enables the deployment of a
              digital Mobile Video Recordings (MVR) system.  MVR data are collected daily by
              a very large fleet of patrol vehicles operated by the law enforcement community
              across the country that record events involving contact with civilians.  Due to
              staggering costs associated with operating current analog, non-indexing
              systems, there is an overwhelming need for a computerized digital MVR
              technology.  Its deployment, however, is hindered by legal acceptance, because
              a digital medium can be easily altered.  Authentication plays a critical
              enabling role by providing an effective means to safeguard the integrity of MVR
              content.  The objective of this research project is to develop a prototype for
              real-time MVR authentication software, based on a novel, hybrid watermarking
              algorithm, that integrates seamlessly with existing digital infrastructure. 
              This algorithm is specifically designed to meet stringent operational
              requirements set forth by next generation MVR system.  It achieves
              progressively varying robustness in one single watermark by means of
              error-correcting signature coding and rate-distortion guided bit embedding.  It
              combines fragile watermark's ability to localize content tampering and robust
              watermark's ability to characterize the severity of content alteration.

The
              MVR authentication, envisioned in this SBIR project, provides an enabling
              technology for the deployment of a digital MVR system for law enforcement
              agencies across the country that is more effective and much less costly to
              operate than the current analog system.  The company's  technology is inspired
              by and modeled after a set of realistic and specific requirements of the MVR
              program of the New Jersey (NJ) State Police, and its software-only solution is
              designed to integrate easily and seamlessly with its digital infrastructure. 
              It provides a secure and economical mechanism for safeguarding MVR content
              integrity that is minimally invasive to the daily routines of patrol officers
              and MVR administrators.  This NJ State Police and similar agencies across the
              country can easily adapt this technology so as to realize enormous cost saving
              through the deployment of a digital MVR system.   

