Title       : SBIR Phase I: Nanostructures for Controlled Fluid Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0232593

Award Number: 0232593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jr-Hung Tsai jtsai@kumetrix.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kumetrix, Inc.
	      29524 Union City Boulevard
	      Union City, CA  94587    510/476-0950

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              novel method of 
pumping and controlling fluid flow within microfluidic
              devices via surface nanostructures consisting of self-assembled monolayers
              containing covalently bound electrochemically active species.  By controlling
              the surface energy (surface wettability) within the flow channels, fluid can be
              made to flow to the desired location within the device.  Application of a low
              voltage (<2 volts) switches the surface between hydrophilic and hydrophobic
              states.  At this low voltage, silicon can be used to make the microdevices, in
              contrast to electro-osmotic pumping which requires glass, quartz, or plastic
              devices.  Silicon is highly advantageous because unique ultraprecise low cost
              manufacturing methods have been developed by the electronics industry for
              silicon,  which will lead to cost-effective manufacturing of the microfluidic
              device.

Commercially, the compact integrated sensor devices emerging from
              this work will have widespread commercial use in clinical medicine, drug
              discovery, genetic testing and research, environmental monitoring, and military
              and antiterrorism security (monitoring pathogens, toxins, and nerve agents). In
              particular, these enhanced microfluidics can be combined with the unique
              silicon microneedle devices developed for painless one step diabetic glucose
              self-testing, relevant to minority populations in which diabetes is very
              prevalent.  Additionally, the ease of use of biodiagnostic products made
              possible by this new technology will benefit long-term diabetics handicapped by
              poor eyesight and limited hand-eye coordination, because performance of a test
              is completely automatic requiring no transfer of blood from a fingerstick or
              armstick to a test strip (required in all current products).   


