Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Law Enforcement Analytical Tool for Visualizing Complex
               Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0232527

Award Number: 0232527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Fund bfund@knowledgecc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KCC
	      3915 E. Broadway
	      Tucson, AZ  857113422    520/574-1519

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 5371,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I will develop research  of a
              commercial application that permits law enforcement or intelligence analysts to
              visualize complex relationships among objects in a consolidated database. This
              software will operate on large data stores that automatically refresh to
              maintain currency. Existing tools that perform this function display the
              results of user queries in textual or numeric formats. Certain inherent human
              cognitive processes interpose difficulties in converting the raw data to
              actionable information and knowledge. This visualization program will give
              analysts the ability to discover previously hidden linkages and relationships
              among criminals, organizations, locations, weapons, and vehicles that may not
              be readily apparent by simply examining raw data. The Phoenix and Tucson police
              departments have agreed to be development partners in this effort. Interviews
              and observations of investigators and analysts at work will form the basis for
              the research outcome. This will be a comprehensive software requirements
              statement. There is substantial demand for easy-to-use analytical software that
              removes technical and data entry burdens from analysts. Software of this type
              can assist law enforcement and homeland defense agencies in carrying out their
              tasks more effectively, at less expense and more quickly than is currently
              possible.

The commercial application of such a software product is all law
              enforcement agencies at the federal, state and local level that engage in
              criminal investigations, and all intelligence gathering agencies.

