Title       : SBIR Phase I: Multimodal Activated Network of Tactile Interfaces for Advanced
               Computing With Haptics (MANTIACH)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0232688

Award Number: 0232688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Crabb johnsond@orbitec.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Orbital Tech Corp
	      1212 Fourier Drive
	      Madison, WI  53717    608/827-5000

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1545,5371,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project, Multimode
              Activated Network of Tactile Interfaces for Advanced Computing with Haptics
              (MANTIACH), is an innovative approach to provide a virtual tactile stimulation
              display to a human  operator in three-dimensional space.  This device conveys
              both the haptic information about a virtual object such as position, placement,
              and orientation as well as the tactile information of force, compliance, and
              texture.  MANTIACH provides a non-visual interface to enable visually impaired
              operators and to augment the ability of visually enabled operators to interact
              with 2D and 3D graphics environments.  MANTIACH uses proven stimulation
              technology, finger and hand positioning, stimulation mapping, and a
              three-dimensional graphics interpreter.  MANTIACH is designed to be integrated
              into standard computer systems with minimal effort and standard interfaces. 
              Key to this device is its ability to completely free the operator from fixed
              mechanical arms or levers  in the work area, while still providing the full
              haptic and tactile stimulation directly related to the virtual graphic of
              screen display.  MANTIACH provides humankind with a new user interface to
              standard computers for full 2D and 3D display capability to enable blind and
              visually impaired people.
     Ultimately Orbital Technology Corporation
              projects a simple human interface that plugs into a standard computer that
              would provide the entire control and feedback interface with 2D and 3D
              simulated objects and screens.  A primary application would  be computer
              graphical displays and controls for the blind.  Additional commercial 
              applications include virtual reality training and entertainment systems,
              feedback for calibrated and remotely controlled tools and robots and feedback
              and control interfaces  for hazardous chemical and weapon handling,
              laparoscopic and robotic surgical equipment and many other applications. 
              Advanced user interfaces for the blind to decrease the gap between sighted and
              blind users of computer systems is possibly the most far reaching and general
              use for the system.  Specific commercial areas to be investigated further
              include the following:  (1) 2D and 3D graphical user interfaces for the blind,
              (2) software and entertainment interface equipment, (3) interfaces for current
              robotic and telerobotic equipment, (4) sound interpreters for the deaf, (5)
              prosthetic hand sensor augmentation, (6) augmented surgical and instrumented
              tools, and (7) force feedback systems for nano-manipulators.

