Title       : SBIR Phase I: Process for Production of Carbon Nanotubes from Re-Usable
               Catalytic Substrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0232675

Award Number: 0232675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Carpenter hcarpenter@nrcorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanomat'ls Research Corp
	      2021 Miller Drive
	      Longmont, CO  805010000    720/494-8401

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              novel process for manufacturing carbon nanotubes  (CNTs).   There is great
              demand for CNTs from composite materials manufacturers, but current technology
              cannot yet provide large quantities of CNTs at an affordable price.  
              Multi-wall carbon nanotubes will be grown from a re-usable catalytic substrate
              by pyrolysis of a carbon feedstock gas. The reusable catalytic substrate will
              provide control over the diameter of the CNTs in the range from 5nm to 100nm. 
              After the CNTs have been grown from the catalytic substrate they will be
              physically removed (harvested), and the catalytic substrate can be reused.  
              The resulting CNTs will be free of catalyst metal contamination and largely
              monodisperse.  This process can be fully automated and is scalable to high
              volumes at very low cost.  This project will prove the feasibility of this
              approach by demonstrating repeatable synthesis of carbon nanotubes from the
              same catalytic substrates. Nanotubes of different diameter will be produced and
              their structure will be characterized.  The experimental data will be used to
              create a detailed analysis of the manufacturing economics for the approach and
              its competitiveness will be evaluated.

The commercial and broader impacts of
              this technology would offer a major breakthrough in the cost/quality
              relationship to produce and sell loose CNTs.  End customers will use CNTs in
              composite materials with improved structural integrity, and unique electrical
              and thermal performance. Potential customers are also focused on the use of
              carbon nanotubes for energy storage.  Spin-off applications could include
              electromagnetic radiation shielding and field emission cathodes for flat panel
              displays. 

