Title       : Meeting the Challenges in Emerging Areas: Education Across the Life,
               Mathematical, and Computer Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0232823

Award Number: 0232823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: V. Celeste Carter                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tina H. Straley tstraley@maa.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Assn of America
	      1529 18th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200361358    202/387-5200

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Mathematical Association of America, in cooperation with the American
              Association for the Advancement of Science, is holding a conference of leaders
              in the emerging fields that integrate computer science, mathematics and the
              life sciences, and leaders in undergraduate education in all three areas. This
              conference is encouraging the nation to meet the educational challenge of
              producing students competent to enter these cross-cutting areas. Conference
              results are reports and resources for those interested in creating courses and
              programs. The most important product is a report to the nation for all
              stakeholders informing them of issues, needs, and opportunities, and what they
              can do.

Intellectual Merit: Research and development in the life sciences
              have escalated as a result of: 1) the Human Genome Project, 2) national
              priorities to enhance and protect the health and well being of the people, and
              3) the use of new technologies. The data being generated has outstripped our
              capability to analyze it. However, knowledge that can result from proper
              analysis of the data will lead to greater advances. New research initiatives
              lead to new ways to integrate the life, mathematical, and computer sciences.
              There are emerging fields of study that integrate these three disciplines, such
              as biotechnology, biostatistics, and bioinformatics. What is missing in this
              picture are the people who have the knowledge and skills to enter these new
              crosscutting areas. Students must be prepared for entering the workforce from
              all levels of undergraduate education, and students must be prepared for
              graduate programs in order to contribute to research and development
              needs.

Broader Impacts: Reports resulting from the conference are being
              distributed widely to the major stakeholders and presentations are being made
              at professional meetings for higher education faculty in the three areas and at
              meetings of administrators and other educators. These presentations further
              bring the report and the issues addressed in it to their attention. New
              programs in the emerging areas at the crossroads of the three disciplines,
              interdisciplinary coursework, recruitment of students, and better-prepared
              students will be the benefits of this project. The nation will be in a stronger
              position to meet its priorities and further the dynamic work being done in the
              life and biomedical sciences.

