Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Hybrid Neural Net Enterprise System Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  2002  
File        : a0232946

Award Number: 0232946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Tarte robt@pacificcodeworks.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PCW
	      1347 Pacific Ave
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950603940    831/426-7582

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 5371,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 1 project is designed to address
              the problem of managing and simulating extended enterprise systems as specified
              in The Extended Enterprise/C.2. As networks and enterprise systems have grown
              in complexity, it has become increasingly difficult to determine the most cost
              effective way to deploy hardware to maximize system availability and network
              performance. Poor resource planning decreases the effectiveness of information
              technology organizations, resulting in increased labor costs and decreased
              company wide productivity. New tools are required to increase productivity.
              This proposal is for research to produce a modeling and forecasting software
              system that use combination of neural net and rules based algorithms to
              simulate enterprise systems. Individual components of the enterprise system
              will be modeled with appropriate neural nets trained by constructive
              techniques. The enterprise system will be modeled by connecting these component
              neural nets with data pipe rule-based software. Such software would be able to
              forecast strains on the system and identify bottlenecks in the network. The
              completed modeling and forecasting software will become a cornerstone
              technology for a tool that will diagnose, troubleshoot and predict IT issues.
              The project will be developed in Linux with C, C++ or FORTRAN, as
              appropriate.

This research could help in making the management of enterprise
              systems and networks more efficient therefore making them more affordable to
              teaching and service institutions.

The result of this endeavor will assist
              enterprise systems and network managers to manage the tasks in faster and more
              economically manner.

