Title       : Crossband Transponder System and Harmonic Radar System To Track and Monitor
               Small Animals Over Long Time Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0232521

Award Number: 0232521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $528272             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Henke blakehenke@msn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earthspan
	      1450 S. Rolling Road
	      Baltimore, MD  212270000    410/455-5987

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports further development of a system for tracking of small
              animals and of other types of organisms as small as insects and seeds.  The
              system makes use of a radar transmitter/receiver to trigger either of two types
              of small devices that will be used to tag individuals.  Cross-Band Transponder
              (CBT) tags consist of a small battery and a microcircuit that sends a VHF radio
              signal in response to the triggering radar signal.  The VHF signal, which will
              provide identifying information unique to each individual tag, will be detected
              using an array of conventional directional antennas.  As planned, the CBT tags
              will weigh 1 gram, last for at year and be useful over a range extending to
              about 2 kilometers from the radar set and antenna array.  Tags of this size
              should be useful with animals weighing as little at 20 grams.  Harmonic Radar
              (HR) tags use the power of the same incoming radar signal to generate a
              outgoing radar signal at twice the incoming frequency. As they require no power
              source, their lifetime is unlimited.  The signal strength is limited by the
              strength of the incoming radar signal, and thus the range is dictated by the
              cost and portability of the radar set to be used.  As planned, these tags may
              be used on organisms (or objects) weighing as little as 50 milligrams, and over
              a range of up to 700 meters.  The signals will not allow individual tags to be
              differentiated.  As part of this project, the use of HR tags to monitor seed
              dispersal will be tried for the first time.
With the development of
              biotelemetry technology, researchers have been able to monitor movement of
              individual organisms at multiple spatial and temporal scales ranging from
              meters and hours to thousands of kilometers and many years. This has led to new
              insights into the study of organism movement, and has been applied successfully
              for management and conservation purposes.  Depending on the desired range and
              lifetime, existing biotelemetry tags typically require a relatively heavy power
              source.  Thus, useful application of the technology has been limited to
              relatively large organisms whose ability to move is not impaired by the size
              and weight of the tag. The proposed system, if successful, will lead to a
              substantial increase in the types of organisms that can be monitored through
              biotelemetry, and an increase in the time period over which individual animals
              can be monitored without the effort and expense of recapturing the animal to
              apply a new tag.


