Title       : SBIR Phase I: Inductive Analysis Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2002   
File        : a0232614

Award Number: 0232614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey L. Worthington jeffw@enter.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TIE
	      8717 Shawnee Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191183709    610/525-5874

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research the
              technical feasibility and commercial viability of an innovative interactive
              environment that supports an inductive analysis approach to unifying
              heterogeneous, distributed information systems. This innovation, called the
              Inductive Analysis Environment, will allow end users to develop abstract models
              of target domains by manipulating existing data and creating new relationships
              and attributes. By enabling end-users to manipulate representations of data
              objects while itself taking care of housekeeping tasks (such as connecting to
              data sources and converting data), the environment will allow users to
              essentially develop applications on the fly, making many of the traditional
              application development cycles unnecessary. After creating these new
              application contexts, users may then save them and share them in a multi-user,
              collaborative space. This process will represent a new kind of problem-solving
              environment. 

The Inductive Analysis Environment thus will introduce a new
              methodology for developing certain classes of information systems. This
              innovation will also enable seamless, end-user controlled integration of
              heterogeneous systems without requiring the intermediate steps of software
              development or data warehousing. By making many steps of the traditional
              software development process unnecessary, the Inductive Analysis Environment
              will make the creation of software applications a much higher- quality, more
              reliable process.

