Title       : SBIR Phase I: Ion-Beam Assisted Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition
               Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0232703

Award Number: 0232703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond T. Westfall tom@insytecorp.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eclipse
	      2345 Anvil Street North
	      St. Petersburg, FL  337103905    727/344-7300

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1407,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves
              developing an ion-assisted plasma-enhanced deposition process for producing
              solid-state proton-conducting hydrated metal oxygen cluster-based materials to
              serve as electrolytes in electrochromic (EC) devices.  Recent developments in
              infrared and THz sensors, superconducting electronics and EC thermal control
              systems require rugged solid-state electrolytes for low temperature high speed
              operation.  Hydrated metal oxygen clusters deposited from solutions can extend
              the performance of existing EC systems but are not compatible with solid state
              vapor phase deposition processes.  Eclipse suggests developing a modified
              duoplasmatron system to deposit thin-films of metal clusters serving as ion
              conductors in EC devices.  The objectives include fabrication of a microplasma
              cluster deposition system, selection of metal oxide precursors, deposition and
              characterization of thin film electrolytes, fabrication and performance
              evaluation of EC devices.  The proposal innovation is the use of enhanced
              microplasma deposition to prepare ionic conductors with controlled
              microstructures for use in EC  systems.  This effort will result in improved
              control of the microstructure of intercalation materials afforded by the
              proposed plasma deposition technique leading to advances in batteries,
              catalysts and nano-structured materials for electronics, optics, and low
              temperature applications.
 
Successful completion of the program will result
              in the development of EC devices having substantially lower operating
              temperature, improved contrast ratio, faster switching speed and greater
              mechanical stability for use in terrestrial and space-based thermal control
              systems, in visible and IR sensors, and in optical data storage systems.
