Title       : SBIR Phase I: Reactive Distillation for Vinyl Ether Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0232759

Award Number: 0232759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Kittrell kseinc@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : KSE Inc
	      P O Box 368
	      Amherst, MA  010040368    413/549-5506

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to establish
              the
technical and economic feasibility of a novel technology to utilize
              reactive distillation to
produce vinyl ethers, the production of which is
              otherwise plagued by equilibrium
limitations and side reactions. The program
              will combine the catalysis expertise of KSE,
Inc. with the reactive
              distillation strengths of the Department of Chemical Engineering of
the
              University of Massachusetts, to develop the new technology. The resulting
              work
product will not only advance the practice of the field of organic
              synthesis, but also will
provide useful case study examples for academic
              teaching and research.
The Phase I program requires completion of three tasks.
              First, research is needed
to improve the catalyst compositions to promote
              vinyl ether synthesis, to match distillation
requirements. Second, laboratory
              reactor tests, including reactive distillation, must be
performed to guide
              catalyst improvement and to demonstrate success of the technology.
Third,
              design and competitive economic analyses are required to complete the
              feasibility
assessment. The proposed research will solve a major problem in
              vinyl ether synthesis,
reducing byproducts and eliminating solvents. It will
              also provide valuable teaching and
research tools for the practice of reactive
              distillation.
Commercial applications of the reactive distillation technology
              will allow
production of vinyl ethers as an important building block in
              organic synthesis,
eliminating the energy intensive acetylene route based on
              World War II technology. It
allows new synthesis methods to be used, by
              eliminating critical equilibrium and
byproduct constraints.
