Title       : SBIR Phase I: HIVbase, Data Integration Software to Support the Study of Chronic
               Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0232127

Award Number: 0232127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanna L. Lamers susanna@genejohnson.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GJI
	      4 Milton Dr.
	      St. Augustine, FL  32084    985/446-9455

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
Program Ref : 5371,9102,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will support the
              development of software, designated HIVbase, which will modernize the way that
              clinical researchers manage their data. For researchers that need to maximize
              the value of their collected information, we will offer a product that contains
              unique applications for integrating multiple sources of disparate data into an
              automated high-dimensional warehouse, applications that perform repetitious
              tasks common to genetic and clinical research projects, and applications that
              are easy to use. Investigators of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus have an
              unsurpassed amount of research information in user-hostile formats,
              error-filled spreadsheets, out-dated databases, directories containing
              thousands of individual files and even paper records. Never before has so much
              informational power been available to HIV scientists. We will exploit current
              technological advances and put together a program containing several novel
              applications: protein identification tools to eliminate repetitious sequence
              editing, the ability to create user-defined searches based on specific genetic
              attributes, and the ability to efficiently share information with outside
              collaborators. 

The outcome of this project will have broad implication in
              the health (HIV) and data mining areas. Health service providers will now have
              access to more complete data in a more expeditious way. Other fields will be
              able to use this application to make information available in an ordered and
              reliable fashion to its service providers.

