Title       : Exploratory Research: Presence and biodiversity of uncultured fungi in Antarctic
               Dry Valleys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0232373

Award Number: 0232373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89895              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Fell jfell@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Fell
0232373
Exploratory Research: Presence and biodiversity of uncultured
              fungi in
Antarctic Dry Valleys

Project Summary/Abstract 

Fungi, as
              decomposers of organic material, have worldwide importance as primary drivers
              of the global carbon cycle. The present knowledge of fungal roles and
              capabilities is derived from cultured organisms. A large unknown commodity is
              the presence and biodiversity of uncultured species. Studies of uncultured
              prokaryotes have indicated that the culturable species may represent a minor
              and possibly functionally unimportant fraction of the community. The present
              study will determine the community structure of the uncultured fungi in soils
              from the Antarctic Dry Valleys. Because the occurrence of these eukaryotes in
              these samples is theoretical and problematical, the research is a high-risk
              venture. The research will be undertaken as a "project of opportunity" in
              conjunction with a field project conducted by the University of Maine (UM) to
              examine the biological role of yeasts in the Dry Valleys. The UM field team
              will provide soil samples for the U. Miami Rosenstiel School of Marine and
              Atmospheric Science (RSMAS) studies. Methods to examine uncultured fungal
              communities are made possible through the development of molecular techniques.
              UM will identify, by sequence analysis, the cultured species. RSMAS will
              identify uncultured fungi by DNA extraction from Antarctic soils, PCR
              amplification of ribosomal DNA with eukaryotic-, fungal-, basidiomycete- and
              ascomycete-specific primers. The resulting amplicons will be cloned and
              sequence analyzed. Based on positive results, the cooperative UM/RSMAS research
              will provide the opportunity to study the roles, functions and species
              interactions of previously unknown components of the soil microbiota in the
              Antarctic and other ecosystems throughout the world. This project will provide
              a research opportunity and training for a post-doctoral scientist.

