Title       : SBIR Phase I: Application of a Novel, Non-Thermal Plasma Technology for Surface
               Modification of Polymeric Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0232794

Award Number: 0232794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pascal Ricatto pjricatto@plasmasol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PlasmaSol
	      614 River St
	      Hoboken, NJ  070300000    201/216-8680

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1633,5371,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop
              non-thermal, plasma technology to achieve uniform surface modification of
              plastic materials at atmospheric pressure in air, without need of significant
              amounts of a carrier gas. This uniform surface treatment can be achieved
              flexibly and economically on three-dimensional objects of practical size to a
              multitude of industries.  In the program, well-characterized flat surfaces of
              polypropylene will be subjected to plasma treatment using a matrix of
              experimental conditions to determine surface modification and damage effects as
              a function of voltage/current characteristics, plasma source configuration and
              processing speed.  Surface analytical tools such as Scanning Probe Microscopy,
              Scanning Electron Microscopy, XPS and FTIR will be employed to evaluate changes
              in surface morphology and surface chemistry.  Changes in surface energy will be
              gaged by standard wetting tests.  The program will then examine performance
              with three-dimensional objects of various size and shape and TPO blends of
              industrial significance. 
 
The proposed program is compelling because the
              technology offers a major leap forward in surface treatment across a spectrum
              of major markets.  Typically the surface preparation for finishing involves
              chemical treatment with highly caustic or acidic agents or with organics,
              imposing concomitant safety and environmental problems.  The plasma technology
              of this proposal can be applied in place of many of these processes. Markets
              include, for example, sterilization or biological activation in the biomedical
              field and fiber conditioning in optical and composite-fiber technologies. 
              However, the greatest commercial impact will be to promote better adhesion,
              whether it be for inks used in labeling, for thin films in electronics or for
              paints or other coatings to provide color, texture and/or corrosion protection.
              

 

