Title       : SBIR Phase I: Next Generation Binary Decision Diagrams (BDD)-Based Logic
               Optimization System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0232043

Award Number: 0232043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhihong Zeng zhzeng@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LogicMill
	      41 The Hollow
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/545-0401

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the need
              to synthesize very large silicon chips designs in very short time. Currently
              available commercial synthesis tools are based on the methodology, data
              structures, and algorithms that are predominantly algebraic (as opposed to more
              efficient Boolean methods), and are characterized by slow run time and
              inadequate design quality. This SBIR project is devoted to the development of
              efficient algorithms and techniques for logic synthesis based on modern BDD
              data structures. At the heart of the algorithms is a novel BDD decomposition
              theory, recently developed by company researchers. The resulting commercial
              product is a software solution for very fast, high-performance logic synthesis;
              as indicated by initial experiments it will be at least an order of magnitude
              faster than software tools available on the market today. The main version of
              the product is a core engine for logic synthesis used in several classes of
              applications: ASICs, microprocessors, and FPGAs. Another version of the tool
              will target formal verification, which also relies on fast logic optimization.
              The logic optimization engine can be plugged into any existing synthesis flow
              utilized by customers and offered by the existing EDA software vendors
    
              The  SBIR Phase I project will stimulate research in design automation and
              inject much needed innovation in the EDA industry. This work will culminate in
              the development of a next generation, high-performance logic synthesis system
              that will have a significant commercial impact on the EDA tools market. This
              activity will also have important educational impact. It will educate a new
              generation of design engineers and students by exposing them to new design
              methodologies and innovations pioneered by this project. 

