Title       : Identifying and Implementing a Coordinated Strategy for Computer and Network
               Security for Higher Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a0232211

Award Number: 0232211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Luker mluker@educause.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steve Worona  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educause
	      1150 18th Street NW, Suite 1010
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/872-4200

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EDUCAUSE has recently been asked by the Critical Infrastructure Assurance Office
              (CIAO) of the federal government to coordinate the contributions of the higher
              education community to the National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace. This report,
              scheduled to be delivered from the Critical Infrastructure Protection Board to
              the President of the United States this summer, will examine the following:
              government's role, private sector contributions, whether or not legislation is
              needed, and the impact of improved security education. The activities in this
              proposal will make a direct contribution toward this important national
              effort.

The research and education community faces a pressing need for
              effective and efficient
strategies for securing its networked computers. The
              security of college and university
computer systems has become a matter of
              critical importance for higher education and the greater Internet community. In
              one well-known example, vulnerable systems on campus networks have been
              implicated as unknowing participants in a Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS)
              attack on critical government and commercial Internet sites. College and
              university computer systems have also been the target of attacks, exposing
              confidential medical and student records. A comprehensive and systematic
              cybersecurity strategy is needed in the higher education community, including
              an executive-level appreciation for the critical importance of this
              problem.

There is a need for a coordinated approach on two fronts: (1) the
              examination and
identification of best practices regarding available
              technologies, policies, and procedures to support secure operations, and (2)
              publications, presentations, and other communication methods to disseminate
              these best practices throughout the research and
education community.

To
              accomplish these tasks, EDUCAUSE will bring together the leading experts in
              both
technology and higher education business practices and policies to
              develop the best
practical approach to solving these problems in the higher
              education community. EDUCAUSE will distribute the best practices though
              extensive national and regional meetings,publications for IT staff as well as
              higher education executives, web libraries, and through partner organizations
              such as the American Council on Education (ACE), the
National Association of
              College and University Business Officers (NACUBO), and the
National
              Association of College and University Attorneys (NACUA). This proposed effort
              will build on previous work by the EDUCAUSE/Internet2 Security Taskforce,
              member institutions, SANS, and CERT and would seek to incorporate the best
              efforts of the federal government and private industry.



