Title       : STTR Phase I: Nanoscale Transport Processes Prediction/Design/Analysis Tool for
               NEMS Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0232640

Award Number: 0232640
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ilya Staroselsky ilya@exa.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Exa Corp.
	      450 Bedford Street
	      Lexington, MA  024201500    781/676-8587

NSF Program : 1505      SMALL BUS TECH TRANS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project will produce a
              unique computational tool for predicting transport in nanoscale  systems. The
              novel approach to be used here is based on Lattice Boltzmann Methods (LBM)
              which will enable virtual prototyping of nanodevices using grids of up to a
              hundred million computational cells thus opening the way for computer aided
              design and analysis of NEMS devices in the data storage industry. Existing  LBM
              codes will be extended to handle the high Knudsen number range applicable for
              the head disk interface in computer disk drive system. This new analytical
              model will then be implemented in a commercial software package, PowerFLOW,
              which is now used for automotive applications worldwide and has early
              applications in the data storage industry. With this platform, the highest
              standards of numerical accuracy, parallel efficiency, and geometric flexibility
              (including full integration with commercial CAD tools), will be obtained. Upon
              benchmarking this algorithm against simplistic flow data, a nanoscale transport
              problem of industrial level complexity will be simulated, with the goal to
              resolve all the relevant geometric details of the slider and to obtain detailed
              pressure and shear (head) stress distributions. 
     Commercially, this
              nanoscale transport prediction tool will open new simulation markets,
              especially at the engineering design level. Secondly, this new technology
              should open broad new markets for computer aided engineering (CAE), especially
              in NEMS and related industries, by enabling nanoscale transport prediction in
              devices of real world complexity which are now designed/optimized using either
              experimentation or semi-empirical rules. Market analysis shows that the
              existing CAE market of about $150 MM per year should increase 10- to 100-fold
              by introducing new prediction technologies at the engineering design level.

