Title       : SBIR Phase I: 3D Video Immersion Room
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232702

Award Number: 0232702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99804              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd A. Williamson toddw@zaxel.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Zaxel
	      11666 Dawson Drive
	      Los Altos Hills, CA  940245115    650/533-8456

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the
              technology for a "3D Video Immersion Room", based on the company's previous 3D
              video capture work.  A user of this room will don a Head Mounted Display (HMD)
              with a camera attached.  Entering the room, the user will experience immersive
              virtual scenarios containing arbitrary combinations of (1) realistic live 3D
              video from a Zaxel 3D Video Capture Studio, (2) prerecorded Zaxel 3D video, (3)
              virtual Computer Graphics (CG) content, and (4) the actual room, people, and
              objects around them.  The proposed research will provide a new paradigm for
              interaction with live or recorded 3D content.  The system will very accurately
              track the position and gaze of the viewer via the camera attached to the HMD. 
              The investigative team will extend work on camera-based marker tracking so a
              large space can be instrumented with paper markers.  The system will
              automatically determine the position and orientation of the camera relative to
              these markers at video frame rate.  It will be quickly self-calibrating so it
              can be set up by simply attaching the paper markers to the walls and slowly
              sweeping the camera around the room.  Thus, this technology will be much
              cheaper and more accurate than competing technologies. 

The "3D Video
              Immersion Room" is a new tool for education and training with numerous
              applications.  Some examples are as follows:  Live 3D Video Teleconferencing,
              which permits two participants to step into different geographically separated
              rooms, enabling them to see each other to communicate naturally; Sports
              Training, which permits an individual to review his or her own athletic
              performance (a golf or baseball swing, a basketball shot) with a trainer,
              including overlaying own previous performance or performance of professionals;
              Historical Reenactment, which uses live or recorded actors and enables students
              to go to a 3D reconstruction or recreation of a historic place with live actors
              and/or tour guides.

