Title       : SBIR Phase I: Development of High Performance NbTi Superconductors Utilizing
               Nanometer-Scale Metal Oxide and Nickel Pinning Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0232704

Award Number: 0232704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark K. Rudziak mrudziak@supercon-wire.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Supercon Inc
	      830 Boston Turnpike
	      Shrewsbury, MA  015453386    508/842-0174

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an
              innovative process for incorporation of nanometer-scale inclusions into 
              superconducting Niobium Titanium (NbTi)  alloy  wires.    These  inclusions 
              will  serve  as  magnetic  flux pinning sites, resulting in improved critical
              current density (Jc) performance as compared to that which can be obtained by
              conventional processing methods.  The innovation will consist in the use of
              mixtures of nanometer-scale NbTi powder and nanometer-scale metal oxide powder
              or nickel powder.  The use of nanometer-scale powders will greatly reduce the
              amount of wire deformation required for optimum inclusion  (pin) size and
              spacing as compared with other powder metallurgical and rod-based processes. 
              This will be beneficial for wire piece-length and processing costs.  At the
              same time, the process will  have  the  benefit  that  pin  volume  may  be 
              easily  adjusted  for  maximum  Jc performance.  By  contrast, the volume of
              pinning sites that may be realized by conventional thermomechanical processing
              techniques for NbTi conductors is limited by precipitation kinetics, resulting
              in an upper limit to Jc performance. 
     Commercially, an improved NbTi
              conductor will find application in superconducting magnets used for high energy
              physics accelerators, Magnetic  Resonance  Imaging (MRI) systems, and Nuclear
              Magnetic Resonance (NMR) devices.  Increased critical  current  density 
              performance  will  translate  directly  into  cost  savings  and  greater
              design flexibility for the MRI and NMR industries.  This will be of particular
              interest to the MRI industry (an industry rapidly approaching $3 billion
              dollars in sales), where it is difficult to maintain an advantage in an
              increasingly competitive international market. 
  



