Title       : U.S.-Ukraine Workshop: Information Technology in Ukraine: From a Worthy Past to
               a Bright Future
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0232083

Award Number: 0232083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21660              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Fitzpatrick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5998,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a US-Ukrainian workshop, "Information Technology in Ukraine:  From a
              Worthy Past to a Bright Future."  The principal investigator is Dr.  Anne 
              Fitzpatrick from the University of New Mexico.  Her Ukrainian collaborator is
              Dr. Boris Malinovsky from the Glushkov Institute of Cybernetics in
              Kiev.

This workshop will draw together computing scientists and scholars not
              only from Ukraine and the U.S. but also from the former Soviet countries of
              Russia, Armenia, Moldova, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Georgia.  Other participants
              are expected from Bulgaria, Hungary, Great Britain and Germany.  The workshop
              will allow the participants to compare the evolution of computer technology in
              two very different cultures and determine what it meant to pursue the field of
              computer science in the Soviet Union with far more certainty than was ever
              possible before.  It will also allow the scholars to establish contacts, learn,
              and publish about a very important and little studied part of computer history
              and the history of Soviet and Ukrainian science and technology.  Only the last
              decade has allowed former Soviet scholars to uncover and openly discuss the
              historical aspects of significant science and engineering projects undertaken
              in the USSR, much less give foreigners easier access to this information.  The
              detailed investigation of the success and failure story of the Soviet computing
              can be instrumental for an orientation in the nature and perils of other
              hi-tech communities under totalitarian rule of today."  

This project in the
              history of science fulfills the program objectives of bringing together leading
              experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary efforts
              and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis
              of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
