Title       : SBIR Phase I: DIAGNOSTICA: Clinician's Assistant for Diagnostics and Treatment
               Planning in Mental Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  2002  
File        : a0232632

Award Number: 0232632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99965              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Gartner agartner@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MR
	      2 Constance Court
	      East Setauket, NY  117333730    631/334-5395

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on
              computational aspects of Diagnostica, an application that provides advanced
              diagnostic decision support and outcome monitoring for individual mental health
              clinicians without significantly altering accepted clinical practices.  A
              critical problem in mental health care is that while a definitive standard for
              making formal diagnoses exists (as encoded in the Diagnostic and Statistical
              Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), its complexity prevents community
              clinicians from utilizing it effectively.  This project will develop the
              computational machinery needed to model and process the temporal and severity
              aspects of DSM-IV.  Diagnostica's reasoning capabilities will be implemented by
              combining techniques drawn from constraint processing, non-monotonic reasoning
              and logic programming.  Diagnostica will use explicit temporal and severity
              measures, thereby enabling rigorous DSM-IV diagnostic work in the normal course
              of documenting a clinical encounter.
 
With increasing pressure by third
              party payers for detailed DSM-IV based documentation and the need to minimize
              misdiagnosis, a majority of clinicians may be expected to use DSM-IV-based
              systems over the next decade.  By enabling the improvement of the quality of
              mental health diagnosis, widespread use of Diagnostica will dramatically
              improve the quality of care, enable the aggregation of community data for
              public health improvement, and spur further development of the DSM rule base.
              

