Title       : Experimental Implications of Theoretic Models: Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0232072

Award Number: 0232072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24387              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elinor Ostrom ostrom@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T.K. Ahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joe A. Oppenheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The researchers are holding a workshop as part of the Political Science
              Program's Experimental Implications of Theoretic Models activity.  They are
              focusing on the linkage between formal and empirical analyses of repeated
              social dilemma games.  Understanding cooperation in the context of social
              dilemma games is fundamental to understanding how alternative institutional
              arrangements may foster collective action in a wide diversity of political
              settings.  An abundance of experimental evidence is inconsistent with
              predictions from existing non-cooperative game-theoretic models based strictly
              on self-regarding preferences.  In recent years, scholars have turned to
              alternative representations of utility in an attempt to capture motivational
              heterogeneity across individuals.  While multiple models have been posited, no
              one model yet appears to explain the rich data that has been obtained by
              multiple experimental researchers who have conducted a very large number o
              repeated social dilemma experiments using various specifications of many
              variables including:
    The size of the collective benefit obtained if all
              participants cooperated;
    The level of knowledge that individuals have
              about each other's identity;
    The number of participants involved;
    The
              nature of communication among subjects; and,
    The possibility of
              sanctioning one another.

While many theoretical possibilities have been
              generated, no one has been able to test his or her ideas against an aggregated
              data set covering all of these conditions precisely, because such a data set
              has not yet been put together and made publicly available.  Given the diversity
              of formal models and large number of experiments that have already been
              conducted, the time is ripe to create a multicampus, multidisciplinary Research
              Work Team to:

plan the construction of an easy-to-use consistent database
              containing many data  
sets contributed by experimental researchers;
review
              recent formal models explaining levels of cooperation in repeated social
              dilemmas in order to examine similarities and differences in theoretical
              structure as   
well as in predictions derived from alternative models;
plan
              further analyses of these data in order to test the models
              comprehensively;
refine better theoretical models to explain cooperation in
              repeated social dilemmas;
provide a general scientific plan for developing
              further theoretical and empirical research in light of the results of the above
              steps.

The researchers are holding the first meeting of the Research Work
              Team in January, 2003, and this project focuses primarily on the plans for this
              meeting.


