Title       : SBIR Phase I: Novel Sample Introduction Technique for ICP-MS/AES Using A
               NanomiserTM Device for Spray Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232389

Award Number: 0232389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Holloway jholloway@microcoating.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CCVD dba MicroCoating Tech
	      5315 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
	      Atlanta, GA  303412107    678/287-2400

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a
              method to lower the practical quantitation level of arsenic using a novel
              instrumental improvement to existing Inductively Coupled Plasma - Mass
              Spectrometry (ICP-MS) and Atomic Emission Spectrometry (AES) techniques. by
              replacing the standard sample introduction nebulizer and spray chamber used in
              ICP-MS and ICP-AES with the Nanomiser. device and thus lower the detection
              limit of arsenic and other elements. The Nanomiser enables very fine
              atomization of solvent/analyte mixtures with exceptional control over size,
              while maintaining a narrow size distribution. Results to date show that this
              breakthrough technology leads to the generation of a monodisperse aerosol with
              a mean diameter in the sub-micron to micron-range. Furthermore, this technology
              provides high residence time (due to low and independently controlled carrier
              gas velocity), which is, together with the small particle size, one of the main
              requirements for adequate thermal evaporation and dissociation of aerosol
              particles. The independence of gas flow and atomization will help to
              significantly increase the ionization of elements with higher first ionization
              energies, such as arsenic, by allowing for longer residence time in the
              plasma.
     The development of a reliable sample introduction technology can
              significantly improve the detection limits of conventional systems for atomic
              spectroscopy. Furthermore, the small size and compact design of the Nanomiser
              device will allow this technology to be easily retrofitted into existing AES
              and MS systems in collaboration with major instrument manufacturers.

