Title       : SBIR Phase I: Fluorescence-Amplified Nana-Assembly for Sensing Bio-Toxins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232277

Award Number: 0232277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston Ho winstonho@maxwellsensors.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MSI
	      10020 Pioneer Blvd., Suite 103
	      Santa Fe Springs, CA  906706213    562/801-2088

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This  Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a
              novel functional 
nanostructure for detection/identification of biological
              warfare agents (BWA). A new  class  of 
fluorescence-amplified nano-assembly
              (FLAN) is proposed for real-time,  selective,  and  ultra-
sensitive BWAs  and
               toxins  assays.  The  basic concept of this technology is to mimic the cell
              
membrane under certain organisms and toxins initially attack. Living cells
              quickly recognize and 
selectively respond towards invasion. The FLAN using
              three key elements for target detection: 1) 
molecular recognition, 2)
              fluorescence transduction, and 3) fluorescence  amplification,  to 
provide
              simple and direct fluorescent  assay.  The molecular receptors recognize the
              BWA; 
the binding causes a change in the local ternary structure, and which 
              leads  to  an  amplified 
fluorescent  structure  that can be quantified
              optically. The synthetic nanostructures exhibit 
bioactivities and high
              stability. The BWA-FLAN receptor binding is a rapid one-step reaction; it
              
does not require complicate separation and washing steps, labeled
              fluorophore, or visualization 
reagents.  
 
During the Phase I project, the
              investigator will design and synthesize functional nanostructures with
              BWA-
specific  receptors, develop FLAN molecular assembly, develop
              fluorescence sensing system, 
characterize,  test,  and  evaluate  its 
              technical  merits.  Highly  selective  and  sensitive  molecular 
recognition
              is important throughout biology, biotechnology, and clinical diagnostics. 

              
COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS 
 
Homeland and civilian defense applications
              include medical diagnostic of pathogens and diseases 
as  well  as 
              non-medical  contamination  avoidance sensors for biological terrorism agents.
              The 
proposed nanostructure-based assays could be easily adapted to targets of
              interest to the medical 
community,  environmental  and  agricultural 
              testing, and food industry and used in conjunction 
with the portable reader
              for diagnostics in clinical or hospital setting.
