Title       : SBIR Phase I: Personalized Wireless Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0232617

Award Number: 0232617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Al-Thaddeus Avestruz al@talking-lights.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Talking Lights Co
	      28 Constitution Road
	      Boston, MA  02129    617/242-0050

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will research
              high bandwidth individualized wireless network (IWN) which is personalized to
              maximize flexibility and capability for individual users and minimize
              interference, crosstalk and extraneous information. A wireless network will be
              established which uses a standard protocol like IEEE 802.11b wireless Ethernet
              standard or the Bluetooth standard. Talking Lights optical selection technology
              will allow users to select among transmitted signals, personalize the
              transmission for individual users, provide CART captions and permit assisted
              conversations.
The system will be developed in connection with experts on
              education of deaf and hard of hearing students and will be evaluated and tested
              in schools specializing in education of the handicapped to maximize user
              friendliness and value. 

Anticipated Results and Commercial Applications: As
              a result of this project, a new technology for communication of information
              will be developed which enhances the capability of wireless networks. A single
              network will be able to carry a broad variety of information. Modified IWN
              ballast transformers will be commercial products sold to replace current
              ballast transformers and allow fluorescent lights to perform dual use as
              locators. IWN optical will be commercial products sold to users. The software
              used to enable optical control of the wireless network will be a commercial
              product. Once installed, the modulated light sys-tem can also be used for
              assistance to hearing impaired and visually impaired users, assisted audio,
              direction finding, description of exhibits and many other applications

