Title       : SBIR Phase I: Power Aware Latency Minimized Source Routing (PALMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0232169

Award Number: 0232169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Zabele zabele@alphatech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Alphatech Inc
	      50 Mall Road
	      Burlington, MA  018034537    617/273-3388

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is focused on
              developing novel network routing techniques that provide power-conserving,
              latency-minimized, throughput-maximized data delivery in mobile ad-hoc network
              (MANET) environments.  It is well known that existing shortest path algorithms
              used for optimal routing tend to yield routing topologies, where a small number
              of the available paths and the available network nodes are heavily used.  This
              tendency induces both path contention (and associated increased latency and
              reduced throughput) and disproportionately heavy loads on a small number of
              critical nodes (which yields premature ad hoc network failure when the
              batteries on one of those critical nodes become drained).  The approach
              introduces a retroactive accounting mechanism in the core dynamic
              programming-based shortest path algorithm to establish balanced, parallel
              pathways through a MANET in order to avoid these problems.  Preliminary results
              using a pair of crossing flows have shown a factor of two improvements in
              throughput and latency, and a factor of three improvements in network lifetime.
               The key objectives for this effort are exploring the performance bounds of
              this approach on a larger scale, where the investigative team expects the
              differences between traditional techniques and the proposed approach to emerge
              as even greater than they are now.

The commercial goal for this effort is
              developing a highly responsive, critically needed, enabling technology to
              provide situational awareness for the first responders and emergency management
              teams in large-scale emergencies and crisis situations.  The proposed effort
              directly supports the ongoing thrust into this commercial area, which provides
              a natural conduit for technology transition.  Standardization of this
              technology, as needed for interoperability, will also lead to licensing
              opportunities with other suppliers.

