Title       : SBIR Phase I: Stabilization of Nanostructured Reactive Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232398

Award Number: 0232398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy P. Weihs tweihs@reactivenanotech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : RNT
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  212244781    /   -

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I will develop a new class
              of nano-engineered  multilayers  for reactive joining of materials that 
              enables  one  to  control  the  stability  and  ignition  energy  of  the
              corresponding reactive foils.  Two general approaches will be explored in this
              project. The first approach is based on vapor depositing a periodic quad-layer
              structure, in which two nanoscale layers, alternating  between  elements  with 
              high  heats  of  mixing  (Al  and  Ni),  are  separated  by thinner, barrier
              layers comprised of a relatively inert material (Cu) that interacts weakly with
              the other two.  Control over foil stability, ignition requirements and reaction
              properties can then be achieved by varying the nanoscale thickness (0.5nm to
              5.0nm) of the inert (Cu) barrier layers.  The second approach is based on the
              development of composite structures, which combine nanolayered reactive foils
              (50-150 micron thick) with micron scale braze and solder layers.  In this
              approach, one takes advantage of the thermal mass of the braze and solder
              layers in order to enhance the stability of the reactive foil. In the project,
              the team   will  (1)  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  this  new  class  of 
              nano-engineered multilayers,  (2)  characterize  their  stability  and 
              ignition  requirements,  and  (3)  develop  and validate  predictive 
              computational  models  that  complement  experimental  observations  and
              amplify their scope.  

Commercially, successful development of these novel
              nanostructed materials will lead to significant improvement in  reactive
              joining technology.  Letters of support from potential customers  and 
              suppliers  demonstrate  interest  in  the  development  of  stable  reactive 
              multilayer foils and their use in joining applications.

