Title       : SBIR Phase I: Mesogenic Molding Process for Optical Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0232822

Award Number: 0232822
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99431              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bunsen Fan fan@reveo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reveo Inc
	      3 Westchester Plaza
	      Elmsford, NY  105231609    914/345-9556

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1788,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
              process technology for composite ordered films based on liquid crystal (LC)
              materials that will have a significant impact on the performance of LC optical
              devices, both passive and active.  These devices include ultrafast optical
              signal processing and high-density optical storage, just to name a few. 

The
              process technology is simple in concept.  A blend of cross-linkable liquid
              crystals and non-reactive liquid  crystals  is  formulated,  and  then 
              prepared  into  a  film  using  usual  techniques.   The  non-reactive
              components are  then removed  from  the film  to  create  a  nano-structured, 
              mesogenic "mold" that retains some of the LC-like ordering.  If desired,
              additional components can be added into the mold, creating a device with
              tailored mechanical, chemical, and optical properties.  The technology can thus
              be used to overcome  inherent  shortcomings  of  LC materials  and  improve 
              the  performance,  durability,  and applicability of many LC optical devices.  
              In  the proposed  program,  the  goal  is  to  fabricate  low-cost, 
              high-efficiency,  reflective  broadband  UV polarizing  films.  This technology
              makes it possible to realize such films even though all  currently available LC
              materials exhibit substantial absorption over the UV spectral range. 

              

This process technology for composite ordered films will have immediate
              commercial applications in a wide range of optical devices, both active and
              passive, as it will dramatically improve performance.  The improvements  may 
              include  better  temperature  resistance,  wider  wavelength  range,  reduced 
              chemical sensitivity,  or  any  combinations  of  these.  The  first 
              application  to  be  produced  with  this  process,  UV polarizing films, has a
              wide range of uses: chiral drug development, optical components, liquid crystal
              displays,  and  even  skin  protection.    Anticipated  revenues  for  UV 
              polarizing  films  could  reach  $4.5 million in its first year alone.   
 

