Title       : An Analysis of American Investments in Housing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1991     
File        : a9023563

Award Number: 9023563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : July 1,  1991        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14981              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carole Shammas   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                   The condition of the housing stock long has been one of the most          
              important indices of material well-being within communities.                   
              Geographers and other social scientists have devoted considerable              
              attention to analyses of the state of housing in the United States in          
              the 20th century, especially in the period since World War II.  Much of        
              the nation's housing was built prior to this century, however, and             
              investigations of the quality of this older housing should examine not         
              only its current status but also the form and character of that housing        
              during earlier historic periods.  This project consists of a detailed          
              empirical investigation of the condition of American housing in the            
              years immediately around 1800.  Data from the 1798 federal tax on              
              dwellings will be related to data from the 1800 population census to           
              provide an overview at the township level of the number, nature, and           
              quality of housing units in those early days of the nation.  Analyses          
              of these data will test hypotheses about the impacts of the frontier,          
              traditional regional structures, climate, and proximity to major roads,        
              rivers, and urban centers on the housing stock.  Special emphasis at a         
              larger scale will be given to housing in wards and townships of the            
              Philadelphia area in order to determine the role of intrametropolitan          
              location on the geography of early 19th century housing values.                
                   This project will link two valuable historical databases using a          
              geographic information system, thereby greatly enhancing their utility         
              for further inquiries by this investigative team and by other scholars.        
              Analyses of these data will significantly enhance statistically based          
              understandings of relationships between many external factors and the          
              quality of housing in the early years of the nation, and it will shed          
              light on the historic causes of substandard housing within the U.S.            
              The employment of undergraduate students as members of the research            
              team to assist in data entry and analysis will provide valuable                
              experience for promising undergraduates.
