Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Second International Conference on Industrial and Applied
               Mathematics; to be held July 8-12, 1991 in Washington, D.C.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9023170

Award Number: 9023170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard R. McDonald                     
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1992        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: I. Edward Block   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Soc Indus&Appl Math(SIAM)
	      
	      Philadelphia, PA  19103    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1260,
Abstract    :
                   This project partially supports the second International                  
              Conference on Industrial and Applied Mathematics to be held in                 
              Washington, D.C. in July of 1991.  The hosting society is the                  
              Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.  Other                         
              participating societies are Gesellschaft fuer Angewandte                       
              Mathematik und Mechanik (Germany), Institute of Mathematics and                
              Its Applications (United Kingdom), Italiana di Matematica                      
              Applicata e Industriale (Italy), and Societe de Mathematiques                  
              Appliquees et Industrielles (France).  There is the expectation                
              that over 1800 mathematical scientist, computer scientist,                     
              engineers and other scientist from over 50 countries will attend               
              this research conference.                                                      
                   Scientific topics will include fluid dynamics, solid                      
              mechanics, materials science, geophysics, thermodynamics,                      
              electrodynamics, number analysis, large-scale modeling, parallel               
              processing, symbolic computation, linear programming, dynamical                
              systems, computer science, discrete mathematics, signal                        
              processing, control theory, robotics, semiconductor design, and                
              applied probability and statistics.  This conference will provide              
              U.S. investigators with access to developing international                     
              technology in computers, algorithms, and mathematics.  In                      
              addition to the National Science Foundation, this conference is                
              supported by industrial sponsors, the Air Force Office of                      
              Scientific Research, the Department of Energy, and the Office of               
              Naval Research.
