Title       : Faculty Award for Women - Energetic Winds and Disk Accretionin Low Mass Young
               Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1995  
File        : a9023554

Award Number: 9023554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzan Edwards sedwards@smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1215,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This faculty award for Women Scientists and Engineers is made             
              to Dr. Suzan Edwards of the Five College Astronomy Department at               
              Smith College.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                   The NSF Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers                  
              recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in teaching                
              and scholarship as well as the potential for continued significant             
              contributions to scientific research, the academic profession, and             
              the education of future scientists.                                            
                                                                                             
                   Dr. Edwards will carry out research on energetic winds and                
              disk accretion in low mass young stars.  Current observational and             
              theoretical work on star formation suggests that the gravitational             
              collapse of dense, rotating cores in molecular clouds results in               
              an initial configuration of a protostar which is dominated by a                
              flattened spinning disk of roughly solar system dimension.  During             
              the first hundred thousand years, the simultaneous processes of                
              mass infall onto the outer part of the disk and accretion of                   
              material through the disk and onto the central stellar object are              
              hidden from direct view by the opaque screen provided by dust in               
              the infalling remnant core material.  Very early in this process,              
              however, observations show that the protostellar system turns on               
              an energetic bipolar wind.  While the driving mechanism for this               
              wind is not yet understood, theoretical arguments suggest that such            
              a wind is required in order for the central object to shed                     
              sufficient angular momentum to grow to stellar dimensions.                     
                                                                                             
                   After several hundred thousand years, the energetic wind has              
              removed enough of the remnant infalling core material that the                 
              star/energetic wind/accretion disk system becomes optically                    
              revealed as a T Tauri "star".  A high resolution optical                       
              spectroscopic survey of T Tauri systems will be carried out at the             
              4m telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in a double-pronged             
              study to investigate atomic lines formed in two distinct regions.              
              Data from Observations of spectral lines formed in the energetic               
              winds will be used to probe the wind origin and collimation                    
              mechanism, and to better constrain wind mass loss rates.                       
              Observations of lines formed in regions where mass accretion onto              
              the stellar surface is occurring will be used to determine whether             
              mass transfer from disk to star is conducted through a classical               
              equatorial boundary layer or whether the stellar magnetic field                
              interrupts the disk and channels disk material along field lines               
              to the stellar surface.
