Title       : Proteins Required for Zygotic Nuclear Fusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1992    
File        : a9023861

Award Number: 9023861
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Virginia Armbrust   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The long-term objectives of this project are to understand how                 
              haploid nuclei within a newly formed zygote recognize each                     
              other as appropriate partners for eventual fusion, how they                    
              move towards one another, and how the fusion event itself is                   
              initiated. If any one of the preceding  steps goes awry, the                   
              zygote can not develop.  The creation of a single diploid                      
              nucleus within the zygote eliminates the last barriers to an                   
              intermingling of the chromosomes from two different organisms                  
              and thus enables the generation of genetic diversity.  Despite                 
              its central importance, however, a detailed understanding of                   
              nuclear fusion or karyogamy has only just begun.  The specific                 
              aims of this proposal are: to 1) immunolocalize the gene                       
              products of two zygote-specific cDNAs which are candidates for                 
              involvement in nuclear fusion in the unicellular alga,                         
              Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and 2) to screen C. reinhardtii                      
              libraries for sequences that are homologous to the yeast KAR                   
              genes already implicated in this process.  The first goal will                 
              be accomplished by generating antibodies against fusion                        
              proteins created using an expression vector that positions a                   
              collagen linker between B-galactosidase and the cDNA of                        
              interest.  These antibodies will then be used to                               
              immunolocalize their respective proteins within the developing                 
              zygote. It is hypothesized that at least one of the                            
              polypeptides will localize solely to the endoplasmic reticulum                 
              and the nuclear envelope due to its involvement in the fusion                  
              of the haploid nuclei.  The second goal will be achieved by                    
              generating oligonucleotides based on the predicted amino acid                  
              sequences of the yeast KAR genes and then screening C.                         
              reinhardtii libraries for the presence of similar sequences.                   
              It will then be possible to determine during which                             
              developmental stages these genes are expressed and whether                     
              their function in C. reinhardtii is homologous to that in                      
              yeast.
