Title       : Heat Shock Gene Expression: An Indicator of Thermal Stress in Marine Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1992    
File        : a9023207

Award Number: 9023207
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Dietz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Environmental regulation of gene expression is certain to be                   
              critical for the survival and success of marine organisms.  At                 
              present, however, very little is known about the interactions                  
              between environmental factors, e.g., temperature, and the                      
              regulation of transcription of genes in any marine eucaryotic                  
              organism.  The only well understood example of environmental                   
              control of gene expression is in the case of the heat shock                    
              proteins (HSPs), which are induced by high temperature and other               
              stresses (e.g., anoxia) in all organisms so far studied. However,              
              few marine species have been examined. This project will examine               
              the heat shock gene (HSP) system in several species of                         
              differently thermally-adapted marine animals to determine: (i)                 
              the threshold temperatures at which heat stress (HSP induction)                
              takes place in differently adapted species (or populations), (ii)              
              the induction patterns of HSPs in larval and adult individuals of              
              coastal fishes, and (iii) the underlying molecular bases of the                
              inter-specific (or inter-population) differences in HSP                        
              expression.  Particular attention will be given to congeneric                  
              species inhabiting different thermal regimes, e.g., latitudinally              
              separated species of two genera of fish, Sebastes and Embiotoca,               
              the mussel Mytilus, and to various fishes whose larval stages                  
              inhabit potentially warm bays and estuaries.  The goals of these               
              studies include (i) the development of a powerful molecular index              
              for gauging environmental stress; (ii) the discovery of basic                  
              mechanisms of thermal tolerance, and (iii) the elucidation of                  
              evolutionary differences in the HSP regulatory mechanisms, which               
              set the differences in induction temperatures in differently-                  
              adapted species.  HSP induction  temperatures may provide                      
              important insights into the thermal tolerance of different                     
              species and populations, i.e., into the fundamental molecular                  
              basis for biogeographical distribution patterns.  The development              
              of a relatively simple screening method for HSP in invertebrates,              
              could provide a useful method for gauging the level of stress                  
              experienced by natural populations of marine organisms.
