Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Analysis of Particle Methods for Solving Vlasov
               Kinetic Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1992    
File        : a9023063

Award Number: 9023063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold D. Victory victory@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keshab Ganguly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The primary objective of this project is to study and                     
              analyze random particle methods for Vlasov-Poisson-Fokker-Planck               
              systems.  It is proposed to see if a random particle-in-cell                   
              method can be implemented that takes into account the fact that                
              plasma particles (ions and electrons) undergo Brownian motion due              
              to collisions with the medium or background particles.  The                    
              research efforts will be mainly devoted to the convergence                     
              analysis and numerical implementation of these methods.                        
              Simultaneously, the investigators shall continue investigations                
              on particle methods for solving Vlasov-Poisson systems.  Their                 
              research will be addressed to improving convergence rates for                  
              simulation methods, introducing time discretization of                         
              particle-in-cell methods, and analyzing more efficient                         
              algorithms.                                                                    
                   For problems of controlled fusion and laser fusion, the                   
              physics of laser-matter interactions is still not well                         
              understood.  Consequently, scientists are turning more and more                
              to microscopic models based on kinetic equations to better                     
              understand these phenomena.  For modeling the evolution of                     
              rarefied plasmas for those times less than the binary                          
              collision times, the Vlasov-Poisson system of equations is used                
              for the relevant kinetic model, when the magnetic fields vary                  
              slowly.  Particle simulation methods consist of replacing the                  
              plasma by a large set of charged superparticles that obey the                  
              usual laws of classical and modern physics, and then computing                 
              the interactions of these superparticles.  A thorough                          
              understanding of the accuracy properties of these methods will                 
              enable the scientist to use different approximate parameters                   
              efficiently in a numerical simulation (e.g., the minimum number                
              of particles to obtain a given accuracy).                                      
                   The Vlasov-Poisson-Fokker-Planck system of kinetic equations              
              incorporates collisional effects of a plasma with the background               
              material (e.g., a plasma system in a thermal bath or "reservoir")              
              by regarding the motion of a particle as Brownian motion caused                
              by collisions with the background.  This model is analogous to                 
              the classical description of the irregular or Brownian motion                  
              exhibited by a particle of colloidal size immersed in a fluid.                 
              In stellar dynamics also, the effect of encounters between stars               
              under gravitational forces influences their motion in the manner               
              of Brownian motion.  The random particle method for                            
              Vlasov-Poisson-Fokker-Planck models is proposed in order to                    
              better understand the effects of collisions by incorporating the               
              Brownian motion in the numerical schemes.
