Title       : Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9023862

Award Number: 9023862
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard W. West                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128921             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Hahn bhahn@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 5416      SHIPBOARD SCIENTIFIC SUPP EQUI
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will support shipboard scientific support equipment               
              for the research vessel ENDEAVOR, an NSF-owned ship operated by                
              the University of Rhode Island, Graduate School of Oceanography                
              and dedicated to use in support of ocean science research.                     
                                                                                             
              The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds              
              for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe                     
              conduct of ocean science research. This Program provides support               
              for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the               
              deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational               
              equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite                       
              receivers to pin point the location of research sites,                         
              communication equipment including radio transceivers and                       
              satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data                           
              communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats                 
              for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites.                  
                                                                                             
              The Project Directors, John F. Bash and James J. Griffin are                   
              fully qualified to direct this project having had considerable                 
              experience in overseeing the acquisition and installation of                   
              shipboard equipment.                                                           
                                                                                             
              This project will allow the institution to correct problems with               
              a wire winder, replace an old and outdated radar, obtain safety                
              breathing devices, an emergency radio beacon, special safe radios              
              for fueling operations, an emergency steering system, a                        
              watermaker, a fuel oil purifier and a computer system.
