Title       : MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY FELLOWSHIP: Biological Invasion and Genetic Intorgression
               of Exotic Mussels -- A Molecular Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1992      
File        : a9023857

Award Number: 9023857
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Geller   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Powers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Marine biological invasions are pervasive, and an understanding                
              of the processes and mechanisms of invasions is important to our               
              ability to manage and conserve marine resources.  Biological                   
              invasions are also large.scale experiments in ecology and                      
              evolution, providing unique opportunities to study basic                       
              ecological and genetic processes in the world' oceans, including               
              dispersal, recruitment, gene flow, and hybridization.  This                    
              project will examine the temporal and spatial pattern of spread                
              of an introduced mussel, and the extent of genetic introgression               
              into populations of native mussels.                                            
                                                                                             
              This research will exploit the on.going incidental release of                  
              genetically distinct larvae of the exotic mussel, Mytilus                    
              galloprovincialis, to study the invasion of a species with                   
              pelagic larvae.  M. galloprovincialis larvae are released into             
              San Francisco Bay on a daily basis in the ballast water of                     
              Japanese ships.  Our studies have shown that 4 x 10.6 mussel                   
              larvae may be released from a single ship.  Because San Francisco              
              is the only port in central California large enough to receive             
              ocean.going ships, all central California populations of Mytilus             
              galloprovincialis likely stem from introduced population in San              
              Francisco Bay.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              The PI will develop  a set of primers (for mitochondrial and                   
              nuclear ribosomal genes) for the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)               
              specific to invading Japanese M. galloprovincialis and to native           
              Mytilus spp.  Using PCR as an assay, the PI will then establish              
              the distribution of Japanese M. galloprovincialis genotypes                
              inside San Francisco Bay and in outlying bays and estuaries.                   
              This will elucidate intraregional patterns of dispersal of an                  
              invading species with pelagic larvae.  Further, because nuclear                
              genotypes have 2 sets of chromosomes, assay by PCR will detect                 
              hybrid genotypes, revealing genetic introgression into native                  
              populations.  Combining mtDNA and nDNA analyses will allow                     
              detection of asymmetrical introgression.                                       
                                                                                             
              Until recently, the history of invasion by an exotic species                   
              could only be inferred from present day distribution, and little               
              inferred about the rate of invasion.  However, because PCR allows            
              the amplification of DNA from preserved material, mussels                      
              collected (and preserved in museum collections) throughout the                 
              period of invasion on the North American west coast can analyzed               
              using the primers developed in this project.  In this way, it                  
              will be possible to reconstruct both the pattern and rate of                   
              invasion by M. galloprovincialis.                                          
                                                                                             
              This study, the first to apply molecular techniques to an ongoing              
              marine invasion, will provide new insights in the processes of                 
              dispersal and introgression of alien genotypes during a                        
              biological invasion.
