Title       : FAW: Molecular Studies on the Evolution and Development of Pteridophytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9023787

Award Number: 9023787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana B. Stein dstein@mhc.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1122,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      Ferns are ideal for evolutionary and developmental studies.            
              Molecular studies tracing fern evolution are especially important              
              because there is a paucity of morphological characters for use in              
              systematic studies and taxonomists disagree about the unity of some            
              traits.  In this research, the investigator will study the                     
              organization of the genomes in several fern families.  Genome                  
              rearrangements are valuable for determining linkage at higher                  
              orders of taxonomic classification where comparisons of restriction            
              site mutations are precluded because the genetic distance is too               
              great.  It is likely that one could trace the evolution of the                 
              rearrangements by finding representatives that are immediate                   
              between the primitive fern Osmunda and the higher ferns.                     
                      The investigator will collect and analyze the old world tree           
              ferns for chloroplast DNA mutations and compare these results to               
              data on new world tree ferns.  One current hypothesis,  which has              
              some support from angiosperm studies, is that species from the old             
              and new worlds that look alike differ more than different species              
              which are in close proximity to each other.  The study described               
              would address this issue.                                                      
                      Ferns also offer several potentially valuable features for             
              studying gene regulation.  The haploid generation is a small, fully            
              independent plant that grows from a single cell (the spore) and can            
              be bisexual.  Unlike flowering plants, self fertilization produces             
              a diploid plant that is 100% homozygous in one generation.                     
              Transformation of the spore will allow the investigator to generate            
              plants homozygous for the introduced trait.  The particular genes              
              that will be examined are male determining genes.  Spores of                   
              certain species that are sown in the presence of the hormone                   
              antheridiogen germinate to produce a male haploid plant.  This                 
              suggests that a different gene(s) is activated in response to this             
              hormone than when the spore is sown without the hormone and in                 
              isolation from other gametophytes.  Subtraction hybridization will             
              be used to enrich for specific messages related to these two                   
              different developmental pathways.
