Title       : Faculty Awards for Women. Scientific Inquiry in the Social Sciences: The Market
               for (IR) Reproducible Research in Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9023464

Award Number: 9023464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan K. Feigenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,1320,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides support to Dr. Susan Feigenbaum under the                  
              National Science Foundation's Faculty Awards for Women Scientists              
              and Engineers Program.  The objectives of this program are to                  
              recognize the nation's most outstanding and promising women                    
              scientists and engineers in academic careers in research and                   
              teaching, to retain them in academia, and to facilitate the further            
              development of their careers.                                                  
                                                                                             
              This award will allow the investigator to pursue her research                  
              agenda concerning the impact of institutional design on individual             
              and organizational behavior.  In particular, she will study                    
              institutional constraints facing economic researchers and examine              
              the resulting (dis)incentives to engage in careful quantitative                
              analysis.  She will provide an in-depth theoretical and empirical              
              study of the "market" for (ir)reproducible statistical analysis.               
              It will evaluate the sufficiency of existing mechanisms to monitor             
              empirical work and propose alternative institutional responses.                
                                                                                             
              Her topics to be studied include: (i) the impact of computing price            
              declines on the volume and complexity of data analysis, data                   
              availability, and replicability; (ii) the relationship between                 
              expositional quality and degree of replication, and their relative             
              importance in terms of journal acceptance; (iii) the effect of co-             
              authors and researcher specialization on the production of careful             
              research; (iv) differential incentives created by government versus            
              private funding mechanisms to promote research quality; (v) the                
              role of the editorial process and peer review in assuring                      
              reproducible results; and (vi) the relative success of scientific              
              institutions in self-policing "important" disciplinary and policy              
              research discoveries.
