Title       : FAW: In Situ Elucidation of Reaction Pathways During Low Pressure Chemical Vapor
               Deposition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1995  
File        : a9023931

Award Number: 9023931
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol McConica   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1360,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The computation speed of modern computers is limited by the               
              resistance of the submicron metal lines used to interconnect                   
              devices.  One solution to the problem of inefficient interconnect              
              is a vertical interconnect between layered devices, a key to 3-D               
              integration.  Because IC fabrication is traditionally 2-D                      
              procedure, no method has been developed to create vertical                     
              submicron diameter "wires".  This electron elevator could be made              
              by a selective metal deposition process whereby a material                     
              catalyzed its own deposition, filling a well in an insulating                  
              material.  Loss of selectivity (LOS), leading to shorts between                
              metal lines, is due to reaction with the noncatalytic insulator,               
              gas phase reactions, nucleation and deposition on the insulator,               
              and chemistries between reactive intermediates from the deposition             
              reaction.  Finding the process margin is a matter of understanding             
              all of the chemical pathways and relevant transport processes of               
              both the heterogeneous and homogeneous reactions.  The LOS kinetics            
              are quite complex for the reactive species, have very short                    
              lifetimes, and can only be seen with in situ diagnostics.                      
                   The goal of the research is to answer some very specific                  
              questions which cannot be answered in commercial or UHV reactors.              
              What is the role of thermodiffusion and recirculation in LPCVD                 
              reactors?  What are the gas phase intermediates, reactions, and                
              products during selective CVD?  How do our LPCVD (1 torr) results              
              compare with those we determine in the UHV studies funded by NSF?              
              Over the long term, the research will lead to understanding what               
              other reactants could be used to create selectively deposited                  
              vertical wires and what the process margins are in terms of local              
              composition and temperature.                                                   
                   Once the local conditions are known for selective deposition,             
              it becomes necessary to implement mathematical models of commercial            
              reactors so that the inlet gas composition which results in the                
              desired near wafer composition can be determined.  This global                 
              model must also include modeling of the transience within the                  
              submicron well as it fills.  Current models will be extended to new            
              chemistries.
