Title       : New Developments in Transition Metal Polyolefin Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1994   
File        : a9023576

Award Number: 9023576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory M. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              The first part of this research will involve the development of                
              a strategy for endo carbon-carbon bond formation that involves                 
              functional group manipulation at the metal center of                           
              (cycloheptadienyl)M(halide), where M is Fe or Ru.  Conversion                  
              of the halide ligand to an appropriate organic group followed                  
              by reductive elimination will complete the functionalization.                  
              The second goal of the research will be to study the chemistry                 
              of carbanions stabilized by Fe(CO)3 and CpCo. The                              
              organometallic anions described are mild nucleophiles that will                
              allow carbon-carbon bond formation with acyl and/or alkyl                      
              halides and BF3 activated carbonyl compounds.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              With this Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award,                  
              the Synthetic Organic Program will support the research of Dr.                 
              Gregory M. Williams of the Department of Chemistry at                          
              California State University, Fullerton.  The work is focused on                
              two major areas, each of which will expand the utility of                      
              transition metal polyolefin complexes as precursors to natural                 
              products.  In these areas, the attack of electron rich species                 
              on coordinated polyoefins and the chemistry of transition metal                
              stabilized carbanions will be used for developing new ways to                  
              affect carbon-carbon bond formation.
