Title       : Faculty Award for Women - An Atomic Hydrogen (HI) Image of the Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9023254

Award Number: 9023254
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline H. van Gorkom jvangork@astro.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 0000,1217,9179,9292,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers is made             
              to Dr. Jacqueline H. Van Gorkom in the Department of Astronomy at              
              Columbia University.                                                           
                                                                                             
                   The NSF Faculty Award for Women Scientists and Engineers                  
              recognizes the high quality of the awardee's record in teaching and            
              scholarship as well as the potential for continued significant                 
              contributions to scientific research, the academic profession, and             
              the education of future scientists.                                            
                                                                                             
                   The emphasis of the research will be on the formation and                 
              evolution of galaxies and the large scale structure of the                     
              universe.  These issues will be explored by making images of the               
              atomic hydrogen in and between galaxies, in isolated galaxies,                 
              interacting galaxies, small groups of galaxies, clusters of                    
              galaxies and in regions where there might be no galaxies at all,               
              the voids.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                   The large-scale structure of the universe as we know it today,            
              with large filaments and sheets is based almost entirely on high               
              luminosity galaxies, seen at optical wavelengths.  Biased galaxy               
              formation predicts a separation between luminosity (bright                     
              galaxies) and mass (dark matter).  Dwarf galaxies are expected to              
              be more uniformly distributed and should be a better tracer of the             
              dark mass.  These dwarfs could be too faint to be included in                  
              optical catalogs.  They will be observed in the radio region of the            
              spectrum.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                   Other similar surveys which will address slightly different               
              questions are a volume limited survey of the Hydra Cluster of                  
              galaxies and HI observations of all the optically known galaxies               
              in the Bootes void.  The Hydra survey will extend the determination            
              of the spatial distribution of gas rich galaxies to a very high                
              density region.  Even more interesting will be a comparison of the             
              HI morphology of the galaxies in Hydra and in Virgo (already                   
              completed) with those in the Bootes void.  This will provide us                
              with unique material on the effects of the environment on galaxies.            
                                                                                             
                   There will be several collaborators and graduate students                 
              involved in the projects.
