Title       : Faculty Awards for Women: Catalytic Hydrogenitrogenation of Petroleum
               Derivatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1995   
File        : a9023778

Award Number: 9023778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Umit S. Ozkan ozkan.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1360,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The research program will focus on investigating the catalytic                 
              phenomena involved in hydrodenitrogenation reactions over sulfided             
              and unsulfided Ni-Mo catalysts.  The catalysts to be used in this              
              study will be synthesized by three different techniques, namely,               
              homogeneous sulfide precipitation, impregnated thiosalt                        
              decomposition and intercalation of nickel and molybdenum cations               
              in clay matrices.  Catalyst characterization will be performed                 
              using various techniques including BET surface area and pore size              
              distribution analysis, X-ray diffraction, scanning and transmission            
              electron microscopy, energy dispersive X-ray analysis, laser Raman             
              Spectroscopy and Raman microprobe and X-ray photoelectron                      
              spectroscopy.  Thermal analysis techniques will also be used                   
              through temperature-programmed reduction, desorption and                       
              sulfidation studies.  In addition to ambient characterization of               
              the catalysts, in-situ characterization techniques will also be                
              adopted using a laser Raman spectrometer and a specially designed              
              in-situ Raman cell.  The changes that take place in the catalyst               
              during oxidation, reduction, sulfidation, reaction and deactivation            
              processes will be examined in-situ.  These studies will be used to             
              investigate the nature of the active form of the catalyst and the              
              catalyst support interactions.  In addition to examining the                   
              reaction network, the effect of reaction parameters such as                    
              hydrogen partial pressure, reaction temperature and pressure and               
              the effect of substituents will also be investigated.  Finally,                
              isotopic labelling techniques will be combined with kinetic studies            
              and in-situ laser Raman spectroscopy studies to gain insight into              
              the catalytic phenomena involved in hydrodenitrogenation reactions.
