Title       : RUI: Race, Gender, and the Correlation Between Schooling and Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9023085

Award Number: 9023085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71033              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Paul Leigh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
              There is widespread agreement among health economists that there               
              is a persistent empirical association across samples and over time             
              between years of schooling and health. However, there are several              
              explanations about why this association occurs. One explanation is             
              that there is a direct effect with schooling endowing people with              
              greater knowledge and skills to practice preventive medicine or use            
              medical care more widely. Another is that schooling enhances health            
              through allowing access to safe jobs, discouraging smoking and                 
              encouraging seat belt use and exercise. Others point to the                    
              possibility that poor health in childhood or adolescence results               
              in less investment in schooling. Finally, it is suggested that                 
              unobserved variables such as the rate of time discount is the                  
              "true" cause of both high levels of schooling and good health and              
              that increased schooling does not lead to better health or slower              
              deterioration of existing health. This project will develop models             
              which will allow for testing of many of these hypotheses in                    
              addition to comparing rates of health returns to schooling across              
              gender and race.                                                               
                                                                                             
              Four large national data sets are used in the project: National                
              Health and Nutritional Examination Survey (NHANESI) I and II,                  
              Epidemiological Followup Survey to NHANESI, and the Panel Study of             
              Income Dynamics. Several dependent variables relating to health                
              will be used: blood pressures, smoking, body mass and early death.             
              The estimation techniques will take into account self selection                
              models, where appropriate. This study will be the first to focus               
              on the race and gender differences in the correlations between                 
              schooling and health in the same way that the classic studies                  
              focused on the gender and race differences in the financial returns            
              to schooling.
