Title       : Oceanographic Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 24,  1991   
File        : a9023731

Award Number: 9023731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64750              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Freitag jfreitag@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Hahn  (Co-Project Director current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Graduate School of Oceanography at the University of                       
              Rhode Island will acquire several items of oceanographic                       
              instrumentation to be placed in a pool of shared use                           
              equipment.  This equipment is maintained for use on or in                      
              association with the R/V ENDEAVOR, a research vessel owned by                  
              the NSF and operated by the university.  A substantial part                    
              of the ship's operating schedule during 1991 is in support of                  
              NSF-sponsored research projects.  The instrumentation will                     
              also increase the capabilities of the ship and of the                          
              University to support research and engineering activities.                     
              The instrumentation includes:                                                  
              -Gyro repeater to display ship's heading in the main                           
               scientific laboratory,                                                        
              -High density computer tape drive for increasing shared-use,                   
               sea-going computing capabilities,                                             
              -Rosette sampler adapter plates to improve the existing                        
               system's ability for collecting discrete seawater samples at                  
               specific water depths,                                                        
              -Niskin bottles for collecting discrete seawater samples at                    
               various depths in the water column,                                           
              -Precision acoustic pingers for determining position of an                     
               instrument package relative to the surface or seafloor,                       
              -Upgrade for a precision salinometer used for the precision                    
               determination of seawater salinity, and                                       
              -Temperature, conductivity, and wind sensors to augment                        
               routine data collection capabilities, and                                     
              -Box Corer upgrade to allow collection of sediment and soil                    
               samples from the sea floor.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The instrumentation described above will increase the                          
              capability of the University to support NSF-sponsored                          
              research and engineering projects.
