Title       : Marine Biotechnology Fellowship: Ribosomal RNA Regulation in Marine Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1991   
File        : a9023858

Award Number: 9023858
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 24,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18324              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee J. Kerkhof   (Principal Investigator current)
              Masayasu Nomura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Marine bacteria are essential links in marine productivity and                 
              biogeochemical cycles.  Although the species composition of marine             
              bacteria is largely unknown, evidence suggests that most marine                
              bacteria are members of the Purple bacteria phylum of the                      
              Eubacterial kingdom.  The phylum contains photosynthetic,                      
              heterotrophic, and lithotrophic bacteria.  Many members are capable            
              of either the oxidation or reduction of nitrogen and sulfur which              
              are extremely important in the marine environment.  This project               
              seeks to ascertain if a general relationship between RNA/DNA ratios            
              and growth rate exists for the Purple bacteria.  New evidence from             
              the marine Purple bacterium, Pseudomonas perfectomarina, indicates             
              that the relationship between RNA/DNA ratio and growth rate extends            
              to the low growth rates believed to occur in the ocean.                        
              Furthermore, the Ps. perfectomarina data is in agreement with the              
              RNA/DNA ratios measured on enteric bacteria at near maximal growth             
              rates.  However, it has not been widely established that this                  
              predictive relationship between RNA/DNA ratio and growth rate is               
              valid for other Purple bacteria over the complete range of growth              
              rates that can exist in the natural environment.  In order to                  
              expand the repertoire of rRNA probes that can be used to measure               
              microbial growth rate in the ocean, a five-step approach will be               
              undertaken to: 1) clone the marine rRNA genes and create marine                
              rRNA promoter-reporter gene fusions to assess if there is                      
              regulation in a growth rate-dependent manner; 2) empirically                   
              measure the RNA-DNA ratio vs growth rate for six marine bacteria               
              (representing three subdivisions of the Purple bacteria) using                 
              previously established methods; 3) investigate the mechanisms                  
              controlling rRNA synthesis in the marine bacteria; 4) screen the               
              marine bacteria's genomes for the presence of novel genes                      
              regulating rRNA synthesis; 5) clone and sequence the 23 S rRNA                 
              subunit of each marine bacterium and identify species-specific                 
              regions which will be used to assay the in situ growth rate in                 
              seawater samples from the Southern California Bight.  If a general             
              relationship between RNA/DNA ratios and growth rates are found to              
              exist for these purple bacteria, investigators could routinely                 
              determine the presence and measure the growth rates of large                   
              numbers of Purple bacteria in natural samples. In conclusion, it is            
              extremely important for the future use of rRNA probes in the ocean             
              that the relationship between rRNA and growth rate be investigated.            
                                                                                             
              No other macromolecule can provide the genetic and metabolic                   
              information necessary to evaluate the growth rate of a single                  
              species of micro-organism in a complex assemblage without the risk             
              of contamination.
