Title       : Nonresponse in Organizational Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1993       
File        : a9023148

Award Number: 9023148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Tomaskovic-Devey Don_Tomaskovic-Devey@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Leiter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    This project seeks to improve our methodological                         
              understanding of how to do generic representative                              
              organizational surveys.  The few general population private                    
              sector organizational surveys which have been done and report                  
              response rates tend to have response (or cooperation)  rates                   
              significantly lower than the seventy to seventy-five percent                   
              which is normal for general population surveys of                              
              individuals.  It is likely that some of the high level of                      
              non-response in organizational surveys represents the                          
              application of survey techniques developed for populations of                  
              individuals to organizations.  The application of survey                       
              methods to organizations must come to grips with the                           
              differences between organizations and individuals.                             
                    The project has two objectives.  The first is to                         
              evaluate the representativeness of a final sample of                           
              establishments relative to the population in terms of the                      
              sources of response bias.  These sources include omissions                     
              from the sampling frame and non-response to the administered                   
              survey or to particular items on the survey.  The second goal                  
              is to develop a theory of organizational survey non-response.                  
              Once a sampling frame has been constructed, high response                      
              rates are essential in order to approximate the                                
              characteristics of a random sample and to insure population                    
              representativeness.                                                            
                     It is anticipated that organizational characteristics                   
              associated with survey and item non-response will be                           
              identifiable.  Since,  almost nothing is now known about non-                  
              response in general organizational samples the probabilities                   
              of making a significant contribution to survey methodology                     
              and organizational research appear to be high.
