Title       : Cooperative Agreement: Understanding the Earth's Dynamics and Structure (IRIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1996 
File        : a9023505

Award Number: 9023505
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Daniel F. Weill                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84999999           (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Simpson simpson@iris.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Inc Res Inst Seismology
	      1200 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/682-2220

NSF Program : 1578      FACILITY SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1576,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Earth's deep interior remains a major scientific frontier that             
              holds the key to understanding the origin of the planet, its                   
              evolution through geologic time to the present structure, and the              
              internal causes of plate dynamics, earthquakes, volcanism, and the             
              geomagnetic field. Inaccessible to direct observation below a few              
              kilometers (the limit of drilling and exposure by erosion) the                 
              Earth's crust, mantle, and core are primarily studied through their            
              interaction with seismic waves. Recent developments in seismic                 
              sensor design, digital data acquisition, transmission, and storage             
              techniques make possible dramatic improvements in the resolving                
              power of seismic imaging methods.                                              
                                                                                             
              The Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology, or the IRIS             
              Consortium, is composed of 70 U.S. universities with research and              
              teaching programs in seismology. It serves as a national facility              
              for the development, deployment, and support of modern digital                 
              seismic instrumentation, and its mission is organized into three               
              major program elements: (1) The Global Seismographic Network (GSN)             
              program provides the U.S. contribution to an international network             
              of 128 permanent, standardized, very-broad-band (VBB), wide dynamic            
              range digital seismic stations at a spacing of approximately 2000              
              km around the globe. (2) The Program for Array  Seismic Studies of             
              the Continental Lithosphere (PASSCAL) aims to establish a U.S.                 
              national resource of 600 portable seismometer systems available for            
              field deployment in specific seismic imaging experiments and for               
              rapid response to earthquake studies. (3) The IRIS Data Management             
              System (DMS) aims to provide the national and international seismic            
              research community with timely access to data from the GSN and                 
              PASSCAL programs. It archives and distributes the data from these              
              programs and facilitates the standardization and exchange of data.             
                                                                                             
              During its initial five years of operation from 1986 to 1990, the              
              IRIS Consortium accomplished the following specific tasks: (1) It              
              developed the IRIS-1 and IRIS-2 lines of standardized permanent                
              station instrumentation employing VBB sensor technology for the                
              GSN. Two IRIS operations and maintenance facilities for the GSN                
              were installed at the U.S. Geological Survey's Albuquerque                     
              Seismological Laboratory and at the University of California, San              
              Diego. Currently, 25 GSN VBB stations have been installed world-               
              wide and are returning data. (2) The PASSCAL program has developed             
              two lines of standardized portable seismographic instrument                    
              packages. One hundred of these  are currently housed at the first              
              PASSCAL Instrument Center, located at the Lamont-Doherty Geological            
              Observatory. PASSCAL instruments have already been used in a number            
              of planned field experiments, and were rapidly deployed for                    
              aftershock studies of the 1987 Armenia and 1989 Loma Prieta,                   
              California earthquakes. (3) The DMS has established GSN data                   
              collection nodes at the Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory and               
              at the University of California, San Diego. An IRIS central data               
              archive and distribution center is temporarily operating at the                
              Center for High Performance Computing at the University of Texas.              
              Through Internet, U.S. users (and European users via the ORFEUS                
              data center in the Netherlands) have access to the continuous data             
              streams from most of the existing GSN stations, to major-event                 
              waveform data in near-real time, and to special datasets from                  
              important earthquakes as well as from PASSCAL field experiments.               
                                                                                             
              This award provides support for IRIS activities in 1991-1995.                  
              During this period IRIS will:                                                  
                                                                                             
                   -- Install an additional 50-60 stations of the GSN, bringing              
                      the total IRIS GSN stations to 75-85 (completion of the                
                      planned 128-station global network will be achieved with               
                      additional stations contributed by IRIS' international                 
                      partners in the GSN and coordinated by the internationally             
                      organized Federation of Digital Seismograph Networks).                 
                                                                                             
                   -- Purchase an additional 500 PASSCAL portable seismographic              
                      units of standard IRIS design and manage their deployment              
                      and maintenance for the seismology research community                  
                      through the establishment of two additional PASSCAL                    
                      Instrument Centers to be located at U.S. universities.                 
                                                                                             
                   -- Install and develop to full capacity a permanent Data                  
                      Management Center (DMC) to be located at a U.S. university.            
                      The five-year objectives of the DMC include complete                   
                      archiving of the world-wide continuous VBB data, very rapid            
                      turnaround of customized datasets to the international                 
                      seismology  community, and improvement of current                      
                      capabilities for managing data from PASSCAL one- and two-              
                      dimensional array field experiments.                                   
                                                                                             
                   -- Assume a leadership role in reaching out to the science                
                      community regarding the use of IRIS facilities in earth                
                      sciences research by sponsoring an annual science planning             
                      workshop. IRIS will also formulate and implement a plan for            
                      the use of PASSCAL instruments in rapid response to                    
                      earthquake prediction and aftershock monitoring needs.                 
                                                                                             
                   -- Create an inexpensive version of the portable PASSCAL                  
                      instrumentation with coordinated educational materials that            
                      will permit low-cost high-school involvement in seismic                
                      monitoring, and develop an educational state-of-the-art                
                      traveling museum exhibit of a complete seismographic                   
                      station, with direct real-time connection with the IRIS                
                      Data Management Center.
