Title       : Marine Biotech Fellowship: Dietary Regulation of Gene Expression During
               Opportunistic Growth in a Polychaete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1992      
File        : a9023964

Award Number: 9023964
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam G. Marsh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In temperate ecosystems, most benthic communities exhibit                      
              between-year variability in the seasonal appearance and                        
              abundance of their opportunistic members.  It seems likely that                
              the life-history strategies of these organisms directly                        
              regulates their growth and reproduction.  This may result form                 
              annual differences in the availability of dietary                              
              micronutrients.  Opportunistic, deposit-feeding polychaetes                    
              face a unique nutritional constraint: their small body size                    
              limits the amount of assimilated materials they can store.                     
              They are dependent on the immediate availabilities of their                    
              dietary requirements to fuel their growth and reproduction.                    
              Although growth and reproduction in opportunists in stimulated                 
              by food supply, little is known about the dietary components                   
              that regulate how much and how fast an opportunist can grow.                   
              This project will assess the potential for two micronutrients                  
              (vitamin D and the carotenoid, B-Carotene) to stimulate somatic                
              cell divisions at the gene transcription level in the                          
              polycheate worm, Streblospio benedicti.  The C-myc                             
              protooncogne will be used to assay tissue responses to dietary                 
              composition immediately (0-24h) after feeding.  Quantifying c-                 
              myc mRNA transcript levels will provide an instantaneous                       
              snapshot of cell division activity in a tissue sample.                         
              Relating tissue responses to a life-history pattern of rapid                   
              growth and reproduction will primarily focus on evaluating the                 
              potential for vitamin D or B-carotene to initiate and maintain                 
              mitotic cycling independent of dietary composition.
