Title       : FAW: Algorithmic Complexity in Cryptography, Distributed Computation and
               Interactive Proofs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1996     
File        : a9023313

Award Number: 9023313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shafrira Goldwasser shafi@theory.lcs.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2860,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's primary areas of research interest are interactive proof              
              systems, fault tolerant distributed computation, cryptography.                 
              Research is projected in these areas.                                          
                                                                                             
              Interactive proofs, introduced by Goldwasser, Micali and Rackoff, are          
              an extension of the classical NP notion of what can be efficiently             
              verified.  Two new ingredients are added:  The verifier may be                 
              probabilistic and err slightly, and the verifier can interact with the         
              prover.  The PI plans to investigate for which class of problems it is         
              sufficient for the prover to be able to solve the problem itself.              
              This problem has direct application to program testing which will be           
              explored.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The rapid development of distributed systems raises the natural                
              question of what tasks can be performed by them (especially when               
              faults occur).  In the last four years it has been extensively                 
              studied, and to a large extent understood, how to perform any                  
              probabilistic computation on inputs distributed among processors in a          
              complete network so that no faulty subset of the processors gets any           
              additional information or can disrupt the computation.                         
                                                                                             
              Cryptography has recently developed from a primarily empirical field           
              of ad-hoc techniques to a formal discipline.  This rigor was                   
              accompanied by concrete and practical proposals of systems which were          
              shown, under a variety of candidate hard problems from number theory,          
              to comply with the new security standards.  At this time in the                
              development of the field two projects should be undertaken: first,             
              the definitions for the different cryptographic tasks must be unified.         
              And second, new hard problems should be found (possibly from coding            
              theory or the geometry of numbers domain) on which to base                     
              cryptographic schemes.
