Title       : Molecular Probes for the Study of Bacterial Iron Reduction in Anaerobic Marine
               Environments, Marine Biotech Fellowship
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1992       
File        : a9023943

Award Number: 9023943
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. DiChristina   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Iron reduction is an important ecological process in marine                    
              environments since availability can be a limiting factor in both               
              the primary productivity of surface waters and the                             
              remineralization of organic matter in bottom sediments. The                    
              primary objective of this project is to use molecular probes to                
              study the microbial ecology of iron-reducing bacteria in                       
              anaerobic marine environments.  Ferri-reductase antibody probes,               
              ferri-reductase structural gene probes and genera-specific rRNA                
              probes will be constructed and used to determine: (1) the                      
              distribution and (2) the environmental parameters which control                
              expression of iron reduction genes and enzymes in those                        
              environments.  In order to construct the ferri-reductase                       
              molecular probes, the project will initially focus on                          
              understanding the process of microbial iron reduction.                         
              Shewanella putrefaciens will be used as a model iron-reducing                  
              marine organism, selected largely because it is commonly isolated              
              from a variety of marine sources, and because of its unique                    
              metabolic versatility: S. putrefaciens is capable of coupling the              
              oxidation of an extensive array of organic compounds to the                    
              reduction of many of the respiratory electron acceptors found in               
              marine environments including O2, NO3-, NO2-, MnO2, SO32- and                  
              Fe(III).  Preliminary molecular work has centered on the                       
              isolation and characterization of mutant strains deficient in                  
              iron reduction capability.  The project will use complimentary                 
              genetic and biochemical techniques to clone and characterize the               
              genes and gene products involved in expression of a functional                 
              ferri-reductase.  Ferri-reductase antibody probes and ferri-                   
              reductase structural gene probes will be constructed and used in               
              ecological studies to detect the presence of iron-reducing                     
              bacteria in marine waters and sediments, and to determine which                
              environmental parameters control expression of iron reduction                  
              genes and enzymes in those environments.  Results from the                     
              project will provide details on the molecular biology and ecology              
              of microbially-mediated iron reduction in the marine environment.//
