Title       : Attentional Effects in the Translation of Print to Sound
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1991   
File        : a9023472

Award Number: 9023472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88903              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Paap kenp@crl.nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Skilled reading requires the acquisition of several subskills,                 
              ranging from recognition of individual words to combination of                 
              words and sentences into the overall meaning of a text.  This                  
              research will investigate the processes by which a skilled reader              
              can determine the sound of a word.  One possible process is that               
              readers first identify the word's letters and then use their                   
              knowledge of spelling-to-sound rules to determine its                          
              pronunciation.  However, there is another way to determine a                   
              word's pronunciation.  Instead of using spelling-to-sound rules,               
              a reader can simply use the letters to look up the word in his                 
              mental dictionary.  When a word is located in the mental                       
              dictionary, information about its meaning and pronunciation can                
              be retrieved.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              Spelling-to-sound rules can enable a reader to pronounce unknown               
              words.  Thus, most readers would pronounce BIM to rhyme with                   
              "him".  Beginning readers would find this very useful since there              
              are many words they have not learned to read, but that are part                
              of their aural vocabulary.  On the other hand, fast and fluent                 
              reading may require that readers be able to go directly from the               
              identification of the letters to their mental dictionary.  Also,               
              only the dictionary route can lead to the correct pronunciation                
              and identification of some words.  For example, if the rules are               
              followed, then the letters PINT would be pronounced to rhyme with              
              "hint", "mint", and "lint".                                                    
                                                                                             
              Despite the fact that two routes from print to sound would appear              
              to be useful, the existence of two functionally independent and                
              anatomically separate routes remains controversial.  Single-route              
              models consistent with existing experimental data have been                    
              proposed in recent years.  One view is that skilled readers                    
              always rely on the rules to translate print to sound, whereas                  
              another view is that skilled readers only use the dictionary                   
              route.  This research, which will involve both experimentation                 
              and computer simulation, is aimed at testing the dual-route                    
              hypothesis that both processes are used by skilled readers of                  
              English.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The results of this project could provide insights into better                 
              methods for teaching beginning reading, for teaching English as a              
              second language, and for understanding some forms of dyslexia.
