Title       : The Role of Concepts in Mathematical Knowledge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  1990  
File        : a9023955

Award Number: 9023955
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Manders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Dr. Manders is developing a novel philosophical view of                        
              mathematical knowledge that long-range intellectual accomplishment             
              in mathematics consists primarily in making things clear by                    
              appropriate use of concepts.  Dr. Manders is extending case studies            
              testing explanations of how conceptual changes affect mathematical             
              understanding.  The studies compare how given problems are dealt               
              with in different conceptual settings.  They seek to account for               
              historically observed differences in understandability in the                  
              different settings by theoretical models of conceptual settings and            
              their relationships to each other.                                             
                                                                                             
              The studies concern (a) algebraic reasoning in Cartesian geometry              
              vs. traditional figure=based geometrical reasoning; (b) the meta-              
              mathematical notion of "model completion" as a schematic paradigm              
              for the historical development of the number concept to include                
              real and complex numbers, and for the movement from affine to                  
              projective viewpoint in geometry; (c) the algebraic notion of                  
              "completion of a partial group action" as a model for projective               
              closure and conformal compactification.  For example, algebraic                
              methods promote clarity in ceratin phases of geometrical problem               
              solving by allowing one to suppress irrelevant geometric                       
              information. Figures must by their nature display this information,            
              whereas algebraic formulas need not.   Such differences may be                 
              brought out by systematically comparing the functioning of                     
              algebraic and figure-based representation.  They are expected to               
              account for many of the historically observed differences between              
              Cartesian and traditional geometry.
