Title       : In-situ Growth of Indium Arsenide/Antimonide Long Wavelength Photodiodes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9023197

Award Number: 9023197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252228             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Chan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Electro-Optek Corporation
	      3152 Kashiwa Street
	      Torrance, CA  905054011    310/534-3666

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 1218,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The new technology of strained superlattice (SSL) of InAsSb and in-            
              situ formation of photodiode on silicon (Si) has the potential of              
              fabricating producible long-wavelength infrared (L-WIR) photodiodes            
              for diverse and military applications.  An investigation on the                
              molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth of the SSL on Si has been                
              made in a phase I SBIR program, aimed at fabricating producible                
              LWIR arrays.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This was accomplished in phase I: (1) all required MBE                         
              modifications compatible to the MBE system have been designed and              
              some have been reduced to practice; (2) the MBE processes for                  
              growing a lattice-matching buffer, SSL and photojunction have been             
              delineated; (3) the feasibility of growing high quality buffer and             
              InAsSb epitaxial layers on Si has been demonstrated by numerous MBE            
              growth runs; and (4) a detailed plan for phase II has been                     
              established.  The MBE growth runs performed have consistently                  
              produced good epitaxial growth, manifested by well-ordered                     
              reflective high energy electron diffraction (RHEED) patterns, high             
              growth stability, mirror-like surface morphology and high carrier              
              mobility.  These runs have reduced the high risk elements and                  
              increase the probability of success of phase II.                               
                                                                                             
              The first goal in phase II is to optimize the growth of the buffer             
              and InAsSb SSL to establish a cutoff wavelength of 12 microns.                 
              Second goal is to develop the photodiode detector using MBE.  A                
              special buffer on Si for lattice matching an defect blocking will              
              be developed then the growth of SSL on the buffer, followed by the             
              in-situ growth of the photodiodes will be established.  The low-               
              defect SSL will provide high detector performance, producibility               
              and uniformity, while the sequential multilayer growth will produce            
              a straightforward in-situ photodiode formation process.
