Title       : Expression of Bacterial Pesticidal Genes in Plants, U.S.- Pakistan Cooperative
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1991 
File        : a9023176

Award Number: 9023176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton P. Gordon miltong@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1112,
Abstract    :
              Technical Narrative:  A collaborative research project is                      
              proposed between Dr. Gordon's laboratory, University of                        
              Washington, Seattle and Dr. Riazuddin's laboratory, Centre for                 
              Advanced Molecular Biology, Lahore, Pakistan.  Their research                  
              will evaluate the potential of transgenic plant technology to                  
              manage and control important crop pests.  These studies will                   
              address three main objectives.  First, pesticidal genes will be                
              identified in the local bacterial isolates and cloned in plant                 
              expression vectors under the control of specific promoters.                    
              Secondly, bacterial pesticidal genes will be introduced and                    
              expressed in Nicotiana tabaccum which will be used as a model                  
              plant system.  Finally, resultant transgenic plants will be                    
              examined for the level of expression of the pesticidal genes and               
              their insect resistance.  The findings of these studies will be a              
              basis for extending transgenic plant technology to other                       
              agriculturally important crops in Pakistan including rice, cotton              
              and chick peas.  It is proposed that isolation, cloning and                    
              introduction of pesticidal genes into plants will be done in                   
              Pakistan where Dr. Riazuddin's laboratory has the  required level              
              of experience and where the necessary infrastructure exists.                   
              However, the provision of expendable biologicals unavailable in                
              Pakistan must be ensured.  Dr. Riazuddin or his associates will                
              spend about three months in the U.S. to obtain specialized                     
              training in the use of various promoters and amino acid                        
              sequencing of purified pesticidal proteins.  Work with such                    
              sequencing methodologies is routine at Dr. Gordon's laboratory at              
              the University of Washington.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Scope: The use of engineered plants to protect crops from insect               
              attack has great potential not only in Pakistan but throughout                 
              the developing world for  achieving effective, low cost, and                   
              environmentally acceptable pest control. Unlike traditional                    
              strategies which use chemical insecticides, biological control                 
              avoids the induction of downstream burdens on the agricultural                 
              infra-structure.  The proposed research is part of a major                     
              program on transgenic plant technology currently being pursued at              
              laboratories of the Centre for Advanced Molecular Biology in                   
              Pakistan.  With moderate dollar support, there are many mutual                 
              benefits including provision of critical laboratory materials                  
              that are not available in Pakistan, training in sophisticated                  
              methodologies, the opportunity for U.S. scientists to engage in                
              research, teaching, the exchange of information on a topic of                  
              common interest, and the promotion of the scientific relationship              
              between the institutions.  Locally, this project has strong                    
              backing from Punjab University and from Pakistan's agricultural                
              planners.
