Title       : Incomplete Contracts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1993 
File        : a9023279

Award Number: 9023279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oliver D. Hart oliver_hart@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is an accomplishment-based renewal of research by one of the              
              architects and leading contributors to the incomplete contracts                
              paradigm for analyzing economic decisions under incomplete                     
              information.  The key feature of this approach is that it                      
              incorporates transaction costs inherent in the writing of long-                
              term contracts (for example, thinking, negotiation, writing and                
              enforcement costs).  Because of these transaction costs parties                
              will write contracts that are incomplete ex-ante, knowing that                 
              these contracts will be renegotiated later on as new information               
              comes in.  The approach studies how this renegotiation takes                   
              place and what implications it has for agents' incentives to take              
              various ex-ante actions.  Under the previous NSF grant the                     
              investigator made important contributions in three areas: the                  
              theory of the firm, vertical integration and market foreclosure,               
              and the financial structure of the firm.  Continued support will               
              lead to further advances in our understanding of the nature of                 
              business internal organization and financial structure.                        
                                                                                             
              This grant continues work on contract and control issues in firms              
              and corporations.  It provides a better understanding of what                  
              determines the structure of claims in corporations and the                     
              various rights possessed by claim-holders, e.g., why debt has                  
              priority over equity, creditors have the right to liquidate                    
              assets in the event of default and equity-holders have votes.                  
              One especially interesting paper in this line of research will be              
              a study of what lessons the emerging Eastern European democracies              
              can learn from the Western experience with different bankruptcy                
              procedures.  The project will also continue to study how                       
              transactions within firms differ from those between firms, and                 
              what are the motives for integration by firms.
