Title       : Intramolecular Anodic Olefin Coupling Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1992  
File        : a9023698

Award Number: 9023698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Moeller moeller@wuchem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the development of new approaches to                   
              carbon-carbon bond formation by oxidation of functionalized                    
              dienes using electrochemistry. Preliminary results indicate                    
              that five, six and seven-membered rings can be formed in high                  
              yield by this methodology. The studies involve the design,                     
              synthesis and electrochemical oxidation of a series of coupling                
              substrates aimed at probing the overall requirements of the                    
              reaction. These experiments are designed to examine the                        
              coupling reactions involving the initiating and terminating                    
              groups that are compatible with the reaction conditions, the                   
              size of the rings that can be formed, the effect of                            
              substituents, the stereochemistry of the products, and the                     
              effect of the reaction conditions on product formation.                        
              Finally, the project examines the synthetic utility of the                     
              reactions for constructing polycyclic ring systems and                         
              initiating tandem cyclization reactions.                                       
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                
              Division will support the research of Dr. Kevin D. Moeller of                  
              the Department of Chemistry at Washington University. The                      
              project is in the general area of synthetic methodology and                    
              focusses on the development of carbon-carbon bond formation by                 
              oxidation of functionalized dienes using electrochemical                       
              methods. These types of reactions are extremely important                      
              because they allow the development of entirely new routes for                  
              molecular synthesis. Oxidative organic electrochemistry is                     
              ideally suited for initiating the key step in these reactions                  
              since it can selectively generate reactive intermediates under                 
              neutral conditions.
