Title       : Approaches to Communications in Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9023036

Award Number: 9023036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79064              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Sobel jsobel@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Intuition and experience indicate that individuals use language to             
              solve strategic problems, but the Nash equilibrium, the principal              
              solution concept used in non-cooperative game theory, does not                 
              provide a sensible framework in which meaningful communication can             
              arise.  The principal goal of this project is to rigorously define             
              where players will use communication to arrive at more efficient               
              outcomes and where communication will fail to improve the outcome.             
              The project investigates the idea that if communication is                     
              possible, then methods of communication evolve and prevent players             
              from playing inefficient equilibria.  The study uses the concept               
              of evolutionarily stable strategies (ESS).  It goes beyond earlier             
              work because it does not assume that language has a focal meaning              
              but allows the meaning of words to arise as part of an                         
              evolutionarily stable equilibrium.  Evolutionarily stable                      
              strategies fail to exist in many games.  The project explores                  
              alternative definitions of evolutionarily stable equilibria that               
              plausibly capture the dynamics of evolving non-cooperative systems             
              with communication.  The outcomes of communication in games in                 
              which agents have private information are studied.  A new general              
              model of signalling games is developed.                                        
                                                                                             
              This project develops a general framework for rigorously analyzing             
              the way communication influences bargaining among rational economic            
              agents with incomplete information.  The results should provide new            
              insights into a wide range of important economic problems.  This               
              work extends previous research by the investigator on oligopoly                
              theory, tax policy, organizational design and litigation.  The                 
              development of alternative general concepts of evolutionarily                  
              stable equilibrium could prove useful eventually to mathematical               
              biology.  The research on the evolution of language could make a               
              contribution to linguistics.
