Title       : Value Conflicts and Technological Policies: The Case of Solar Energy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1991      
File        : a9023010

Award Number: 9023010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47728              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank N. Laird   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              It has become evident that for a proper understanding of public                
              debates about technology policy, it is necessary to take into                  
              account the normative values at issue as well as the technical                 
              concerns.  This study will contribute to our understanding of the              
              way normative values and technical knowledge, as a tightly linked              
              package, influence and are used in political conflict over                     
              technology.  In examining the case of solar energy, the project                
              will synthesize a theoretical framework that explains both the                 
              dynamics and the complex linkages between normative values and                 
              scientific knowledge in the policy process.  It should also                    
              illuminate an interesting and important recent episode -- the                  
              swift rise of solar energy in funding  and visibility within the               
              government, in response to the energy crisis, and its swift fall               
              back into obscurity.  The analysis of documents will be the                    
              principal methodological tool.  Energy policy in general and                   
              solar energy in particular are richly documented issue areas,                  
              replete with books, articles, reports, and congressional                       
              hearings.  The specific values involved in this controversy will               
              be brought out in association with policy options, and the                     
              driving force of these associations will be examined in the                    
              course of the research.  Results will be widely disseminated in                
              journal articles on both solar energy policy and theoretical                   
              issues involved in studying value conflicts in technology policy.              
              In addition, the investigator plans to produce a monograph as a                
              contribution to the scholarly literature and to present reports                
              of results at relevant professional society meetings.                          
                                                                                             
              This proposal is a modest request for support to enable a                      
              talented young scholar to investigate the close links between                  
              values and scientific knowledge in a particular debate over                    
              technology policy.  The principal investigator is well qualified;              
              institutional support is very good; the research design shows                  
              originality and is well worked out; dissemination is likely to be              
              broad and to reach appropriate audiences.  Support is highly                   
              recommended.
