Title       : The Structure and Evolution of Low-Mass Stars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9023775

Award Number: 9023775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bohdan Paczynski bp@astro.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              For a few decades after Robert Oppenheimer's 1939 announcement of              
              the probable existence of "neutron stars", the field of neutron                
              star astronomy was arguably held back by a lack of understanding               
              of what such objects would look like if astronomers on Earth looked            
              in their direction.   Studies have found that nonmagnetic neutron              
              stars reveal their presence by emitting high energy radiation in               
              response to primarily matter falling onto them from an orbiting                
              companion star.  The Principal Investigator (PI) proposes a series             
              of theoretical investigations that would predict the radiation                 
              emitted a matter-accretion process.  He suspects that the response             
              is reponsible for the pulses of x-ray and gamma ray radiation                  
              recently detected by balloon and space-borne high energy                       
              experiments.  The PI hopes to confirm or refute this idea by his               
              modeling of what these "signatures" of a brief radiation-driven                
              wind would look like.  He anticipates further that these events can            
              be used to estimate the masses and radii of neutron stars directly,            
              which has not been possible up to now.  In addition, he points out             
              that a knowledge of high energy signatures from accretion events               
              may be essential in the interpretation of data from several x- and             
              gamma-ray space missions now being planned.  Finally, the PI wishes            
              to examine the spiralling in of neutron stars in decaying orbits               
              around one another.  This process would proceed so fast (within                
              seconds) that it can be fairly described as a "neutron star                    
              collision".  Much of the gravitational energy liberated in a                   
              collision would be emitted in a brief burst of gravitational                   
              radiation.  It is possible that such events could be a major source            
              of any gravitational radiation detected on Earth.  ***//
