Title       : Oceanographic Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9023729

Award Number: 9023729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Knox rknox@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 5413      OCEANOGRAPHIC INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
              The Scripps Institution of Oceanography of the University of                   
              California at San Diego has requested several sea-going data                   
              management systems and items of oceanographic instrumentation                  
              to be placed in a pool of shared use equipment.  This                          
              equipment is maintained for use on or in association with the                  
              four research vessels operated by the institution.  A                          
              substantial part of the ships' operating schedules during                      
              1991 is in support of NSF-sponsored research projects.  The                    
              instrumentation will also increase the capabilities of the                     
              ships and of the institution to support research and                           
              engineering activities.  The instrumentation includes:                         
                                                                                             
              -Shipboard data management systems and components for real-                    
               time acquisition, management, analysis, and display of large                  
               environmental and geophysical data sets,                                      
              -Mercury reversing thermometers for precision calibration of                   
               temperature data collected at sea,                                            
              -Water purification system to provide reagent grade pure                       
               water for chemical analyses at sea,                                           
              -Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler system for remote and                       
               continuous measurements of subsurface circulation features                    
               while the ship is underway,                                                   
              -12-kHz echosounder system for collecting data on seafloor                     
               bathymetry and sedimentary profiles,                                          
              -Replacement Niskin bottles, thermometer racks, and acoustic                   
               altimeter for collecting discrete seawater samples at                         
               various depths in the water column,                                           
              -Installation of a sea chest on R/V NEW HORIZON to                             
               accommodate acoustic Doppler current profiler, transducers,                   
              -Calibration equipment to assure the accuracy of measurements                  
               made at sea.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              The University of California is cost sharing in the                            
              acquisition of this equipment.  The instrumentation described                  
              above will increase the capability of the organization to                      
              support NSF-sponsored research and engineering projects.
