Title       : Faculty Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers (FAW)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1995  
File        : a9023561

Award Number: 9023561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn W. Meyers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1360,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Structure-property relationships in engineering materials is the               
              broad area of interest of the P.I.  Current work falls into three              
              categories: solidification processing of alloys and metal-matrix               
              composites, toughening mechanisms in nonferrous alloys and ceramic             
              composites, and the study of the structural changes in friction                
              materials.  Analytical work in the area of solidification                      
              processing has focused on the two dimensional simulation of the                
              phenomenon of microsegregation in alloy castings.  Finite element              
              and finite difference techniques are employed to investigate                   
              transient temperature and composition profiles and to determine the            
              interface morphology for alloys and pure metals, including natural             
              convection effects, the heat storage effect in the mold media, and             
              the dissipation of the surface wave during mold filling.  The                  
              algorithms, developed from first principles of mass, momentum and              
              energy, yield results which agree well with those reported in the              
              literature.  Future plans in this area involve the extension of                
              this work to three dimensions and the placement of reinforcing                 
              fibers in the mushy zone of the alloy during the solidification                
              simulation.  Combined analytical and experimental techniques are               
              employed to study the deformation and toughening mechanism in                  
              ceramic matrix composites.  The results of the limited experimental            
              investigations are used in the two dimensional finite element model            
              of the crack intersecting a single fiber in the composite.  In the             
              third category during the application of friction, the materials               
              experience local hot spots which themselves cause changes in the               
              structure of the materials.  The characterization of these changes             
              and their effect on the production of noise during braking are                 
              being studied using semimet materials.
