Title       : Unions and Firm Solvency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1991   
File        : a9023942

Award Number: 9023942
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1991   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Freeman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Morris M. Kleiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the project is to provide the first rigorous                    
              empirical analysis of the impact of unionization on firm                       
              bankruptcy, liquidation and unemployment due to plant closings. A              
              consistent empirical finding is that unions raise wages above those            
              found in nonunion firms and that in a competitive product market               
              one would expect to find that  unionized firms would go out of                 
              business more than nonunion firms. However, if unions engage in                
              economic rent sharing then during periods of economic hardship                 
              unionized firms may be able to remain solvent by giving back some              
              of these rents.                                                                
                                                                                             
              These potential outcomes will be empirically analyzed by first                 
              examining the extent to which unionized firms become insolvent                 
              relative to nonunion firms. Second,  the extent to which firms drop            
              unionized lines of business relative to nonunionized ones will be              
              determined. Finally, the extent to which unionized plants close and            
              workers become unemployed relative to nonunionized ones will be                
              investigated. Data from COMPUSTAT, Census of Manufactures data on              
              plant closings, the Current Population Survey, as well as new                  
              survey data developed from these companies will be used.                       
                                                                                             
              The project will make an important contribution in two areas of                
              economics - labor economics and industrial organization. The                   
              results will improve our understanding of firm shutdowns, the role             
              of unions on firm performance and how these are related to varying             
              levels of profit, employment and industrial structure.
