Title       : Estimation of a Model of Community Choice and Public Goods Provision in System
               of Local Jurisdictions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9023373

Award Number: 9023373
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Romer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis N. Epple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research investigates a setting in which individuals are                  
              mobile among many localities or jurisdictions.  In this setting,               
              collective decisions determine tax and spending levels within                  
              jurisdictions.  Individuals determine the jurisdiction in which                
              they will reside and the amount of housing and other private                   
              goods they will consume.  Under previous NSF grants, the                       
              investigators developed and analyzed fully articulated                         
              equilibrium models of these individual and collective decisions                
              and used these models to study a variety of issues related to                  
              residential choice, housing prices, local government taxation and              
              spending decisions, redistribution, and land use restrictions.                 
              This work defined the state of theoretical research on the                     
              political economy of local government, but although the                        
              investigators have used the models for numerical simulations with              
              the parameters of the model set to empirically plausible                       
              magnitudes, no one has yet succeeded in directly estimating or                 
              testing these models.  The contribution of this next phase of the              
              project will be to test whether a fully articulated theory of                  
              community choice is consistent with the data.                                  
                                                                                             
              This project develops an empirically tractable framework that                  
              captures locational and collective goods equilibrium in a                      
              multicommunity setting.  It estimates the parameters of this                   
              model using data from U.S. metropolitan areas.  The estimates                  
              provide the basis for predicting the distribution of households                
              by income across communities, given the levels of public goods                 
              provision across communities.  In addition, the estimates provide              
              predictions about the distribution of publicly provided goods                  
              across communities.
