Title       : Hormone - Behavior Adaptations for Breeding at High Latitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1992      
File        : a9023834

Award Number: 9023834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231375             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wingfield jwingfie@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Little is understood of how environmental and social                           
              factors, particularly territorial aggression, affect the                       
              breeding of migratory arctic birds.  Relationships between                     
              reproduction and environmental induced stress, where they play an              
              important adaptive role, are virtually unknown in high latitude                
              species.  Many species arrive in the arctic,establish territories              
              and eventually feed their nestlings in a fraction of the time for              
              temperate birds.  Adherence to this rigorous schedule, pairs must              
              ignore environmental conditions that would normally inhibit or                 
              delay breeding at temperate latitudes.  Dr. Wingfield proposes that            
              these constraints have been met by adaptations of the endocrine                
              system in arctic birds.  This study proposes to continue                       
              examining the relationship between two potentially                             
              antagonistic hormones: corticosterone, which directs                           
              behavior away from reproductive activities and towards                         
              survival activities and testosterone, which mediates the                       
              aggressive behavior associated with territoriality.  In both                   
              hormone-behavior systems, Dr. Wingfield suggests that the                      
              endocrine responses of arctic-nesting birds will show                          
              decrease sensitivity to environmental stimuli, allowing more                   
              prolonged opportunities to breed.  The endocrine adaptations                   
              to be investigated in this research program may elucidate                      
              physiological mechanisms by which polar animals avoid delays                   
              and/or conflicting behaviors which might reduce their                          
              chances for successful reproduction.
