Title       : Fluorescence in situ PCR (FLIP) in Individual Cells of Marine Microalgae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1991  
File        : a9023838

Award Number: 9023838
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1991      
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53663              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clarice M. Yentsch cmyentsch@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project represents a "Research Fellowship in Marine                       
              Biotechnology and the Ocean Sciences. Dr. Yentsch, the research                
              fellow, will receive formal training in a laboratory course                    
              format followed by an apprenticeship at, The Jackson Laboratory,               
              in Bar Harbor, Maine under the supervision of a sponsoring senior              
              scientist, Dr. Charles Sidman.  The training encompasses learning              
              laboratory techniques in molecular biology, specifically these                 
              techniques will include use of restriction enzymes, blotting,                  
              cloning, sequencing and polymerase chain reaction (PCR).                       
                                                                                             
              The scientific focus of the project is to learn and                            
              refine/develop techniques in order to assess heterogeneity of                  
              gene expression and mutation rate in single celled microalgae.                 
              Eventually with additional funding, the fellow Dr. C.M. Yentsch                
              and faculty sponsor Dr. C. Sidman expect to place dialysis                     
              cultures in environments with varying degrees of human insult and              
              assay for heterogeneity of gene expression in single cells via                 
              fluorescent in situ PCR (FLIP) using flow cytometry.
