Title       : Linear Programming: Condition, Knowledge & Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9703490

Award Number: 9703490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84466              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yinyu Ye yinyu-ye@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Yinyu Ye      Complexity theory is the foundation of computer algorithms.  The
              goal of the theory is to develop criteria for measuring effectiveness  and
              efficiency of various algorithms and difficulty of various problems.  The term
              ``complexity'' refers to the amount of resources required by a   computation.
              In this proposal, running time or number of arithmetic  operations is the major
              resource of interest.  The aim of the proposal is to further develop the
              complexity theory of  linear programming (LP). In particular, we analyze
              ``condition'' numbers that  determine the degree of difficulty of an LP
              problem, and ``precondition'' the  problem using Partial Knowledge. Therefore,
              we study whether or not certain  kinds of partial knowledge could help in
              solving this problem and how they  impact the complexity of the problem. If
              such knowledge is helpful and  available, then an experienced owner of LP
              problem instances might be able  to use it to solve them more effectively.    
              In general, progress in the area of developing efficient algorithms for 
              solving large-scale optimization problems will be of great importance in 
              improving the efficiency of manufacturing systems, communication networks, 
              aircraft routing, multiple-flow operations, and resources planning.  
              Strengthening research in this area will contribute to the national interest 
              in industrial competitiveness and scientific knowledge.   Businesses, large and
              small, use LP models to optimize telecommunication  networks, to schedule
              traffic flows, to control manufacturing processes,   to plan financial
              investments, to minimize production costs, etc. LP has  been the mostly used
              applied mathematics and computation tool. Historically,  research developments
              on LP have dramatically widened the scope of its  applications. Many problems,
              which were "unsolvable" 15 years ago, are now  solved in few minutes and in
              real time. The anticipated findings and  discoveries resulting from this
              proposed project will strengthen and improve  theoretical  results and
              practical performance of LP algorithms further, and  may lead to the
              development of new high-performance algorithms for a variety  of computational
              problems.
