Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlocal Equations Modeling Fine- scale Structures in
               Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9703727

Award Number: 9703727
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63409              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaofeng Ren ren@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Ren  9703727    Martensite transformations are phase transformations that
              produce a change   of shape and a change of crystal symmetry. Shape-memory
              materials are  materials that are extremely malleable in the martensite phase
              below a  transformation temperature, but that return to a `remembered' original
               shape when heated above the transformation temperature.   Coherent phase
              transitions of crystalline solids lead to mixtures of  distinct phases or phase
              variants with characteristic fine-scale  structures. The main issues addressed
              in this project are the characteristic  scales, the generation and the
              propagation of the   microstructures. A nonlocal theory involving
              integro-differential  evolutionary equations is proposed to answer these
              questions.  This theory lies between the traditional microscopic quantum theory
              which   uses Schodinger's equation and the macroscopic elasticity theory which
              uses  elliptic and hyperbolic partial differential equations. In the study of 
              the  characteristic scales, a periodic solution of a stationary nonlocal
              equation  is needed. But the  equation seems to have multiple solutions. The
              `right'  periodic solution should be selected by a suitable least energy 
              principle. Another intriguing question is to find a `generalized' traveling 
              wave solution of a dynamic nonlocal equation, which describes the propagation 
              of microstructures. This solution should have an oscillatory structure  at one
              end, constant value at the other end, and as time increases the 
              uniform-to-oscillatory transition region should advance in a periodic  manner.
              Such a solution can also be viewed as a heteroclinic orbit in an  infinitely
              dimensional function space connecting a periodic stationary  solution to a
              constant stationary solution.       Materials and processing are critical to
              the success of industries such as the  aerospace, automotive, biomaterials,
              chemical, electronics, energy, metals,  and telecommunications industries. This
              project is concerned with shape memory  materials and  martensite
              transformations. The mathematical theory in this  project is aimed at
              understanding the characteristic scales, the generation  and the propagation of
              the microstructures during shape memory materials'  phase transformations. The
              study of stationary periodic solutions ald  uniform-to-oscillatory waves of the
              integro-differential evolutionary equations  used in this nonlocal mathematical
              theory is at the cutting edge of  mathematical analysis and computation.
