Title       : Development of a Local Electrode Atom Probe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9703932

Award Number: 9703932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Kelly   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick P. Camus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Matyi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703932  Kelly  This award provides partial support for a development  program
              to build and test an new analytical instrument, a  local electrode atom probe
              (LEAP).  This instrument will use  very high electric fields applied to a
              surface to field  evaporate atoms and accelerate them toward an imaging 
              detector.  The atom type is determined by time-of-flight  mass spectrometry for
              each atom.  A three-dimensional image  which is made up of the atom positions
              and identities is  then reconstructed from the data.  Unlike prior instruments 
              of this genre, the LEAP will have the capability to obtain  these images from
              planar samples.  It will also be able to  record the data orders of magnitude
              faster than previous  instruments.  This higher speed and planar specimen
              geometry  will make the LEAP technique able to tackle new problems  which have
              previously been out of reach.  It is expected  that this LEAP will be able to
              do many of the jobs that  previously would have been done with a secondary ion
              mass  spectrometer (SIMS) and it will do them with atomic-scale  spatial
              resolution.    The specimen geometry for this microscope is such that it is 
              realistic to fabricate and analyze specimens from whole  classes of materials
              which have been off-limits in the past.  Semiconductors, insulators, thin film
              structures on planar  substrates, and even microelectronic devices are
              examples.    A couple of intractable problems in the microelectronics  industry
              are specifically targeted in this project because  of their technological and
              economic significance and because  they will serve as prime illustrations of
              the power of the  technique.  Successful analysis of these materials problems 
              is a goal of this program.  The combination of these  capabilities will produce
              a technological breakthrough in  materials characterization.  ***
