Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: A Facility for Cross Disciplinary Research on
               Sensorimotor Development in Humans and Machine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2001   
File        : a9703217

Award Number: 9703217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $920598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roderic A. Grupen grupen@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carole R. Beal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Barto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil E. Berthier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel K. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-9703217  Grupen, Roderic A.  University of Massachusetts    A Facility for
              Cross Disciplinary Research on Sensorimotor Development in Humans and Machines 
                This award is for supporting research activities in Computer Science and
              Psychology at UMass in assembling an infrastructure for experimental work on
              the development of conceptual structure from sensorimotor activity.  An
              interactionist theory is advanced in which the origin of knowledge is
              interactive behavior in an environment.  By this account, the nature of the
              environment and the agent's native resources (sensors, effectors, and control)
              lead directly to appropriate conceptual structures in natural and artificial
              systems.  The central claim of this research is that the first task facing an
              intelligent, embodied agent is coordinated sensory and motor interaction with
              its environment and that this task leads to policies and abstractions that
              influence the subsequent acquisition of higher cognitive abilities.  An
              interdisciplinary team specializing in robotics, cognitive development, and
              motor development, learning, planning and language lead the effort.    The
              infrastructure incorporates robot hands and arms, binocular vision, binaural
              audition, haptic and kinesthetic information in a common framework to provide a
              rich sensory and motor encoding of interaction with the world.  In addition to
              the robotics facilities, the infrastructure includes tools for gathering
              precise, quantitative observations of postures and rates of movement in human
              subjects.  These facilities are designed to support analogs of nontrivial human
              processes so that computational models of development may be compared to data
              from infant subjects.
