Title       : Topics in Abstract Gambling Theory, Stochastic Games, and Predictive Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1999      
File        : a9703285

Award Number: 9703285
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Sudderth bill@stat.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703285  Sudderth   Basic research is proposed in four areas:(1)abstract
              gambling theory, (2)two-  person, zero-sum stochastic games, (3)strategic
              market games, and (4)predictive inference   in statistics. The first three
              areas all involve agents controlling stochastic processes either   alone or
              jointly. Abstract gambling theory is a particular formulation of one-person  
              stochastic control theory, whereas two-person, zero-sum stochastic games have
              two   controllers with opposing interests. Strategic market games typically
              have many agents   and are used to model features of an economy such as price
              formation and loan markets.   In the fourth area, predictive inference,
              research is proposed on two criteria that seem   natural to require of any
              statistical prediction.   Most of the proposed research is on questions of how
              one or more individuals   should act when faced by a series of successive
              choices that must be made with   considerable uncertainty about their
              consequences. An example is the problem of how   much of one's income should be
              spent on current consumption and how much should be   saved (or invested) for
              the future. This problem, when formulated for a single individual,   fits into
              the framework of abstract gambling theory. If two individuals are in direct  
              competition for resources, the problem can be viewed as a two-person stochastic
              game.   Finally, if the problem involves all the individuals in a large
              economy, it can be viewed as a   many-person, strategic market game in which
              the individuals as a group determine, or at   least influence, prices and
              interest rates. If a central bank is added to the game as another   player that
              has the power to set interest rates, the question arises as to how the bank  
              should set interest rates so as to minimize inflation or improve the general
              welfare. This is   likely to be a difficult problem for our models just as it
              is in the real world.
