Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Cavitation in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1997        
File        : a9703986

Award Number: 9703986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76157              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott J. Spector sspector@math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703986  Spector         The principal investigator will analyze certain partial
                differential equations as well as certain problems in the calculus   of
              variations in order to determine conditions under which these   problems have
              singular solutions.  The underlying equations are   those that arise in
              elasticity and viscoelasticity and the desired   singularities are point
              discontinuities.  Problems that will be   considered include: the existence of
              singular solutions to quasilinear   elliptic systems; the existence of, and
              admissibility criteria for,   singular solutions to hyperbolic systems; the
              existence of minimizers   with singularities for problems in the calculus of
              variations; and,   the determination of whether known discontinuous solutions
              to   quasilinear elliptic systems are in fact minimizers of the   corresponding
              problem in the calculus of variations.  %%%     The research area of this grant
              is the mathematical analysis of   equations that arise in Materials Science. 
              The most common way to   determine when a material will fail under the
              influence of external   forces is to subject a piece of the actual material to
              tensile   loading until failure occurs, i.e., "pull on it" until it breaks.   
              This is fine if one is interested only in the gross properties of   the
              material.  However, if one wants to understand the reasons for   material
              failure then one must have recourse to mathematical models   of the material. 
              Experiments on certain rubbery polymers, called   elastomers, have shown that
              when one pulls on an elastomer small   holes appear in the material.  These
              holes then grow in size and   combine to form cracks.  A similar phenomenon
              occurs in optical   fibers.  If one tries to send too much power through an
              optical   fiber then a series of holes can form in the core of the fiber.   
              These holes seriously degrade the ability of the fiber to transmit  
              information.   In this grant, the principal investigator will uncover   the
              mechanisms that cause the creation and growth  of holes in polymers   and
              glasses by examining systems of partial differential equations   from the
              theory of elasticity and viscoelasticity.    ***
