Title       : CAREER: Theory, Software Tools, and Applications for Algorithmic Visual
               Information Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9703163

Award Number: 9703163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandros Eleftheriadis eleft@ee.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The investigation and development of a new algorithmic framework for media 
              representation is proposed, with emphasis on digital images and video.  In 
              particular, a new architecture for visual information representation is
              detailed  based on the notion of programmable terminals, essentially
              considering the  decoder as a Turing machine.  In such a framework, the
              algorithm becomes itself  the content, rather than just being used to process
              content.  The benefits of  such an approach are numerous, and can be
              appreciated by considering the  revolutionary benefits derived from the
              transition of computer usage from the  days of simple text terminals for
              number-crunching mainframes to today's powerful  graphical user interfaces that
              host Web browsers.  Computers were initially  considered as calculation
              devices, but are not mostly used to generate elementary  forms of algorithmic
              content, such as windows, menus, icons, fonts, etc., that  empower users to
              perform advanced text document creation, distribution, access,  etc.  The
              proposed framework generalizes this paradigm to the case of digital  images and
              video, and allows its use in a wide range of applications.    The shift towards
              algorithmic representations requires both theoretical and  applied innovations.
               From a theoretical standpoint, it is shown that a new  mathematical theory can
              be developed (called Complexity Distortion Theory),  providing a universal
              mathematical framework in which all coding techniques (from  traditional
              entropy coding to model-based video coding) can be appropriately  analyzed. 
              This theory builds on the notion of a programmable terminal and  promises
              significant results for real systems that operate under time and space 
              constraints, or when compression is only one of the representation
              requirements.   From a practical, applications-oriented standpoint, this new
              approach allows the  elimination of decades of lag of audio-visual information
              representation with  respect to modern software design.  A software-based archi
              tecture is described,  centered around a new programming language paradigm
              (FLAVOR - Formal Language for  Audio-Visual Object Representation), and
              developed to provide the basis for real,  functioning systems.  Several
              applications and application domains are discussed  in which the proposed
              approach can have a fundamental impact, empowering users  with seamless
              creation, manipulation, and access to visual information.
