Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Optimal Initial Conditions for Growth in an Intermediate
               Ocean-Atmosphere Model of the Pacific Which Generates Both the Annual Cycle and
               ENSO
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1997  
File        : a9703995

Award Number: 9703995
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Thompson thompson@amath.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510101   Climate Models                          
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Thompson  9703995    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Christopher J.
              Thompson at the Graduate School of  Environmental Earth Science, Hokkaido
              University, Sapporo,  Japan.  Dr. Thompson will work with Dr. Shang-Ping Xie, 
              Associate Professor in the Division of Oceanic and  Atmospheric Sciences, on a
              research project entitled,  "Optimal Initial Conditions for Growth in an
              Intermediate  Ocean-Atmosphere Model of the Pacific that Generates the  Annual
              Cycle and ENSO."    This proposed research emphasizes the construction and 
              analysis of an intermediate- sized model of the Equatorial  Pacific that will
              reproduce both the annual cycle and the  inter-annual cycle of the atmospheric
              pattern known as El  Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO).  ENSO is an irregular, 
              three to seven year sea surface temperature (SST) cycle, the  most well known
              aspect of which is the periodic and  anomalous warming of the South America
              coast, a pattern  referred to in the scientific community as El Nino.  ENSO 
              also acts as a predictor for other important seasonal  weather patterns, one
              specific example being the Asian  Monsoon,  which continues to cause either
              floods or droughts  in South and East Asia.  A minimal degree of predictability
               for ENSO has been achieved through previous research, but  this research has
              been confined to the development of models  that reproduce either the ENSO
              cycle or the annual cycle.  No existing model has successfully reproduced both
              patterns  or predicted their combined effects.  As such, the purpose  of the
              proposed research is to develop this complex model  and apply optimal initial
              condition analysis to that model  in order to identify those structures which
              may lead to  large transient growth in the atmosphere.  ***
