Title       : Acquisition of GPC/Static Light Scattering System for Polymer, Membrane and
               Colloid Science Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9703973

Award Number: 9703973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Saad A. Khan khan@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benny D. Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter K. Kilpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703973  Khan       The Chemical Engineering Department at North Carolina  State
              University (NCSU) will purchase a Gel Permeation  Chromatography /Static Light
              Scattering  system to obtain  critically needed information in polymer,
              membrane and colIoid  science research. The equipment will be used for several
              funded  projects, including (1) The Influence of Chain Configuration  and
              Composition on the Extraordinary Permeation Properties of  Substituted
              Polyacetylene Vapor Separation Membrane Materials;  (2) Gas Transport and
              Barrier Properties of Novel Aromatic  Polyamides; (3) Enzymatic modification of
              water soluble  polymers; (4) Composite Polymer Electrolytes Using Fumed 
              Silica; (5) Synthesis Rheology and Microstructure of Polymer  Grafted Latex
              Systems for Water-borne Inks; and  (6) Asphaltene  and Discotic Mesogen
              Aggregation in Model Solvent System:  Effect of Aggregat on Emulsion Stability.
              To sustain these  strong research program and provide for new and innovative 
              research, a modern gel permeation chromatograph (GPC) / static  light
              scattering system (SLS) is essential. The GPC/SLS system  would provide the
              capability to determine molecular weight,  molecular weight distribution and
              chain configuration of block  copolymers substituted polyacetylenes that are
              being developed  as membrane materials, enzymatically modified guar 
              galactomannans for use in food and oil/gas applications, and  graft comb
              polymers that are being synthesized as low  water-borne inks. The success and
              completion of each of these  projects hinges on information obtained using the
              acquired  instrumentation. A sensitive GPC/S is required to characterize 
              microstructures resulting from polymer-fumed silica-lithium ion  interactions
              in novel polymer electrolyte materials.  This  instrument will also have the
              capability to measure the size,  topology, and fractal dimension of asphaltene
              aggregates.  These new capabilities will provide crucial information for the 
              growing interdisciplinary research program in polymer rh eology,  membrane, and
              colloid sciences at NCSU and enable it to remain  strong and vital in the years
              ahead.  The acquired equipment  would also play a major role in training
              undergraduates in the  newly-created polymer and colloid science track in the
              BS  Chemical Engineering program.  ***
