Title       : CAREER: Non-agglomerated Nanoparticle Synthesis in Low Pressure Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9703357

Award Number: 9703357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nick G. Glumac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9703357    This is an investigation of non-agglomerated
              nanoparticle productiol in low-pressure flat flames.  Production in
              low-pressure flames of a target group of materials including yttrium-stabilized
              zirconia, silicon oxynitride, alumina, zirconia, titania, and tungsten oxide,
              is demonstrated.  Parametric studies assess the effects of process conditions
              on the size, quantity, and morphology of the synthesized nanopowders.  Modeling
              and diagnostic work centers on a single nanopowder species with the goal of
              predicting particle sized, production rate, and degree of agglomeration given
              system process inputs.  A gas-phase chemical mechanism is included in the model
              along with mechanisms for particles formation and growth.  Multispecies
              laser-induced fluorescence is applied to the flames to quantify the gas-phase
              chemical environment, while laser absorption scattering measurements are probe
              sampling are used to quantify the particle size- and number-density fields. 
              Several baseline production conditions are characterized and modeled and the
              model is refined to match the experimental observations,  Analogous models are
              then produced for different powder species.    This work demonstrates a
              technique for high-rate, inherently scalable production of a series of
              industrially significant non-agglomerated nanopowders.  Process models for
              nanopowder production and developed.  Such models extend present understanding
              of gas-phase particle synthesis and allow computational optimization mf the
              synthesis process.  For scale-up operations, the models help in identifying
              appropriate process diagnostics for industrial reactors and enable development
              of closed-loop control algorithms.
