Title       : Quantum Integrability and Inverse Spectral Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1999    
File        : a9703775

Award Number: 9703775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve Zelditch zel@math.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal is concerned with the relations between the fine structure of
              the spectrum of a compact Riemannian manifold and the dynamics of its geodesic
              flow.  On the one hand, the principal investigator is interested in the well
              known inverse problem, can one hear the shape of a drum?  Recent advances in
              the analysis of the spectral invariants known as wave trace invariants allow
              one to 'hear' much more than has been previously possible, especially in the
              case of certain real analytic metrics with completely integrable geodesic flow.
               The main tool here is the construction and analysis of quantum analogues of
              the Birkhoff normal forms for a Hamiltonian flow near a periodic orbit or
              invariant torus. On the other hand, the principal investigator is also
              interested in problems of mathematical physics having to do with quantum
              ergodicity and chaos or, at the opposite extreme, with complete integrability. 
               In particular, he wishes to analyse pair correlation functions of the spectra
              of some model quantum maps over compact symplectic manifolds and related fine
              structure invariants.   The motivation for these problems originated in
              physics. During the fifties, many physicists were studying the forces which
              hold the nucleus together.  These forces were not known, but certain aspects of
              them were observable.  In particular, the spectrum of energy levels of the
              nucleus could be measured in experiments. The 'inverse spectral problem'
              naturally arose- could the potential energy of the nucleus could be determined
              from these energy levels?  The answer is still basically unknown. On the one
              hand, different systems with the same spectrum have been constructed; on the
              other, these ambiguous systems have very unusual features and it seems likely
              that typical systems are determined by their spectra.  Another problem posed by
              nuclear physicists in the fifties, most famously by E. Wigner and L.D. Landau,
              was whether there was any pattern to the spacings between high energy levels.
              Do they just occur randomly?   This is now known as the level spacings problem.
              Numerous computer studies of physical systems and toy mathematical models
              indicate that the patterns are related to the degree of predictability or chaos
              of the system.  The reason why this should be so remains a mysterious
              mathematical problem.  However, the hope is that the new tools and developments
              described above will lead to worthwhile gains in insight into these fundamental
              problems.
