Title       : CAREER: Molecular Interfacial Engineering for Advanced Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2001      
File        : a9703207

Award Number: 9703207
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Nealey nealey@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9703207    This Career project is an investigation of a variety of
              material issues associated with the use of high resolution lithographic
              processes (electron beam writing, extreme UV lithography, and X-ray
              lithography) to fabricate structures with lateral dimensions less than 100nm. 
              One issues is the determination of the physical properties of thin films of
              polymers (photoresist), and the diffusion behavior of solvents and other low
              molecular weight agents in these films in order to develop a more fundamental
              understanding of current photoresist processing and its limitations_ Another is
              the development of new polymers for use in extreme UV and x-ray lithography. 
              Some of the work targets new strategies for micro- and nanofabrication that
              will involve, for example, the use of patterned self-assembled monolayers
              and/or multiple layer resist systems.    A new manufacturing process will be
              investigated for the efficient integration of dissimilar materials.  The
              process relies on two levels of self-assembly.  At the molecular scale,
              functionalized self-assembled monolayers (SAMS) control wetting and adhesion
              interactions of surfaces, At the scale of chips, modules, or panels, fluidic
              self-assembly (enhanced by predetermined interactions between surfaces covered
              with SAMS) delivers structures of micron dimensions of one material (Si, for
              example) to as many as 10 million receptor sites on a substrate of another
              material (plastic, for example).  Fundamental studies of the interactions and
              frictional properties of surfaces modified with SAMs will be made using a
              modified atomic force microscope (AFM) in which 20 (m glass spheres are
              attached to the AFM tip.  These mesoscale studies will guide the macroscopic
              process development and will make significant contributions to the field of
              tribology.    The use of non-Fickian diffusion of plasticizers in limited
              supply will be investigated as a strategy to control the morphology and
              materials properties of glassy polymers, specifically for opt ical
              applications. The investigators will fabricate and test the cross-sectional
              area of transmission is defined by refractive index gradients that correspond
              to gradients in plasticizer concentration.  They will also  films fabricate
              flat diffraction gratings and flat lenses in glassy polymer films using
              patterned SAMS, preferential wetting, and non-Fickian diffusion. In addition to
              the optical applications, the proposed research will make significant
              contributions to our knowledge of non-Fickian diffusion mechanisms in glassy
              polymers.    Through a State Grant of $340,000, the polymer laboratory in the
              Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Wisconsin has recently
              been renovated with state-of-the-art equipment A unique opportunity exists to
              develop a polymer laboratory course that emphasizes polymer synthesis and
              characterization.  The lab will be taught to seniors and first year graduate
              students in two formats: 1) weekly labs and lab reports, and 2) semester long
              group projects that are consistent with the teaching methodology of problem
              based learning.  This laboratory course will compliment a lecture course in
              polymer science and technology.  At the graduate level, a new course in the
              physical chemistry of polymers will be introduced.  These curriculum
              improvements are synergistic with our educational and research initiatives to
              offer research activities at the undergraduate level, to prepare    and mentor
              graduate students to perform innovative research in the field of polymers, and
              to unite the polymer community on campus. The investigator will also develop a
              short course to be offered during the summer primarily for scientists
