Title       : CAREER: Conjugated Ionomers: Synthesis, Self-Doping, and New Device
               Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9703311

Award Number: 9703311
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $332040             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Lonergan lonergan@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703311  Lonergan    The research program in this CAREER award targets the
              development  of a new concept in conjugated polymer interfaces:  the use of 
              conjugated ionomers to form stable interfaces between  dissimilarly doped
              conjugated polymers.  The realization of this  concept will open a new avenue
              in the study of conjugated polymer  interfaces.  An avenue that has great
              promise for the fundamental  study ofthe electronics of conjugated polymers at
              interfaces and  that may lead to a number of exciting new device technologies. 
              The research program has three major elements: (1)  a synthetic  effort to
              develop ring-opening polymerization techniques for the  synthesis of conjugated
              ionomers with a controlled density of  ionizable functionalities, (2)  the
              development of innovative  doping methodologies for the preparation of truly
              self-doped  polymers and for the preparation of multilayer structures in  which
              each layer has different doping characteristics, and (3)  the fundamental study
              of interfaces between differentially doped  conjugated polymenrs, such as the
              polymeric pn junction, to test  traditional models of current flow and
              depletion at semiconductor  interfaces.  In this CAREER award, activities in
              support of  chemical education at a variety levels are also detailded.  At  the
              undergraduate level, a program of implementing tested  innovations into the
              general chemistry curriculum at the  University of Oregon is described; these
              include an emphasis on  the concepts of learning through inquiry and of
              learning from  peers.  The goal is to better involve students in their own 
              education and go beyond the facts of science to teach how science  is done.  On
              the graduate level, the projects works toward  improving Oregon's ability to
              better meet the educational and  career goals of individual students while
              maintaining the  scientific rigor and high standards befitting an Advanced
              degree  in chemistry.  %%%  The primary outcomes of this work will be: (1) 
              self-doped  polymers where the leve l of injected charge is precisely balanced 
              by the density of covalently bound ionic centers, (2)  a general  approach to
              all polymeric pn junctions and other device  structures involving contacted
              differentially doped conjugated  polymers, (3)  a systematic study of depletion
              in conjugated  polymers, and (4)  a clearer picture of the promise for 
              conjugated polymers in semiconductor device applications.  ***
