Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Interface Dynamics and Renormalization Methods for
               Nonlinear Systems of Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9703530

Award Number: 9703530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92454              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gunduz Caginalp caginalp+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703530  Caginalp  This proposal is being jointly funded by Division of
              Mathematical Sciences  (DMS) and Division of Materials Research (DMR).  This
              proposal involves research on two topics:  (a) the study of   interfaces, and
              (b) the use of renormalization and scaling methods to   study systems of
              parabolic differential equations.  The study of   interfaces proceeds along the
              lines of previous work that utilizes the   phase field model.  The study of
              alloys is particularly important in   terms of the ''freezing in'' of solute
              into the solid.  This is an area   in which mathematics can make a substantial
              contribution since the   models necessarily involve differential equations that
              are degenerate,   as the diffusivity is close to zero in the solid phase.  In
              the second   part of the study, the PI will utilize renormalization and scaling
                methods to obtaing results on systems of parabolic differential   equations
              in which an asymptotic self-similarity can be expected.    The work involves an
              extension of the PI's work that used these   methods to compute anomalous
              exponents in nonlinear diffusion   equations.  The objective is to extend these
              results to systems of   parabolic differential equations, thereby adding a
              powerful tool to the   methodology of these systems.  Finally, the study will
              apply these   methods to reaction-diffusion systems such as the phase field  
              equations in order to extract key features of global behavior.      This study
              will provide a formalism for studying complicated   problems involving
              materials science. In particular, interface   problems arise in many industrial
              applications and pose important   challenges in terms of theory and large scale
              computation. The   development of a consistent set of equations and methodology
              for   high speed computation is valuable as a starting point for many  
              industrial applications such as casting of alloys. The study will also  
              utilize renormalization techniques that have been so successful in  
              understanding subtle behavior in  thermodynamics. With the   development of
              these   techniques in this dynamical context, an extremely complicated  
              engineering problem can potentially be understood in terms of   manageable
              parts with particular characteristic behavior.
