Title       : CAREER: Robust Visual Communications for Packet Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9703177

Award Number: 9703177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Hemami hemami@ee.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Faster computing and higher available bandwidths for digital communications have
               made visual communications increasingly possible - one- and two-way exchange
              of  both images and video, including browsing multimedia databases, real-time 
              imaging, and video-conferencing.  Advances in image and video compression have 
              contributed to the feasibility of visual communications, and packet networks
              such  as today's ATM and future wireless ATM networks can offer the required 
              bandwidths.  However, these networks cannot offer guaranteed packet delivery - 
              some data can be lost.  As such, these networks cannot be used to reliably 
              deliver visual information coded using today's compression standards.  The goal
               of this research is to provide reliable visual communications over unreliable 
              packet networks with dynamic bandwidths and packet handling characteristics 
              through source coding specialized to transmission over such networks.    This
              research involves developing specialized image and video compression 
              techniques for transmission over networks with dynamic bandwidths and packet 
              handling characteristics.  Traditionally to deal with loss in transmission, 
              redundancy is completely removed from data via source coding and then
              reinserted  through channel coding, following Shannon's joint source-channel
              coding theorem.   This research investigates redundant source coding, in which
              redundancy is  included in the source coding so that less or no channel coding
              is required,  while achieving better visual quality than if the joint-source
              channel coding  theorem is applied.  Specifically, redundant source coding
              techniques for  subband-wavelet image representations and for the temporal
              information in video  sequences are being developed, along with suitable
              packetization strategies.   Optimal data partitioning algorithms are also being
              developed, to allow  transmission over multiple sub-channels with different
              characteristics.
