Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Vector-Valued Function Spaces and
               Non-Commutative Function Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9703789

Award Number: 9703789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narcisse J. Randrianantoanina randrin@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703789    Randrianantoanina    The proposer intends to focus on two lines of
              research:  (1) Banach space structures of C*-algebras and related spaces;  (2)
              studies of vector-valued function spaces. In (1), he will  study some
              connections between the two fields: Banach space theory and   operator algebra
              theory. The primary goal of this direction of   research is to show that some
              classical results from  Banach space theory and harmonic analysis are still
              valid  for the non-commutative setting. One important direction is the  
              investigation of symmetric spaces of measurable operators  associated with semi
              finite von Neumann algebras. The basic   permanence question is whether or not
              a given property  can be preserved from a given function space to its non 
              commutative version. For instance, the classification  of (non commutative)
              spaces of finite  type (respectively  of finite cotype) is not known; there is
              the question of  which spaces have the Radon-Nikodym properties  associated
              with Riesz-subsets of a given  discrete group. Another direction is the study
              of  non commutative Hardy spaces associated with maximal finite  subdiagonal
              algebras of finite von Neumann algebras. For  example, it is unknown if Szego's
              theorem from classical   analysis is valid for the general non commutative
              setting.  It is still open if the predual of such maximal subalgebras  are of
              finite cotype. The same kind of investigation will  also be considered for non
              commutative Hardy spaces and the  non commutative disc algebras introduced by
              Popescu.  Our knowledge of Banach space structures of non commutative 
              C*-algebras (despite some recent intensive studies) is  still less than
              satisfactory; the proposer also will  tackle some of the questions that arise
              naturally from the   classical case. For instance, the behavior of different
              classes  of bounded operators on C*-algebras are far from being well 
              understood. Several intermediate results, such as   factorizations of
              absolutely summing operators and   compactness of  absolutely summing
              operators, were already   obtained, hinting that in general non commutative
              C*-algebras  should behave (in many ways) like their commutative counterparts. 
              The main motivation for this part is that certain  problems related to these
              algebras become more transparent  when formulated in Banach space language.
              Part (2) can  be viewed as close connections between measure theory  and Banach
              space theory. Many questions remain unresolved  on permanence properties
              preserved by Bochner spaces.  The proposer will concentrate on properties of
              spaces  containing classical function spaces, uniqueness of   preduals, and
              strong regularity.     The purpose of this project is to improve the
              understanding  of the connections between different field of analysis:  Banach
              space theory, harmonic analysis, and operator algebra  theory. C*-algebras turn
              out to be one of the most  important structures in mathematics. They have
              significant  applications to other parts of sciences (for examples, 
              mathematical physics, geometry, quantum mechanics), so it   is important to
              view them from many different angles.
