Title       : Acquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9703732

Award Number: 9703732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schiffer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. McGinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Slavi C. Sevov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Paulius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacek K. Furdyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703732  Schiffer  This award provides partial support for a SQUID magnetometer
              to  be located on the campus of the University of Notre Dame, where  no
              equivalent device currently exists.  Such a magnetometer can  measure the
              magnetization of samples as a function of  temperature and magnetic field.  The
              proposed instrument is  extremely sensitive and therefore is appropriate for
              measuring  both bulk and thin film samples.  Its operation is almost 
              completely computer-controlled, so that it is capable of a high  throughput of
              samples, and the operating costs are rather low.    Several research groups at
              Notre Dame and one at Western  Michigan University will be the primary users of
              this  magnetometer.  In each case, the measurement capabilities of  the
              magnetometer will greatly enhance currently existing  research and make new
              experiments possible.  The research areas  are quite diverse, including: 
              Intermetallic cluster compounds,  high temperature superconductivity,
              metalloporphyrim chemistry,  colossal magnetoresistance materials,
              geometrically frustrated  magnets, and diluted magnetic semiconductors
              (including thin  films and superlattices).  This instrument will truly be used 
              in an interdisciplinary fashion since the above research  involves groups in
              three different departments.  Several other  research groups on the Notre Dame
              campus also have occasional  use for such a magnetometer and will be given
              access.  %%%  This award provides partial support for a SQUID magnetometer to 
              be located on the campus of the University of Notre Dame, where  no equivalent
              device currently exists.  Such a magnetometer can  measure the magnetization of
              samples as a function of  temperature and magnetic field.  The proposed
              instrument is  extremely sensitive and therefore is appropriate for measuring 
              both bulk and thin film samples.  Its operation is almost  completely
              computer-controlled, so that it is capable of a high  throughput of samples,
              and the operating costs are rather low.    Several research gr oups at Notre
              Dame and one at Western  Michigan University will be the primary users of this 
              magnetometer.  In each case, the measurement capabilities of  the magnetometer
              will greatly enhance currently existing  research and make new experiments
              possible.  The research areas  are quite diverse, including:  Intermetallic
              cluster compounds,  high temperature superconductivity, metalloporphyrim
              chemistry,  colossal magnetoresistance materials, geometrically frustrated 
              magnets, and diluted magnetic semiconductors (including thin  films and
              superlattices).  This instrument will truly be used  in an interdisciplinary
              fashion since the above research  involves groups in three different
              departments.  Several other  research groups on the Notre Dame campus also have
              occasional  use for such a magnetometer and will be given access.  ***
