Title       : CAREER: The Productive Re-Use of Industrial ByProducts to Solve Environmental
               Problems: A Paradigm Shift in the Way Industrial ByProducts are Traditionally
               Viewed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  2000      
File        : a9703367

Award Number: 9703367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis G. Grubb dgrubb@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Proposal: CMS 96-16854  PI:  Dennis G. Grubb:  Georgia Institute of
              Technology    "Career:  The Productive Re-use of Industrial Byproducts to 
              Solve Environmental Problems:  A Paradigm Shift in the Way  Industrial
              Byproducts are used "      The overall objective of this Career development
              plan is to  explore the interface between geotechnology, geochemistry, 
              environmental engineering and the social sciences, the  latter principally due
              to the stigma associated with  industrial byproducts.  The research program
              will emphasize  core skills in fundamental science and engineering, and will 
              have its nexus with the educational program in these same  areas, but also in
              creative thinking.    Specifically, this research will evaluate whether fly ash
               (pure or blended with other industrial byproducts) can be  used as a porous
              geochemical filter (PGF) media to  successfully mitigate or attenuate acid mine
              drainage (AMD).  The primary objective will be to identify a strategy for 
              rapid deoxygenation of AMD leachates while minimizing the  negative impacts of
              iron precipitation, i.e., pore clogging  in the PGF itself.  The second
              objective is to identify and  quantify the governing redox chemistry, and
              precipitation  and sorption phenomena associated with the flow of AMD  through
              the various PGF media, including the redox reactions  involving metals that are
              mediated by microorganisms under  anoxic conditions.  The third objective is to
              identify which  PGF media can best immobilize metals and to correlate this 
              performance with geochemical and geotechnical index  properties.    The
              educational activities will be constructed to promote  mental and experiential
              breadth and conceptual versatility.  Critical thinking techniques will be
              introduced, and special  facets will be developed to attract and retain more
              students  from all groups of engineering.  Existing and new coursework  will be
              infused with information from history and philosophy  of science and
              engineering, and will highlight factors that   can contribute to the discovery
              and problem solving process.  The study of productive use of industrial
              byproducts will be  introduced into coursework, as a means of initiating 
              paradigm shift in attitudes concerning industrial byproducts  and their
              productive re-use.    ***
