Title       : Cellular Automata and Percolation Models of Growth and Competition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9703923

Award Number: 9703923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janko Gravner gravner@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703923  Gravner    This project addresses the behavior of deterministic and
              random cellular automata (CA).  Such processes describe configurations on
              lattices which evolve by a repeated update of a local rule.  The research goals
              consist of three main parts.  The first part focuses on deterministic and
              random growth models, emphasizing emergence of asymptotic shapes, limit laws
              for first passage times, as well as hydrodynamic and other continuum limits. 
              The second part is devoted to competition theory, especially to cases which
              lead to approximation with the motion by mean curvature.  On finite universes,
              long-time evolution of such dynamics depends on topological properties of the
              underlying space.  The third part consists of studying percolation on
              hypercubes in high dimensions; the goal is to understand how the number of
              species is determined by the structure of viable genotypes and various mating
              strategies.  This research is accompanied by development of computer software,
              which is used for simulation, statistical analyses, numerical computation and
              combinatorial searches.    This project studies several classes of
              deterministic and random evolutions of spatial configurations.  The basic
              property of these evolutions is that they are governed by local rules; they are
              referred to as deterministic and random cellular automata (CA).  The study of
              CA offers insights into fundamental organizational principles in many
              scientific contexts. CA complement differential equations, the prevailing
              method of describing physical processes, by demonstrating how differential
              equations arise naturally from local rules.  In biological contexts, the CA
              models under study shed light on how harshness of the environment affects
              diversity of species, how equally fit species compete for the available space
              and how spread of biological agents is affected by spatial anomalies. 
              Emergence of shapes in growth models is often seen as the basic example of
              global structure arising from local dynamics, and studying proper ties of such
              shapes leads to challenges in probability theory, geometry and complexity
              theory.  Finally, computer analyses of CA are not only indispensable for
              mathematical development, but they also provide a worthy testing ground for
              parallel computation schemes and visualization hardware.
