Title       : New Neural Architectures Based on Fuzzy Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9703750

Award Number: 9703750
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263656             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Yager ryager@iona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iona College
	      715 North Avenue
	      New Rochelle, NY  108011830    914/633-2000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hybrid neural-fuzzy modeling is an important technology for the development of
              intelligent systems.  Recent developments, especially in control, have shown
              the benefits of joining these technologies.  both technologies provide vehicles
              for modeling the human thought processes: fuzzy set theory can be seen as being
              extremely useful at representing the macro-level while the neural technologies
              provide a unique tool for dealing with the micro-level.  Particular benefit
              will come from a symbiotic relationship in which fuzzy logic structures are
              used in crafting of neural systems and use the resulting neural networks for
              the learning and actual implementation.  In this spirit the overriding
              objective of this research is to  use the structures provided by fuzzy logic to
              help guide  in the discovery of new neural architectures to better model the
              sophisticated modes of human reasoning.  Motivated by this the basic focus of
              this project is to investigate some specific fuzzy modeling paradigms and
              provide for their neural implementation.  The first part of the research will
              look at an extension of the pervasively used fuzzy systems modeling technology,
              one which allows for a hierarchical representation of the rule base.  The goal
              here is to provide for a neural architecture to implement this modeling  and in
              doing so, among other objectives, get a deeper understanding of the
              possibilities of representing hierarchical know in a neural framework.  The
              next part will look at the problem of multi-criteria decision making and focus
              on the neural modeling of complex relationship between criteria.  The fist part
              will investigate a new paradigm for learning called participatory learning
              which can be seen as a type of critic learning approach.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
