Title       : Synthetic and Mechanistic Studies of Organometallic Reagents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2000      
File        : a9703589

Award Number: 9703589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans J. Reich reich@chem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Hans J. Reich, of the Department of Chemistry at the University   of
              Wisconsin at Madison, is supported by the Organic Synthesis Program   for his
              synthetic and mechanistic studies of organometallic reagents.    His research
              is aimed at gaining a mechanistic understanding of a number   of important
              reactions and processes in organolithium chemistry,   including chelation
              effects, the role of ion pair structure on   reactivity, the formation and
              potential interconversion of allenyl and   propargyllithium reagents, the
              properties of stereochemically defined   organolithium reagents, and the
              thermodynamics of the lithium metalloid   exchange reaction.  With the support
              of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor Hans J.   Reich, of the Department
              of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin at   Madison, studies the chemistry
              of certain classes of organometallic   compounds, molecules bearing
              metal-carbon bonds.  His research is focused   primarily on organolithium
              compounds, which play a central role in both   organic and inorganic chemistry.
               Lithium reagents are often used in   reactions forming new carbon-carbon bonds
              and thereby helping to build up   the often complex structures of compounds
              displaying interesting chemical   or biological activity.  In addition, they
              are also common precursors to   many other organometallic reagents which
              provide additional opportunities   to synthetic chemists.  Professor Reich
              explores organolithium compounds   in solution in order to provide a better
              understanding of the factors   influencing their structure and chemistry,
              thereby helping to achieve   better predictability of their chemical reactions
              and expanding the   applications of lithium reagents.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
