Title       : In Situ Toughening of Mullite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9703561

Award Number: 9703561
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed N. Rahaman rahaman@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 101 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1373,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703561  Rahaman    The proposed research will investigate the toughening of 
              mullite, Al6Si2O13, by an in situ approach, in which the  microstructure of a
              monolithic material is modified by a  controlled heat treatment to produce a
              morphology of  elongated, plate-like grains.  This approach has been shown  to
              result in a significant enhancement of the fracture  toughness of silicon
              nitride and silicon carbide ceramics.  However, it has not been applied in any
              systematic manner to  the toughening of oxide ceramics.  Mullite is an ideal 
              material for this type of toughening, as it is a single phase  oxide that is
              prone to the growth of elongated grains.  The  controlled heat treatment will
              allow the development of a  microstructure of elongated, plate-like grains and
              control of  the grain boundary chemistry.   Dense, single phase mullite, 
              fabricated by hot pressing below ~1600  C, will be heated  above 1700  C, which
              is in the two phase region (mullite and  liquid), where elongated grain growth
              is promoted.  The grain  growth kinetics will be measured at diffepent
              temperatures to  achieve an understanding of the microstructure evolution. 
              Oxide additives such as yttria, added to the mullite powder  prior to
              densification, will be used to control the chemistry  of the grain boundary
              phase.  The microstructure and  microchemistry of the fabricated materials will
              be  characterized by a variety of optical, diffraction,  microscopy, and
              spectrographic techniques. The modulus of  rupture and fracture toughness of
              the mullite will be  measured at room temperature by four-point bending of
              beams  sectioned from the hot pressed discs.  The effects of the 
              microstructure and the grain boundary chemistry on the these  mechanical
              properties will be determined. The data will be  used to determine the
              processing conditions to produce a  microstructure with optimum modulus of
              rupture and fracture  toughness at room temperature.  %%%  The ability to
              significantly improve the toughness of mullite  will enhance it s reliability
              in current applications in the  ceramics industry and its attractiveness for
              future  applications in the advanced structural ceramics sector.  Furthermore,
              because of the relative simplicity of the system  (e.g., mullite is a single
              phase oxide with no known phase  transformations), mullite can provide a model
              oxide system  for understanding the microstructure evolution and property 
              optimization by the in situ toughening approach.  In this  way, it can form a
              model system for future application of the  in situ approach to other oxide
              ceramics.  ***
