Title       : Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Telecommunications and the Future of
               Democracy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9703472

Award Number: 9703472
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Sclove   (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Tebaldi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass Fdn for the Humnities
	      One Woodbridge Street
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    /   -

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Massachusetts Foundation for the Humanities and three institutional partners
              are   co-sponsoring a Pilot Citizens' Panel on `Telecommunications & the Future
              of Democracy` at Tufts University in April 1997.  Based on the `consensus
              conference` process pioneered in Europe, a Citizens' Panel provides a context
              for non-experts to deliberate effectively on issues of public policy that are
              both technically complex and socially controversial.  Substantively, the goal
              is to offer non-expert citizens an opportunity to develop and publicize
              informed judgments on emerging telecommunications technologies and policies
              that promise to profoundly affect the future character of the American society
              and politics.  Procedurally, the goal is to demonstrate that:  (a)
              notwithstanding greater socioeconomic and cultural diversity in the US,
              non-expect Americans can deliberate as successfully as their European
              counterparts; and (b) the process can be easily replicated and incorporated
              into the public policy-making process.  This project is exploratory and high
              risk in several respects.  For example, while experience has shown that a
              consensus conference works effectively within relatively small, homogeneous
              populations such as Denmark's', there is no guarantee that it can work within a
              much larger and more diverse population.  The urgency of the project derives
              from the opportunity to harness the talents of 12 highly motivated student
              volunteers from the Education for Public Inquiry and International Citizenship
              (EPIIC) program at Tufts University.  The key public forum will be held at
              Tufts in early April in the context of a much larger conference on the Future
              of Democracy, scheduled for April 4-7, 1997 and also being organized by EPIIC. 
              Dissemination of project results will occur by reports and presentations to
              media, interest groups, and government agencies                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
