Title       : CAREER: Robust Control of Passive and Non-Passive Aerospace Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9703092

Award Number: 9703092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Atul G. Kelkar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research plan in this CAREER project focuses on new  challenges in the
              robust control of linear and nonlinear,  passive and non-passive systems. There
              are two main research  objectives. One of the objectives is to extend and 
              generalize the existing robust stability results for  multibody nonlinear
              flexible spacecraft to include a broader  class of systems and develop
              synthesis methods for  dissipative controllers proposed for such systems. The
              other  objective is to develop new robust control methodologies for  open-loop
              stable nonpassive, open-loop unstable, and non-  minimum phase systems.
              Extensions of passivity based  techniques and development of new robust control
               methodologies for such systems are pursued. In particular,  the new
              methodologies using Generalized Predictive Control  (GPC) techniques are
              developed. First, an investigation of  GPC controllers for linear
              time-invariant (LTI) single-input  single output nonpassive systems is carried
              out.  Subsequently, the extensions to LTI multi-input multi-output  and
              nonlinear non-passive systems are considered. `Proof-of  concept` laboratory
              setups, which can represent a class of  linear and nonlinear nonpassive systems
              of interest, are  also developed. These systems can be used not only as 
              benchmark systems for numerical simulation and experimental  validation of new
              control methodologies, but also as  laboratory experiments for education.
              Besides involving  undergraduates at various levels of research work, a well 
              structured industry-university cooperative education plan  for undergraduates,
              and a plan for providing advance  education opportunities for high school
              students is  designed. Three new graduate courses in the area of controls  are
              developed to help build a strong controls program in the  Department of
              Mechanical Engineering. An innovative study  abroad program for an
              international collaborative education  is also formulated.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
