Title       : CAREER: Research and Education in Materials Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9703419

Award Number: 9703419
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Tsui ftsui@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703419  Tsui    The CAREER plan seeks to enhance both research and education 
              in  materials physics at the University of North Carolina at  Chapel  Hill. 
              The research component explores atomic  scale  synthesis  and characterization
              of metallic thin  films  and  multilayers grown by molecular beam epitaxy
              techniques.   It  focuses   on  three  main  objectives:   (1)  to   elucidate 
              diffusion processes during epitaxial nucleation and  growth,  and  to  develop
              techniques for producing tailored epitaxial  structures and morphologies, (2)
              to understand the nature of  spin-dependent  scattering responsible for  the 
              oscillatory  magnetic  coupling  and giant magnetoresistance  effects  in 
              metallic  multilayers,  and  (3)  to  shed  light  on   low-  dimensional   
              penomensa   by   exploring   monolayer    and  submonolayer systems.  The
              education component seeks to make  positive   impact  on  the  intellectual 
              climate   of   the  community.   It employs a two pronged strategy.   First, 
              it  focuses on improving teaching effectiveness in the classroom  by  
              transforming  traditional  lecture  presentations  into  participatory, 
              discovery-based courses.   Second,  research  and education opportunities in
              artificially structured nano-  materials  are  developed  for  high  school 
              teachers   and  students   in   the  Chapel  Hill-Durham   area.    Outreach 
              activities   toward  the  local  community  include   mentor  programs, lab
              tours, and journal clubs.    %%%    The CAREER plan seeks to enhance both
              research and education  in  materials physics at the University of North
              Carolina at  Chapel  Hill.   The research component focuses on  exploring 
              novel   electrical  and  magnetic  properties  of  synthetic  metallic
              nano-structures.  It seeks to elucidate the role of  artificial  constraints 
              on  material  properties,  and   to  enhance  our  ability  to  produce
              tailored  electronic  and  magnetic sturctures.  It is pursued by systematic
              studies of  atomic  scale  materials synthesis and ma terials  properties 
              using  state-of-th-art techniques including  molecular  beam  epitaxy   and 
              scanning  probe  microscopy.   The  education  component  seeks to make
              positive impact on the intellectual  climate   of  the  community.   It 
              employs  a  two  pronged  strategy.    First,    it  focuses  on  improving  
              teaching  effectiveness  in the classroom by transforming  traditional  lecture
               presentations  into participatory,  discovery-based  courses.   Second, 
              research and education opportunities  in  artificially  structured
              nano-materials  are  developed  for  high  school teachers and students in the
              Chapel Hill-Durham  area.    Outreach  activities  toward  the  local 
              community  include mentor programs, lab tours, and journal clubs.  ***
