Title       : Particles, Stochastic Partial Differential Equations, Random Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9703648

Award Number: 9703648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter M. Kotelenez pxk4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703648  Kotelenez   The investigator will work on the derivation of physically
              meaningful stochastic   partial differential equations (SPDEs) from systems of
              diffusing and interacting particles.   The main difference from the traditional
              approach for N diffusing particles is that the   fluctuations will be
              represented by "correlated" Brownian motions (representing the   fluctuation
              forces), where the strength of the correlations depends on the distance of  two
                given particles and a parameter, the so-called correlation length.
              Consequently, the SPDEs   will depend on the correlation length as a parameter.
              Macroscopic and central limit   theorems are expected, as the correlation
              length tends to zero. Further, the investigator   will study the qualitative
              properties of the SPDEs. Homogeneous, isotropic and stationary   random fields
              shall be derived as solutions of the SPDEs, and the spectral analysis of the  
              random fields in terms of the coefficients of the SPDEs shall be conducted.  
              Mathematically, the proposed work will build a bridge between 4 different areas
              of   mathematics, namely particle systems, SPDEs, random fields and partial
              differential   equations.   Many physical, biological and economic phenomena
              consist of a large number of   components. The large number and the rapid
              changes of the components make an exact   description of the time evolution of
              all components very difficult , if not impossible.   Examples are turbulence,
              chemical reactions, diffusion, spreading of diseases (viruses,   bacteria),
              population growth, environmental pollution, climate, weather, financial markets
                etc. To build a mathematical model of those phenomena, the real world systems
              of atoms,   molecules, viruses etc. are replaced by random particle systems
              whose time evolution can   serve as a good predictor for  the real world
              systems. A more traditional model for the   same phenomena are macroscopic
              (deterministic) partial differential equations, many of   which, more than  a
              century ago, became the ma in theoretical tools in different areas of   physics
              and engineering and also, more recently, in some areas of the biosciences and  
              economics. Such an equation typically describes "how much mass (of some matter)
              is at a   given place at a given time." Mathematically, most of those
              macroscopic equations can be   derived from particle systems by a limit
              procedure, assuming that the number of particles   becomes infinite and their
              respective masses become very small, and that the motion of   particles is
              always statistically uncorrelated. This derivation also explains why the  
              macroscopic equations often do not correctly predict the time evolution of the
              real world   systems, but that in the long run they appear to be an average of
              many observations.   Macroscopic equations, however,  are easier to compute
              than particle systems. The   investigator will extend the model of macroscopic
              partial differential equations to a model   of  mezoscopic (stochastic) partial
              differential equations. The mezoscopic equations shall   be derived from
              particle systems in the same way as the macroscopic equations, but under   more
              realistic assumptions on the particle systems, namely that the motion of
              particles is   statistically correlated, when they are close to one another. 
              As a result the mezoscopic   equations should be in better agreement with
              observations than the macroscopic   equations, while preserving the
              computational simplicity of the latter ones. Moreover, the   macroscopic
              equations will appear as the  limiting case of the mezoscopic equations.  
              Mezoscopic equations will have diverse applications in physical chemistry, the
              biosciences,   fluid mechanics and financial markets.
