Title       : CAREER: Sensor Management in Intelligent Motion Control Systems and Learning
               About Intelligent Machines Using a Problem Based Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9703352

Award Number: 9703352
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicola J. Ferrier ferrier@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  research  explores sensor management in intelligent  motion  control 
              systems  with  the  main  objective  of  describing  and  evaluating a
              mathematical model of what it means to pay attention  to  a  sensor. A system
              model and control topology that  reflects  properties  of  the  hardware, such 
              as  computation  delays  and  communication  limitations,  is used.  The 
              amount  of  attention  devoted to a device can be interpretated through the
              selection of  feedback  gains  and  the  degree  of  communication  bus  access
               allocated to the device.  Control synthesis with this model  will  address 
              questions such as which sensors should  be  used  for  a  task,  what  degree
              of coordination between devices is  required,  and is the system stable? The
              control design methodology will  be  applied  to robotic applications.
              Successful completion  of  this  research  will  enable designers of complex 
              robotic  systems  to  utilize   a  formal  procedure  in  selecting  sensors  
              and   in  determining  the  required, or sufficient,  coordination  between 
              motor subsystems, while still ensuring system stability.    The  other
              objective of this project is to develop curriculum  in  the  area of
              intelligent machines, providing mechanical engineers  with interdisciplinary
              skills and improving students' engineering  problem  solving skills.  Both
              goals will be addressed through  a  hands-on  undergraduate course in Robotics
              using a problem  based  learning   (PBL)  teaching  methodology.   Using  PBL, 
               students  identify  the  theory  required to solve  a  problem,  learn  the 
              theory,  and  apply  it.   Thus  students  explore  the  relevant  subjects  as
              they see the need for them. A robotics course,  with  material  from multiple
              disciplines, is suited to this  approach.  A   graduate  level  Intelligent 
              Systems  course  will  also  be  developed.
