Title       : Water Configuration and Transport in Wet "Unsaturated" Porous Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1999  
File        : a9703574

Award Number: 9703574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174518             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomlinson Fort   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  CTS -9703574    Water Configuration and Transport in Wet "Unsaturated"
              Porous Media     This project is an investigation of the location, surface
              area, and movement caused by surface tension gradients, of water held in wet
              "unsaturated" porous media.     By "unsaturated" is meant a condition where
              only part of the available pore space is filled with water, the remainder being
              filled with air or a second fluid.  Examples of the condition are soil above
              the water table and any other porous solid or particulate material which has
              been exposed to but is not saturated with moisture.     The necessary surface
              tension gradients are established by applying surfactants with very specific
              properties to part  of a wet unsaturated system.  In optimum cases, 80-90% of
              the water moves.  Previous work has established criteria for surfactant
              effectiveness and the mechanism through which water movement is effected.  It
              has led to the first direct experimental means of determining the area of the
              air-water interface in wet "unsaturated" porous media.     The goals of this
              research are to better understand these systems and to apply this understanding
              to solution of important technological problems which involve them.  Specific
              objectives of this accomplishment-based renewal (ABR) proposal are to:  (a)
              complete development of a model to calculate the air-water interfacial area,
              (b) determine the kinetics of surfactant spreading and water movement as a
              function of system saturation, (c) scout for surfactants capable of effecting
              two phase oil-water transport and (d) investigate water and dissolved solute
              transport in practical systems.  The model is based on the first application of
              simulated annealing to determination of surface areas in wet "unsaturated"
              porous media.  The kinetics of surfactant spreading will be followed by
              radiotracer methods.  The kinetics of water movement will be followed by a new
              gravimetric technique based on the changes in the center of gravity which occur
              when water moves withi n a standard column.  Systems to be studied include
              glass spheres and sand, clay minerals and model soils.  Comparison will be made
              of the movement of water with and without dissolved electrolytes, and in the
              presence and absence of an insoluble nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL). Attempts
              will be made to relate the kinetics of surfactant spreading and water movement
              to the abnormally high viscosity which has been reported for water near
              capillary walls.     This study has great potential technological impact. 
              Results may lead to more efficient drying/de-watering processes in industries
              where these operations are now conducted with a steam dryer.  The ability to
              move water in soils by means of a cheap nontoxic and biodegradable "chemical
              pump" has important applications in environmental remediation and in
              agriculture.  Knowledge of the area of the air-water interface is fundamental
              to modeling interfacial mass transfer processes, and for understanding oxygen
              transport in soils.  The surface area model should be applicable to non-aqueous
              petroleum systems, and to water-oil as well as to the water-air interface, in
              wet "unsaturated" porous media.
