Title       : Symplectic Geometry and Stratified Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9703947

Award Number: 9703947
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reyer Sjamaar sjamaar@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Reyer Sjamaar proposes to investigate invariants of symplectic stratified spaces
              and of Hamiltonian Lie group actions, using methods from differential topology,
              singularity theory and invariant theory.  This project is expected to
              contribute to the understanding of the singularities that arise from
              Hamiltonian Lie group actions and momentum maps.  One of the goals is to
              calculate the equivariant index of symplectic quotients and symplectic
              cross-sections.  A further goal is to construct homology Todd classes for
              stratified symplectic spaces, with applications to the index theory of
              manifolds with singularities.   Symplectic geometry is the branch of geometry
              governing the laws of the classical mechanics of Newton.  Classical mechanics
              is a quite accurate description of the large-scale behaviour of objects in the
              physical world.  At submicroscopic scales a more precise description is given
              by the laws of quantum mechanics.  To link together macroscopic and microscopic
              behaviour, it is of importance to be able to go back and forth between the two
              descriptions, and this has generated much activity by physicists and
              mathematicians in this century.  My project intends to contribute to the
              quantization of systems that exhibit ``bad'', or singular, features that cannot
              be treated by conventional means.  Such singularities often arise in the
              presence of linear, spherical, or more complicated types of symmetry.  Symmetry
              in a system of physical objects often enables one to predict important features
              of its future behaviour, and my object is to find out how these features are
              reflected at the quantum level.
