Title       : CAREER: Application of Sloan Digital Sky Survey Data to Gravitational Lensing
               Studies and the Enhancement of Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a9703282

Award Number: 9703282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. McKay tamckay@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - McKay    A large amount of recent theoretical and experimental work
              has  shown that gravitational lensing effects afford our best  opportunity to
              directly measure the abundance and distribution of  total mass in the universe.
              Recent work has extended the  measurement of mass distributions from the strong
              lensing regime  of multiple quasar images and giant arcs to the weaker lensing 
              effects seen in the periphery of massive clusters of galaxies.  With the unique
              wide field imaging system of the Sloan Digital  Sky Survey (SDSS), it will be
              possible to extend such lensing  studies to very wide fields, and study density
              variations in the  universe independent of the bias between luminous and dark 
              matter. The weak lensing technique is the only way to directly  probe large
              scale structures in the mass density of the universe,  and the SDSS offers the
              only opportunity to do this over a large  fraction of the sky. These methods
              will be used to measure the  surface density of matter over one fourth  of the
              sky, to probe  the evolution of this density field using photometric and 
              spectroscopic redshifts, to measure directly the bias between the  observed
              local distribution of luminous matter and the underlying  mass distribution,
              and to measure the lensing mass of nearby  clusters like the Coma cluster. This
              is a difficult program,  requiring careful control of systematic errors, but
              the SDSS is  exceedingly well designed to meet these challenges. A 
              complementary program would search for quasar lenses within the  SDSS data for
              use in related studies.    Data generated by the SDSS will be used both for
              traditional  graduate and undergraduate research, and also as a tool for 
              bringing current research into the introductory classroom.  Advanced
              undergraduate students will be involved in  designing a  set of tools, using
              the SDSS data, to illustrate important  scientific principles. These tools will
              be used in a "hands-on"  cosmology class for entering non-science majors, in
              large  standard intro ductory physics classes, and will be distributed  through
              existing teacher outreach programs.  There will  be  continued efforts to
              improve the quality of standard  undergraduate teaching at the University of
              Michigan, and to  continue SDSS public information programs and a successful
              public  lecture series.    This project is a five year program that will enable
              a faculty  member at the University of Michigan to  develop further as an 
              astrophysics researcher and an educator. The grant will  support  the faculty
              member, a graduate student, and a number of  undergraduates in their analysis
              of gravitational lensing effects  in data to be obtained by the Sloan Digital
              Sky Survey. There is  also support to use the SDSS data in the development of
              new  educational materials for use in a variety of classroom  situations.
