Title       : Calculus of Homotopy Functors, Algebraic K-theory and Universal Constructions of
               Finite Degree
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9703655

Award Number: 9703655
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy McCarthy randy@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703655  McCarthy       Tom Goodwillie defined a Taylor tower for homotopy
              functors.  These are functors from spaces (or spectra) to spaces (or spectra)
              and  they must preserve homotopy equivalences.  The tower is an inverse  limit
              of functors with the fibers between stages being equivariant  homology
              theories.  The tower does not necessarily recover the  original functor for all
              spaces or spectra but does for suitably  connected objects.  One way in which
              the investigator will study this  tower is by studying another tower that
              agrees with the Taylor tower  within the radius of convergence for a given
              functor but whose  defining characteristic at the n-th level is the universal
              degree n  construction as compared to the universal n-excisive construction 
              given by the Taylor tower.  He will also continue to study algebraic  K-theory
              by use of linearizing functors of exact categories to  spectra.  A functor F
              from exact categories to spaces or spectra is  said to satisfy ``additivity''
              if F applied to the exact category of  short exact sequences of a category is
              naturally equivalent to the  two-fold product of F applied to the category
              given by the exact  functors that take kernel and cokernel of a short exact
              sequence.  There is a universal construction, called ``linearizing,'' which
              takes  an arbitrary functor from exact categories to spectra and produces a 
              new functor of exact categories that satisfies additivity.  This is  completely
              analogous to taking the ``derivative'' in the sense of  Goodwillie when
              reinterpreted with these new towers.  Algebraic  K-theory itself is the
              linearization of a free functor from exact  categories to spectra.  Topological
              Hochschild homology and  topological cyclic homology are also examples of
              linearizing a  functor, and the trace maps that connect these theories may be
              studied  from this point of view.  The investigator will be examining different
               constructions for the study of algebraic K-theory obtained by  linearizing
              various types of functors.  The hope  is to obtain new  theories that one can
              use to study algebraic K-theory effectively.       An important tool for
              studying functions from the complex numbers  to itself is the Taylor series
              expansion of the function about a  point.  For a functor -- a kind of
              generalized function -- from spaces  to spaces, Tom Goodwillie has similarly
              defined a Taylor series  expansion of the functor about a space.  In standard
              analysis one must  assume a function has all its derivatives about a point to
              ensure that  the Taylor tower exists, and then one can be sure that this 
              approximation to the original function is accurate only within a  radius of
              convergence about the point.  Similarly, for functors of  spaces, one must make
              assumptions about the functor to ensure its  Taylor tower exists, and even when
              these are satisfied, one obtains  accurate estimates of the original functor
              only for spaces  sufficiently close to the space of expansion.  The
              investigator will  be examining a modification of Goodwillie's original
              definition for  the Taylor tower of functors from spaces to spaces that tends
              to agree  with his definition for spaces within the radius of convergence of a 
              point but differs in general.  Two advantages of this new tower are  that it is
              easier to define and that it can be applied to an even  greater variety of
              interesting situations.  One area to be explored  with this new technology is
              algebraic K-theory, which from this point  of view is simply the derivative of
              a particularly easy functor.  ***
