Title       : CAREER: Gas Phase Cleaning of Semiconductor Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1997       
File        : a9703237

Award Number: 9703237
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony Muscat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9703237 Muscat  The objective of this CAREER project is to understand how water
              and other polar molecules initiate and sustain silicon dioxide etching in the
              gas phase using hydrogen fluoride. Oxide etching is an important process in the
              fabrication of microelectronic devices and is a paradigm for gas phase
              adaptation of the aqueous solutions that are currently used to prepare
              semiconductor surfaces between primary processing steps such as plasma etching
              and deposition. A mechanism is proposed for gas phase etching of silicon
              dioxide in HF/water mixtures to understand how water initiates and sustains
              etching and how the strong HF bond is broken. Experiments in both the fast
              etching regime where rates are industrially viable and the single layer regime
              where the surface and gas phase can be controlled precisely in an ultra high
              vacuum apparatus will be studied. Real time Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
              spectroscopy and mass spectrometry done in situ will be complemented with
              ellipsometric and Auger measurements made after etching to examine the
              mechanistic details. Specifically, the rate of production and chemical bonding
              of surface silanol (Si-OH) groups will be examined in the fast etching regime
              as a function of pressure, surface temperature, and the fractional saturation
              vapor pressures of HF and a hydroxyl-bearing molecule, such as water, alcohols,
              glycols, and glycerol. Precise coverages of HF and a hydroxyl-bearing molecule
              will be deposited on an oxide surface in an ultra high vacuum chamber to
              examine chemical bonding, clearing of the final oxide layer, and a bifurcation
              in the reaction when the dosing order is reversed. %%% The project addresses
              fundamental research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of microelectronics
              materials and devices, in general. An important feature of the program is the
              emphasis on education, and on the  integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant research area. ***
