Title       : Studies in Interacting Particle Systems and Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9703814

Award Number: 9703814
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto H. Schonmann rhs@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703814  Schonmann   The Principal Investigator will work on various projects in
              the areas of interacting particle systems, statistical mechanics, percolation,
              and other related subjects in Probability Theory.  The main objects of interest
              in this proposal are the ergodic behavior and the relaxation patterns of
              several interacting particle systems, including Ising models and other lattice
              spin systems, contact processes on arbitrary graphs, growth models and cellular
              automata.  Several of the proposed problems have their motivation in phenomena
              observed in nature as, for example, metastable states of systems in the
              vicinity of phase transition regions.   The Principal Investigator will study
              problems in interacting particle systems.  These are models for systems which
              contain a large number of  similar components and in which each component
              interacts in a simple way with a few other ones.  For instance one can think of
              the atoms in a crystal interacting when they are close enough, or individuals
              in a large population which may suffer or not from some infection with
              contamination occurring between neighbors.  The local interaction may involve a
              substantial amount of randomness, but since the system as a whole is large, one
              expects and indeed observes a much more predictable behavior at the global
              level.  A great deal of interest in such   systems stems from the fact that the
              qualitative behavior of the whole system may depend in non-trivial ways on
              parameters which are built into the local interactions, but which only affect
              those in a smooth way (for example, the rate of infection between neighboring
              individuals in the second example above).  The general issues of interest are
              then the understanding of which sort of equilibria can be reached by such types
              of stochastic dynamics, how an equilibrium state is reached, and how the
              parameters which affect the local rules may affect the answers to these
              questions.
