Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structure of Solutions to Certain Equations in the
               Physical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9703711

Award Number: 9703711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70857              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuxi Zheng yzheng@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zheng  9703711    Yuxi Zheng proposes to study some nonlinear partial
              differential equations  from fluid dynamics (Euler equations), plasma physics
              (Vlasov-Poisson system),   and liquid crystal physics. These equations are the
              laws of motion of their   respective physics. The turbulent nature and/or
              defects in the materials   show up in the form of singularities and
              instabilities in the solutions of   the equations. Yuxi Zheng plans to use
              advanced analytical tools to study   the structures of the singular solutions.
              In the case of compressible Euler  equations in two space dimensions, for
              example, Yuxi Zheng plans to isolate  typical singularities (hurricanes,
              tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigate  their individual structures. The
              result of the investigation will be a clear   understanding of the worst
              possible solutions, and thereby quantify our   knowledge of the physics and
              offer guidance in high-performance numerical   computations of general
              solutions.    Yuxi Zheng proposes to study some applied mathematical problems
              in the   fields of fluid dynamics (which includes motion of the air and water),
                plasma physics (which includes motion of the material that makes up the Sun, 
              and also more than 90% of the universe), and liquid crystal physics in  
              material science.  Scientists and engineers have used mathematical equations,  
              called partial differential equations, to model the motions. The turbulent  
              nature and/or defects in the materials show up in the form of singularities  
              and instabilities in the solutions of the equations. It is these singularities 
               and instabilities that often spoil accurate numerical computations of the  
              solutions. Yuxi Zheng plans to use the state of the art analytical tools to  
              study the structures of the singular solutions.  In the case of a compressible 
               gas such as air, for example, Yuxi Zheng plans to isolate typical  
              singularities (hurricanes, tornadoes, shocks, etc.) and investigate their  
              individual structures. The result of the investigation will  be a clear  
              understanding of the worst possible solutions, and thereby quantify our  
              knowledge of the physics and offer guidance in high-performance numerical  
              computations of general solutions.
