Title       : Computer-intensive Methods for the Statistical Analysis of Dependent Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9703964

Award Number: 9703964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris Politis dpolitis@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9197,9218,EGCH,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Politis  9703964    This project involves the on-going development of resampling
              and subsampling as they apply to  dependent data, i.e., time series, random
              fields, and (marked) point processes.  The investigator's efforts redirected
              towards:  (a) relaxing the conditions for asymptotic validity of
              computer-intensive methods for dependent data (e.g., allow for 
              nonstationarity, slow mixing rate, etc.); (b) rendering subsampling more
              `automatic' by devising a built-in procedure for estimation of the rate of
              convergence of the statistic in question; (c) improving the accuracy of
              distribution estimation by techniques such as Richardson extrapolation, and by
              optimal choice of block size; (d) developing appropriate resampling/subsampling
              methods in the case of alternative data-collection scenarios as is the case of
              measurements at irregularly spaced locations, i.e., data from a marked point
              process; and (e) exploring the idea of `local' resampling for time series.    
              This research focuses on the development of computer-intensive methods of
              statistical inference for the  analysis of dependent data without having to
              rely on unrealistic or unverifiable model assumptions.  The statistical
              analysis of dependent data is vital in many diverse scientific disciplines;
              thus this research has potentially many practical applications.  For example,
              consider the problem of stochastic computer simulation of complex manufacturing
              systems that is an important issue in Industrial Engineering; the methodology
              of subsampling for `almost' stationary time series is most helpful in order to
              assess convergence and accuracy of the simulation.  For another example,
              suppose that X(t) denotes an environmental measurement, e.g., rain
              precipitation or ozone concentration as measured at location t. Typically, the
              t-points where X(t) is measured are irregularly scattered in space or on the
              earth's surface.  The development of a general methodology for statistical
              inference involving data of this type is a significant contribution i n spatial
              statistics and, in particular, studies involving geological, atmospheric, and
              environmental data.
