Title       : CAREER: Mesoscopic Interacting Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9703388

Award Number: 9703388
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitrii Maslov maslov@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703388  Maslov  This is a CAREER award which combines theoretical research 
              with education innovation.  The research part of the award  will focus on
              mesoscopic systems in which electron-electron  interactions play a crucial
              role.  Analytical and numepical  techniques will be used to study Luttinger
              liquid effects in  quantum wires and quantum Hall systems, concentrating on 
              such issues as the coupling to the Fermi liquid reservoirs,  paraconducting
              effects in inhomogeneous Luttinger liquids,  Luttinger liquid to Fermi liquid
              crossover, electron-phonon  scattering in Luttinger liquids, AC transport and
              noise in  inhomogeneous Luttinger liquids and quasi-one-dimensional  effects in
              strong magnetic fields in the presence of long  range Coulomb interactions. 
              Mesoscopic superconductivity  will also be investigated.    A special emphasis
              of the research will be to look at  qualitative features of the effects under
              consideration.  This part of the research will be incorporated in the 
              educational activities.  Qualitative methods in physics will  be used as a
              basis for courses at both the undergraduate and  graduate levels.  These
              courses will teach students how to  use simple techniques to gain insight to
              complex physical  phenomena.  %%%  This is a CAREER award which combines
              theoretical research  with education innovation.  The research part of the
              award  will focus on mesoscopic systems in which electron-electron 
              interactions play a crucial role.  Mesoscopic systems are  ones in which
              various submicroscopic quantum effects become  apparent on size scales of
              everyday phenomena.  Examples  include many microelectronic devices. Analytical
              and  numerical techniques will be used to study a variety of  phenomena.  
              Mesoscopic superconductivity will also be  investigated.    A special emphasis
              of the research will be to look at  qualitative features of the effects under
              consideration.  This part of the research will be incorporated in the 
              educational activities.  Qualitative methods in physics will  b e used as a
              basis for courses at both the undergraduate and  graduate levels.  These
              courses will teach students how to  use simple techniques to gain insight to
              complex physical  phenomena.  ***
