Title       : New Approaches to Nonparametric Regression Estimation for Continuous and
               Discrete Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9703876

Award Number: 9703876
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elias Masry masry@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9197,9218,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Masry  9703876    The research is concerned with regression functions
              estimation in a hybrid setting: the underlying  processes are continuous in
              time, and so is the regression function, but the observations are taken at 
              discrete-times.  This is common in many practical situations where the
              collected data is irregularly spaced  as in environmental and oceanographic
              studies.   The instants at which the data is obtained constitute a  point
              process with a FINITE mean sampling rate but nevertheless result in no loss of
              information.   The  goal of the research is to identify appropriate non-equally
              spaced  sampling schemes; formulate suitable  estimates based on a modified
              Nadaraya-Watson approach and on the more recent local polynomial fitting 
              approach; and study their convergence properties including asymptotic normality
              and rates of strong  convergence. A fundamental requirement is that the
              consistency of the regression estimates, as the  number of observations tends
              to infinity, holds for ALL positive values of the mean sampling rate. Results 
              of this type do not hold for conventional equally-spaced data unless the
              sampling rate is allowed to diverge  to infinity.      Scientists and engineers
              collect huge amounts of data in wide range of disciplines including  
              communication systems (e.g., Internet traffic, satellites), econometrics (e.g.
              stock market), geology (e.g.  earthquakes), and environmental science (e.g.
              pollution levels). While much of the observed data is  continuous in time, the
              processing of the data is carried out by using computers which convert the data
              to  a digital form. The research develops digital processing methodologies
              (irregular sampling  methodologies) which do not lose any information during
              the conversion process from continuous-time  data to discrete-time data. The
              context of the research is 1) to forecast the future evolution of the 
              phenomena being observed and 2) to filter signals observed in the presence of
              corrupting noise.
