Title       : CAREER: Model Systems for Flavoenzyme Activity. Recognition and Catalysis within
               Sol-Gel Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2000     
File        : a9703466

Award Number: 9703466
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent M. Rotello rotello@chem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Rotello's research focuses on three objectives: (1)   incorporating
              flavin derivatives into transparent, silica-based, sol-gel   matrices; (2)
              exploiting the electronic spectroscopy of flavins to probe   sol-gel
              microenvironments; and (3) exploring the thermal redox and   photocatalytic
              chemistry of bound flavins.  Spectral properties of the   incorporated flavins
              are correlated with viscoelastic measurements of the   gel to identify changes
              in the flavin microenvironment during gelation   and drying.   The
              electrochemical and spectroelectrochemical behavior of   the flavin
              incorporated in the matrix is compared with that in fluid   solution to
              ascertain matrix induced changes in redox potential, while   medium effects on
              redox activity are explored through stoichiometric   oxidations of
              representative thiols and other biologically important   functional groups. 
              Educational activities include developing a molecular   modeling component for
              large organic chemistry courses, continuing an   outreach program designed to
              enhance high school students' interest in   pursuing undergraduate degrees in
              the physical sciences, and mentoring   undergraduate physical science majors in
              an integrated program designed   to sustain and promote their interest in the
              physical sciences.  With this CAREER award, the Organic Dynamics Program
              supports the   research and educational activities of Professor Vincent Rotello
              of the   Chemistry Department at the University of Massachusetts.   Professor  
              Rotello explores the incorporation of reactive molecules into glass-like  
              environments, essentially forming artificial enzymes wherein the matrix   plays
              the role ordinarily taken on by the amino acid backbone of a   natural enzyme
              and the reactive molecule serves as the active site of the   enzyme.  These
              artificial enzyme systems offer the opportunity to probe   various features of
              the processes effected by the natural enzymes and may   also lead to the
              discovery of unique reaction chemistry distinct from   that of the enzymes. 
              Professor Rotello's educational activities include   the development and
              integration into undergraduate organic chemistry   courses of computer-assisted
              investigations of molecular structure.    Through outreach programs, Professor
              Rotello encourages high school   students to major in the physical sciences,
              and, once they are in   college, he enhances and sustains the interest of
              undergraduate physical   science majors through an integrated program of
              faculty seminars, field   trips and interactive laboratory experiences.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                    
