Title       : Acquisition of a Dynamic Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer for Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1998  
File        : a9703930

Award Number: 9703930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386445             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Kramer edkramer@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703930  Kramer    This award provides support for the acquisition of a dynamic 
              secondary ion mass spectrometer (SIMS) based on a quadrupole mass  analyzer for
              materials research.  It will be installed in the  Electron Microscope and
              Microanalytical Facility of the  University of California Santa Barbara (UCSB)
              Materials Research  Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) and will be open to
              use by  all qualified users at UCSB and the nationwide MRSEC system.  The 
              instrument selected is optimized for depth profiling insulating  samples such
              as polymers and ceramics but will also serve the  most of the depth profiling
              needs for semiconductors.  It is  equipped with a rotation attachment, for
              improving depth  resolution at interfaces well below the surface, as well as a 
              liquid nitrogen cooled sample stage accessory, which will make it  possible to
              depth profile polymers that are molten at room  temperature.  In addition to
              the standard duoplasmatron ion  source (for oxygen or argon ions), a cesium ion
              source will be  acquired.  While an O2+ or AR+ beam is ideal for polymer depth 
              profiling, a Cs+ beam is optimum for depth profiling many  elements in
              semiconductors.  The acquisition of this instrument  will provide important new
              capabilities for investigating phase  separation in polymer thin films, short
              range diffusion in  ordered block copolymer systems, the grafting of polymer
              chains  to polymer/polymer interfaces by chemical reaction, the structure  of
              surfaces of semifluorinated side group block copolymer  surfaces that resist
              reconstruction in water and of antifouling  coatings made of copolymer
              consisting of water soluble blocks and  non-water soluble glassy blocks and for
              monitoring the formation  of molecular bridges between surfaces in hot melt
              adhesives.  %%%  While this instrument will have an exceptional impact on
              research  on polymer surfaces and interfaces, it will also be of great  value
              to researchers investigating impurity levels in epitaxial  thin films of oxides
              and diffusion i n ceramics.  Moreover the  dynamic SIMS will enable much
              improved characterization of  nitrides grown by both metal organic chemical
              vapor deposition  (MOCVD) and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), as well as multiple
               quantum well structures in these systems for optoelectronic  devices.  SIMS
              depth profiling of Mn in Mn ion implanted GaAs  magnetic semiconductors will
              provide crucial information on the  nanostructure of these exciting materials. 
              SIMS determinations  will provide key information on vertical cavity
              semiconductor  laser structure grown by MBE, on non-stoichiometry in compound 
              semiconductor layers and on oxide distribution in AlAs layers.  In addition the
              dynamic SIMS capability will provide fundamental  understanding of the
              non-equilibrium diffusion, trapping, and  activation of impurities during
              silicon processing.  The high  interest shown in this instrument by materials
              researchers at  UCSB and elsewhere is a strong indication that it will be fully
               utilized to do exciting materials science.  ***
