Title       : Fatigue Crack Growth at Toughened Polymer Adhesive Interfaces with Impenetrable
               and Penetrable Phases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1999     
File        : a9703667

Award Number: 9703667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337888             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Ritter ritter@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Lardner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,1771,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9703667  Ritter    The objective of this research is to understand the 
              mechanisms involved in slow crack growth at polymer adhesive  interfaces that
              have been tailored to promote adhesion.  The  research involves both
              impenetrable and penetrable  interfaces.  An example of an impenetrable
              interfaces is  silane coupled epoxy/glass and of a penetrable interface is 
              PS/PMMA.  Slow crack growth is measured under both constant  and cyclic loading
              using the Double Cantilever Drilled  Compression (DCDC) test.  Although this
              test has been used  to study crack growth in monolithic glass and ceramic 
              materials, the use of the test to study crack growth at  polymer adhesive
              interfaces is new.  The unique advantages  of this test is that crack growth is
              stable and the  interfacial fracture toughness can greatly exceed the  fracture
              toughness of the adjoining materials because of the  stabilizing role of the
              compressive loads.  Finite element  modeling is used to estimate the energy
              associated with  plastic and viscoelastic deformation while the energy 
              associated with chain disentanglement, pullout, and scission  is estimated
              based on micromechanical modeling.  Direct  measurement of the intrinsic
              adhesive energy is by the  Johnson, Kendall, and Roberts technique, where the
              contact  radius between a sphere (made of polymer adhesive) and a  flat plate
              (made of the bonded material) is measured.  %%%  Through careful
              experimentation, micro-mechanical modeling,  and finite element analysis, the
              influence of slow crack  growth on the various mechanisms that contribute to
              the  fracture resistance of both impenetrable and penetrable  interfaces is
              explored.  This should significantly improve  understanding of adhesive
              bonding.  ***
