Title       : CAREER: The Social Environment and Developmental Plasticityin Vasopressin
               Neurochemical Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9703309

Award Number: 9703309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334592             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine A. Marler camarler@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1096,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Marler, C.  IBN-973309  Behavior plays a crucial role in interactions
              between an animal's internal and external environments.  While significant
              progress has been made in understanding how social interactions can influence
              adult hormone levels, we know little about the impact of the early social
              environment on behavior, particularly factors influencing aggression.  The PI
              proposes to investigate the plasticity in behavior in response to significant
              changes in parental behavior, as well as the physiological mechanisms
              underlying such plasticity.  To examine the effects of both paternal and
              maternal effects she proposes to work with Peromyscus mice because it is one of
              the few mammalian model systems in which males make significant contributions
              to raising the young and also because there is considerable variation among the
              different species of Peromyscus. The PI will alter levels of parental care by
              allowing offspring of one species to be raised by the parents of the other
              species.  If this causes changes in aggressive and parental behavior of the
              offspring once they have matured, then she will examine physiological
              underpinnings for these changes in behavior.  The neuropeptide arginine
              vasopressin and the steroid hormone testosterone will be studied because these
              are important biochemicals influencing social interactions of adults, including
              aggressive interactions and parental behavior.  These studies will allow
              testing of the plasticity of vasopressin both within and between species in
              response to changes in the social and hormonal environments.  A theme that runs
              through the PI's  research is the integration of several different scientific
              fields.  This is an approach which she employs in her teaching as well. The PI
              uses animal behavior to introduce basic concepts of biology to psychology
              students and emphasize how animal studies contribute to our understanding of
              physiological mechanisms influencing human behavior.    PROJECT SUMMARY        
                   3
