Title       : Elucidation of Polymer Conformation, Phase Structure, and Dynamics by
               Multidimensional Solid-State NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9703916

Award Number: 9703916
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Schmidt-Rohr   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703916  Schmidt-Rohr    In this research program, multidimensional nuclear
              magnetic resonance (NMR)  techniques are developed and applied to elucidate the
              conformations and  motions of functional groups in solid polymers and relate
              them to  macroscopic materials properties.   The proposed NMR techniques for 
              characterizing segmental conformations in unoriented polymers, such as 
              amorphous polymers and polypeptides, are based on measuring the relative 
              orientations of adjacent segments by correlating anisotropic NMR couplings 
              (dipolar and chemical-shift anisotropies). The torsion-angle informatiol is 
              extracted from characteristic intensity patterns in the resulting 2D or 3D 
              spectra.  Eventually, in a 3D spectrum, 2D chemical-shift correlation  patterns
              will be separated by dipolar couplings.  The torsion-angle  distributions in
              various PET samples, polystyrenes, and other polymers will  be characterized. 
              Double-quantum NMR techniques for measuring the torsion  angles and in peptides
              have been demonstrated and will be applied to solid  polypeptide materials.
              Structure and mobility on a larger scale, e.g. in  phase-separating polymer
              blends or at the crystalline-amorphous interface,  will be investigated by 
              spin-diffusion NMR.  In the area of molecular dynamics of solid polymers,
              multidimensional  exchange NMR methods that were introduced in part by this PI
              have elucidated  relaxations in polymers, which influence many macroscopic
              materials  properties. New exchange NMR techniques will be developed, aiming,
              for  instance, at detecting small-amplitude or localized motions. Motional 
              processes, such as helical jumps, will be exploited for obtaining structural 
              information, e.g. to characterize polymer chain folds. The length scale of 
              motional heterogeneities in polymers above the glass transition will be 
              determined based on spatial information from spin diffusion.  %%%%  In this
              research program, solid polymers such as engineering  plastics and advanced
              biomaterials are investigated on a mole cular  level by novel nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) techniques. The  insight into molecular structures and motions,
              which are related  to mechanical properties such as toughness or creep, will 
              ultimately help industry in the development of improved polymer  materials.
              Students from three departments will be instructed  about modern NMR in theory
              and practice, while several graduate  students will be trained to use the
              latest multidimensional NMR  techniques in polymer research.  ***
