Title       : AMP: Alliance for Minority Participation Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9703197

Award Number: 9703197
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3210080            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph W. Turner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynette P. Padmore  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9703197  Padmore    Florida A&M University in collaboration with Albany
              State College,  Bethune-Cookman College, Clark-Atlanta University, Florida
              State  University, Florida International University, the University of 
              Florida, the University of South Florida, the University of Central  Florida,
              the University of Miami and Florida Memorial College and  three affiliated
              community colleges (Florida Community College at  Jacksonville, Miami-Dade and
              Tallahassee) has formulated a program  designed to influence more
              underrepresented students to select  carers in science, engineering and
              mathematics.  The Alliance will   emphasize a focused effort to increase
              directly the recruitment,  retention, graduation and graduate school placement
              of Blacks,  Hispanics, and Native Americans who are enrolled in the 
              undergraduate SEM degree programs at the participation  institutions. 
              Indirectly, enhancement elements of the project will  influence the persistence
              of students at all Alliance member  institutions.  The Alliance's influence
              will span from the pre-  freshman level to the enrollment of scholars in SEM
              graduate  programs.  Participants will be selected from biology, chemistry, 
              mathematics, physic and all engineering disciplines.  The FGAMP  Project has
              been a major coalescing force at the institutions  involved in Phase I of the
              venture.  Visibility has increased for  the institutions.  Student performance
              in their respective areas  has improved significantly.  A significant level of
              support has  been received from the Florida Legislature for support of the 
              Florida institutions.  Phase Ii of the FGAMP operation will build  on the
              successes of Phase I and will include greater involvement of  community
              colleges.  FGAMP institutional and industry partners are  expected to continue
              their support of the project through summer  internships.    The success of
              this project will be shared with other state and  regional institutions.
