Title       : CAREER: Simulating the Evolution of Advanced Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9703044

Award Number: 9703044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yunzhi Wang wang.363@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703044  Wang  This is a CAREER grant to a new faculty member.  In the  research
              component advanced simulation techniques will be  developed and used to study
              the formation and evolution of  complex microstructures during thermal
              processing of high-  temperature oxide-based sensor materials, nanostructured 
              ceramic composites and titantium-based intermetallic alloys.  The research
              should reveal the fundamental mechanisms,  morphology and kinetics of the
              microstructure development;  provide a means to predict microstructure
              formation during  processing; and suggest novel processing schedules to 
              improve material performance for a wide range of  applications.  The
              methodology to be used is the field  computational approach to nonlinear
              pattern dynamics.    The proposed research will form the basis of new courses
              at  the undergraduate and graduate level in which students can  design alloys
              and see how microstructure evolves during  processing and how it determines
              materials properties.  The  course will be embedded in world-wide web and
              CD-ROM  technology.  %%%  This is a CAREER grant to a new faculty member.  In
              the  research component advanced simulation techniques will be  developed and
              used to study the formation and evolution of  complex microstructures during
              thermal processing of high-  temperature oxide-based sensor materials,
              nanostructured  ceramic composites and titantium-based intermetallic alloys. 
              The research should reveal the fundamental mechanisms,  morphology and kinetics
              of the microstructure development;  provide a means to predict microstructure
              formation during  processing; and suggest novel processing schedules to 
              improve material performance for a wide range of  applications.  The
              methodology to be used is the field  computational approach to nonlinear
              pattern dynamics.    The proposed research will form the basis of new courses
              at  the undergraduate and graduate level in which students can  design alloys
              and see how microstructure evolves during  processing and how it dete rmines
              materials properties.  The  course will be embedded in world-wide web and
              CD-ROM  technology.  ***
