Title       : Japan STA Program: Dissecting the Molecular Mechanisms of the Signal
               Transduction Pathway Leading to Ethylene Dependent Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9703835

Award Number: 9703835
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Y. Fujimoto fujimoto@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Fujimoto  9703835    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Susan Y.  Fujimoto at
              the National Institute of Bioscience and Human  Technology, Tsukuba, Japan. 
              Dr. Fujimoto will work with Dr.  Masaru Takagi, Senior Researcher in the Plant
              Molecular  Biology Laboratory, on a research project entitled,  "Dissecting the
              Molecular Mechanisms of the Signal  Transduction Pathway Leading to Ethylene
              Dependent  Transcription."    The goal of the proposed research is to identify
              molecular  components of the pathway leading from the perception of the  plant
              hormone ethylene to a physiological response.  How  this gas acts as an
              important growth regulator in plants is  not yet well understood.  Elucidation
              of this pathway would  not only offer fundamental insights for basic science
              but  would also provide a significant impact to plant  biotechnology.  Using
              the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana,  factors that are involved in the
              transmission of signals  necessary to initiate transcription of genes
              responsive to  ethylene will be investigated.  Ethylene responsive genes  have
              already been isolated from Arabidopsis and a group of  proteins termed AERBs
              (Arabidopsis Ethylene-Responsive  Binding proteins) that interact with these
              genes have been  characterized.  In the proposed research, AERB gene 
              expression will be analyzed and compared  with expressions  in Arabidopsis
              mutants affected in their response to  ethylene.  In addition, the possibility
              of protein  modification and identification of factors interacting with  the
              AERBs in response to ethylene will be examined.  By  using ethylene responsive
              genes in conjunction with known  ethylene response mutants, one can dissect and
              possibly  order the genes comprising this important and complex  pathway.  ***
