Title       : GOALI: Atomic Correlations in Disordered Materials Observed using Variable
               Coherence Transmission Electron Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9703906

Award Number: 9703906
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Murray Gibson j-gibson@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M.M.J. Treacy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9703906 
              Gibson    This  GOALI research project, which is supported in part  by  the 
              Office   of  Multidisciplinary  Activities  (OMA)  of   the   MPS  Directorate,
               intends to develop a quantitative  technique  using  the  TEM  to 
              characterize  network structure  in  amorphous  and  disordered materials.
              Although TEM has been highly successful  in  the  study of defects in
              crystalline materials, it has been  less  useful  thus  far  in  characterizing
               amorphous  materials.  The  present  project is based on the premise that the
              high resolution  TEM  image,  nonetheless, contains a wealth of information 
              about  the  microstructure in disordered materials. An important  aspect  of  
              the   proposed   new  technique,  which  will   be   pursued  experimentally 
              and theoretically, is the use of  the  three-body  correlation function to give
              new insight into medium range order.  Theoretical   methods  for  extracting 
              higher-order  correlation  functions directly from experiment will be explored.
              Materials to  be  studied  include amorphous semiconductors, gate  dielectrics,
               and ferroelectrics. This work will be carried out collaboratively  by  two
              PI's , one from a university, one from an industrial lab,  and  by  a  jointly
              supervised graduate student who will  benefit  from a significant exposure to
              industrial research.  %%%  This  GOALI research project, which is supported in
              part  by  the  Office   of  Multidisciplinary  Activities  (OMA)  of   the  
              MPS  Directorate,  will  be  carried  out  by  a  team  of   materials 
              scientists,  both  experts  in use of the  Transmission  Electron  Microscope
              (TEM), one at a research university, and the other  at  a  leading industrial
              research laboratory. An excellent  graduate  student will benefit from joint
              supervision by the two PI's,  and  in  the  process of doing a significant
              portion of his/her thesis  research   at  the  industrial  laboratory,  will 
              gain  valuable  experience   and contacts in industry. The project is designed 
              to  extend  the  usefulness  of the TEM in assessing  the  degree  of  disorder
               present in real materials, including gate oxides  which  are central in
              semiconductor transistor devices. Knowledge of the  degree  of  disorder  in  a
               given  material  can  be  useful  in  predicting  its performance in a given
              application. The  outcomes  of  the  project are expected to include new
              knowledge concerning  the  use  of  the TEM, and an excellent training
              experience  with  significant industrial exposure, for a graduate student.  ***
