Title       : Weak Convergence Results for Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9703815

Award Number: 9703815
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Mountford malloy@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703815  Mountford   The subject of interacting particle systems is of
              particular interest when a given   process has multiple stationary
              distributions.  In this case it is of interest to know which   initial
              configurations converge to which stationary distributions.  For the contact
              process   the complete convergence theorem provides the perfect answer to the
              above question.   This solution may be carried over to a large class of
              supercritical, attractive, reversible   nearest particle systems.  Such a
              complete convergence theorem cannot hold for the   critical reversible nearest
              particle systems as finite systems die out almost surely.    Mountford is
              interested in examining the above question in this case. The convergence  
              question for the voter model is well understood and a good description of the
              stationary   distributions is given, but it remains difficult to address large
              deviation and percolation   issues. Mountford wishes to investigate these and
              similar questions. Mountford will also   continue his work on the structure of
              level sets for the Brownian sheet, in collaboration   with Professor Robert
              Dalang.   Professor Mountford is continuing his work on interacting particle
              systems.    Interacting particle systems are processes where a large (often
              infinite) population have   associated variables that evolve in random fashion;
              a particular individual's variable will   typically evolve according to its
              value and those of its close neighbors.  For instance the   population may be
              trees in an orchard, the variable values may be sick or healthy and an  
              individuals value may change from sick to healthy or vice-versa depending on
              the health   and sickness values of the immediately surrounding trees.  These
              processes provide a rich   family of models for the spread of disease, the
              propagation of knowledge, the   establishment of consensus. The subject of
              interacting particle systems for infinite   populations becomes particularly
              interesting when the system admits distinct equilibria.   The n one important
              issue is to say which (if any) equilibrium a system will converge to,   when
              starting from a given initial configuration. Another important area of research
              is to   describe the distinct equilibria.  If the population is large but
              finite, then although usually   there is only one equilibrium, multiple
              equilibria in the corresponding infinite population   translate into the
              existence of initial configurations for the finite system that take a very  
              long time to reach equilibrium.
