Title       : CAREER: Applications In Capillary Electrophoresis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2000     
File        : a9703142

Award Number: 9703142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Gomez   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, aims to develop  capillary
              electrophoresis as a method for characterizing  noncovalent interactions such
              as host-guest complexation  reactions.  Professor Gomez and his undergraduate
              and master's  level students at California State University at Los Angeles will
               develop metal ion affinity chromatographic supports, immobilize 
              beta-cyclodextrin dimers and small ligands on the surfaces of  capillary
              electrophoresis columns, and prepare capillary coatings  with terminal ligands
              on their surfaces.  Nonaqueous and mixed  solvent capillary electrophoresis
              will be examined to determine  the analytical utility of such systems.  This
              CAREER project will  introduce students to a number of important contemporary
              areas  including surface chemistry, capillary electrophoresis, host-  guest
              complexation reactions, and protein and peptide  separations.  A further
              educational aim will be to raise the  awareness of minority students at the
              middle and high school  levels regarding career opportunities in science.  
              Capillary electrophoresis is being developed as a method to  characterize
              important noncovalent intermolecular interactions  with the support of this
              CAREER research project.  Professor  Gomez is introducing this emerging area of
              separation science to  undergraduate and master's level graduate students with
              emphasis  on practical problem solving applications.  Considerable effort  will
              be invested in the synthesis of molecular structures that  exhibit
              intermolecular interactions of interest when used in  conjunction with
              capillary electrophoresis.  New laboratory and  course experience will be
              provided to these students in this  area.  Efforts will be made to involve
              middle and high school  minority students in activities that encourage their
              interest in  science.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
