Title       : Spectral Behavior of Two Classes of Large Dimensional Random Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9703591

Award Number: 9703591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Silverstein jack@jack.math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703591  Silverstein    The principal investigator plans to work on the behavior
              of eigenvalues of two classes of random matrices, both of sample covariance
              type, where the vector dimension and the sample size are large and on the same
              order of magnitude.  The sampled vectors making up the first class are
              independent, each a linear transformation of a vector containing i.i.d.
              elements, while the second class models the result of perturbing a sample
              covariance (or correlation) matrix with noise added to each sampled vector. 
              For the latter case independence is not assumed on the unperturbed samples. 
              Although both classes have a broad range of applicability, motivation for
              studying them comes from the detection problem in array signal processing, when
              the number of (unknown) sources, impinging on a bank of sensors in a
              noise-filled environment, is sizable.  For both classes the empirical
              distribution function (e.d.f.) of the eigenvalues (as the dimension approaches
              infinity) converges to a nonrandom limit.  Using techniques and arguments
              recently developed to successfully analyze the convergence of individual
              eigenvalues of the first class to boundary points in the limiting support, the
              principal investigator plans to solve two remaining open problems concerning
              this class, namely the rate of convergence of both the e.d.f. and those
              individual eigenvalues, and relaxing independence assumptions.  He also intends
              to study completely the analogous properties of the second class of matrices,
              beginning with understanding analytically the limiting e.d.f., which is
              described in terms of an equation satisfied by its Stieltjes transform.    The
              principal investigator plans to study properties of two classes of random
              matrices of high dimension used in modeling multivariate random phenomena.  The
              motivation stems primarily from the detection problem in array signal
              processing, that is, determining the number of sources impinging on a bank of
              sensors in the presence of noise.  Under certain conditions, when  the number
              of sources is sizable, known results on one of the classes of random matrices
              can be used to reliably estimate the number of sources with the total number of
              measurements much smaller than what is needed according to standard
              multivariate analysis.  The principal investigator intends to study a few
              remaining questions pertaining to this class, and to mathematically analyze
              another class of random matrices which allows for a broader range of
              applications.
