Title       : CAREER: The Folk Theory of Behavior: Implications for Social Perception and
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9703315

Award Number: 9703315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertram F. Malle bfmalle@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the basic problems that people face as social beings is to make sense of
              each other's behavior. This research project investigates how people solve this
              problem. The approach is to understand people's `folk theory of behavior,`
              which refers to the conceptual framework within which people describe, explain,
              and influence human behavior. By studying this `folk theory,` it is expected
              that regularities inherent in communication, interaction, and social
              relationships will be better understood. The theoretical model relies on two
              propositions:(1) that people distinguish between intentional and unintentional
              behavior, and (2) that people explain unintentional behavior by mere causes
              (e.g., inside the person, in the situation), whereas intentional behavior is
              explained with reasons (e.g., beliefs, desires). Initial evidence for these
              propositions has led to an integrative model of folk explanations. This model
              generates numerous implications that are tested in the present research
              program, grouped under four questions:(1) How do people judge intentionality?
              (2) Which behaviors do people attend to? (3) How do people evaluate behavior?
              and (4) How do people explain behavior? To answer these questions the research
              employs multiple methods, including questionnaires, interactive audio-visual
              computer presentations, detailed coding of existing texts (e.g., novels,
              diaries), and observations of dyadic interaction. The aim of this research
              program is to identify key components of people's folk theory of behavior and
              to examine their substantial implications for social perception and social
              interaction. The aim of the associated educational activities is to increase
              awareness, among students and the public, of social perception and interaction
              phenomena and of the principles that govern them.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
