Title       : Integration of Endoscopic Imaging with Interactive, Image-Guided Surgery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9703714

Award Number: 9703714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Jenkins                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168133             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Galloway bob.galloway@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703714  Galloway  The objective of this research is the development of a 
              process for merging Interactive, Image-Guided Surgery (IIGS)  with Minimally
              Invasive Surgery (MIS).  The IIGS is the  display of present surgical position
              and trajectory on  preoperatively obtained tomographic images.  The MIS is a 
              technique by which surgical exposures and damage to healthy  tissues are
              reduced by the use of endoscopes to allow  surgical visualization through small
              openings in the skin.  These two techniques are complementary, MIS presents
              high  magnification, real-time imaging at the cost of a small  depth of field
              and surface-only imaging, while IIGS provides  a wide field of view with
              three-dimensional information but  uses images which do not reflect anatomic
              changes since  their acquisition.  By using the proposed merging process,  both
              the tomographic information and the video input will  appear on the same
              computer screen allowing the surgeon to  use each imaging modality for its
              strength and mitigating  the disadvantages of each.  The combination of these 
              techniques would be accomplished in three steps: (1) the  creation of a device
              which allows the determination of the  visualization geometry of the endoscope
              and the tracking of  that geometry in three-dimensional physical space, (2) the
               design, programming and testing of software to allow the  display of high
              throughout image formation, and (3) the  development of alternatives to
              conventional IIGS display  modes to allow flexibility depending on the nature
              of the  surgical situation.  This process could result in improved  outcomes as
              measured by more complete resections and reduced  damage to healthy tissue. 
              ***
