Title       : CAREER: Optimizing Fiber-Optic Communication Systems Through Analytical Modeling
               of Linear and Nonlinear Signal Degradations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9703347

Award Number: 9703347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maite Brandt-Pearce mb9q@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                  This research pursues the design and analysis of multiuser optical 
              communication systems to increase the performance, distance, and capacity  of
              existing and future systems.  The focus is on  the physical layer -  i.e., the
              actual single fiber links that connect the nodes of large.  The  intense demand
              for more data, voice, and video in and out of every home and  office has led to
              multiuser systems that are typically broadband and high  power, sometimes
              leading to severe linear and nonlinear degradation in the  signal due to
              properties inherent to the fiber.  Mastering these physical  limitations can
              translate into a hundred to thousand fold increase in  capacity of existing
              infrastructure, with a potential savings of billions  of dollars.    The goal
              of this research project is to identify, characterize, and combat  signal
              degradation in fibers, and to use this information to design the  highest
              capacity multiuser systems.  While the physical properties of  fibers have been
              broadly measured and defined, the proper design of fiber  systems to optimize
              signal properties for communications has not been fully  considered.  A tool
              has been developed that provides a method of obtaining  an analytical
              closed-form solution of a nonlinear differential equation  describing the
              propagation of optical signals through silica fiber.  The  result is a Volterra
              model for the fiber which can be used to both quantify  the signal degradation
              due to the fiber and to design algorithms and  devices to combat this effect. 
              The model will be used to analyze the  performance of optical TDMA, CDMA, and
              WDMA networks including realistic  distortions such as intermodulation
              products, intersymbol interference, and  multiple user interference.  This same
              model will then be used to define  signal processing algorithms and
              corresponding nonlinear devices to combat  signal degradation.  The possibility
              of creating a communication system  that uses the soliton waveform in multiuser
              systems will be studied.  Solitons are hi ghly desirable in that they take
              advantage of the nonlinear  fiber effects to cancel pulse dispersion caused by
              linear effects. Finally,  effects such as nonlinear polarization on coherent
              light communication  systems will be analyzed using a modification of our
              Volterra model.    The education portion of this study includes three new
              courses for  improving the instruction of undergraduates and graduates in
              optical  communications and multiuser communication at the University of
              Virginia.  Two courses emphasize development of the optical communication
              system from  the ground up (without relying on the usual RF analog), followed
              by a third  course in multiuser communication, tied directly to this and
              related research.    The primary goal of an educational institution to prepare
              the new  generations for tomorrow can be accomplished only if the institution 
              responds to the needs of the current and future students.  One important 
              aspect of this goal is to respond to the increased interest of women in the 
              field of engineering.  Following her hypothesis that women are socialized  to
              find importance in issues of human and social concern, this researcher  will be
              active in modifying the current methods of teaching engineering to  show the
              link between technical methodology and the resulting products and  services.
              Students will be encouraged to work within well defined groups  that echo the
              work place environment.  Being a female in a field that is in  transition from
              being male dominated carries the responsibility of being a  role model.  Female
              engineering students will be especially encouraged to  participate in a
              mentoring program instituted to promote success, a sense  of belonging and
              strong self esteem.     World-Wide Web Link:
              http://watt.seas.Virginia.EDU/~mb9q/
