Title       : Large-Eddy Simulation of Turbulence Under Sea Ice and ArcticLeads
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9703539

Award Number: 9703539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91381              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Skyllingstad skylling@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 4444,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9703539  Skyllingstad      This research project is a key component of a large,
              coordinated, multi-investigator program called SHEBA (Surface Heat Budget of
              the Arctic) Ocean.  The SHEBA program will simultaneously measure, over an
              annual cycle, the various fluxes and properties of the atmosphere, ice pack,
              and upper ocean that determine the aggregate mass and energy budgets of Arctic
              sea ice.  Its goal is improved understanding of how and to what extent, the ice
              covered Arctic Ocean affects climate variability in lower latitudes and in
              global climate models (GCMs).  Towards that goal, two potentially important
              radiation/climate feedback processes have been singled out for study: 
              Ice-Albedo Feedback and Cloud-Radiation Feedback.      This project represents
              a process modeling effort to examine the detailed turbulent structure of the
              upper ocean under pack ice and leads. The work augments the field work of the
              SHEBA program by providing a method for interpreting and analyzing data taken
              in leads and under the ice pack. Results from this study will help clarify how
              turbulence and sea ice interact in the polar oceans, and will aid in the
              construction of physically-based parameterizations of the ice covered mixed
              layer. A thermodynamic model of sea ice will be coupled to an existing
              three-dimensional ocean large-eddy simulation model that resolves a significant
              portion of the turbulent eddy scales in the mixed layer. The project has three
              main objectives: 1) to determine the temporal and spatial scales of turbulent
              eddies beneath ice and leads, 2) to examine the relationship between ocean
              mixed layer turbulence and sea ice formation and decay, and 3) to quantify the
              role that the mixed layer has as a heat reservoir for the Arctic Ocean. By
              combining the results of the modeling experiments with observations from SHEBA,
              the study will help establish a strong physical understanding of upper ocean
              sea ice processes in the Arctic that can be used to develop and test improved
              parameterizations.
