Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Hamiltonian Systems of Infinite Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9703847

Award Number: 9703847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Kappeler kappeler@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703847    T. Kappeler       1. Hamiltonian systems of infinite dimension:  The
              analysis of   the symplectic structure of the phase space of completely
              integrable   Hamiltonian systems of (in)finite dimension is very useful in the
              study of   Hamiltonian perturbations.   The investigator plans to apply prior
              work on action-angle variables for the  Korteweg-deVries equation (KdV) to
              contribute to the investigation of the  problem of the existence of analytic,
              quasiperiodic (in time) solutions  of Hamiltonian perturbations of KdV or of
              any of the equations in the   KdV hierarchy (KAM type theorem) and to study
              longtime stability of solutions   of perturbed KdV equations (Nekhoroshev-type
              estimates).     Further, the investigator plans to prove, in a generic
              situation, local    existence of (generalized) action-angle variables for a
              large class of   completely integrable Hamiltonian systems of infinite
              dimension.  2. Regularized determinants of elliptic operators:  They appear in
              modern   physics (functional integrals) as well as in geometry and topology
              (torsion,   eta-invariant). The investigator plans to continue his work on
              techniques for   analyzing regularized determinants and their applications to
              geometry and   topology: Torsions for bordism and relative torsion (in the
              usual and the   L2-setting); numerical computations of regularized determinants
              via a   deformation; manifolds of determinant class and representation of the  
              L2-torsion of a closed manifold M as a limit of a sequence of appropriately  
              normalized torsions associated to a sequence of finite covers of M.   3.
              Smoothing of dispersive waves:  Dispersive waves appear in many instances,  
              e.g. in the study of water waves.  The investigator plans to analyze  
              microlocal smoothing properties for a large class of linear and nonlinear  
              systems of dispersive evolution equations of Schroedinger type.      In many
              different applications, such as propagation of signals along   optical fibers
              (telecommunication), analysis of water waves  and currents, and  theoretical
              physics (celestial mechanics, quantum field theory), the basic   underlying
              ideal models turn out to be integrable systems of finite or   infinite
              dimension. To be useful for applications, perturbations of these   ideal models
              have to be studied. Whereas integrable systems of finite   dimension and their
              perturbations are relatively well understood, much  remains to be done in the
              infinite dimensional case.
