Title       : Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9703830

Award Number: 9703830
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Liggett tml@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703830  Liggett   This project involves a number of problems concerning contact
              processes,   exclusion processes, voter models, and reaction diffusion
              processes. The contact process   on a homogeneous tree has two critical values,
              and hence three distinct parameter regions   of interest.  The most important
              from the point of view of this project is the middle one, in   which there is
              weak survival.  In this region, it is proposed to extend Liggett's earlier  
              construction of radially symmetric stationary distributions, and more
              generally, to   investigate the structure of the set of all extremal stationary
              distributions.  One approach   to this proceeds via a conjecture made by him
              concerning the size of a certain growth   parameter.  Another problem is to
              determine the asymptotics of the larger critical value as   the coordination
              number of the tree increases.  Finally, there is the issue of how long it  
              takes for the contact process on a finite part of the tree to die out, and how
              this depends   on the parameter value.  The exclusion process to be considered
              is one dimensional and   asymmetric, and homogeneous except for one bond, which
              is slower than the others.  The   problem is to determine the effect of this
              slow bond on the structure of the set of   stationary distributions.  The
              problems for voter models and reaction diffusion processes   deal with regions
              of ergodicity and nonergodicity.     A significant number of areas of physics
              and biology involve situations in which a large number of agents evolve in time
              in such a way that the evolution of each agent is affected by the states of the
              others.  The agents could be atoms in a crystal, or parasites in a host
              population, for example.  In many of these situations, there is some quantity
              (temperature, say) which affects the way in which the interaction occurs, and
              in many cases, the evolution of the system is changed drastically when this
              quantity changes by a small amount.  The area known as interacting particle
              systems is the branch o f probability theory that studies such issues.  The
              models to be studied in this project are among the more important which arise
              in this area. The contact process is related to spread of infection, exclusion
              processes model particle motion, voter models have a socio-political  
              interpretation, and reaction diffusion processes model systems in which growth
              and   motion both occur.  Stationary distributions are descriptions of the
              possible long time   states of a system.  A main issue for each class of models
              is to determine what these are,   and how their structure depends on the
              quantity which specifies the strength of the   interaction.
