Title       : The Dynamics of Space-Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1999  
File        : a9703480

Award Number: 9703480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78079              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scot R. Adams adams@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal has two main goals.  The first is a systematic development of
              Lorentz dynamics. A major milestone would be a complete description of the
              connected Lie groups that admit a nonproper action on a connected Lorentz
              manifold. In the case of simple Lie groups, there are definitive results due to
              N. Kowalsky, but the non-semisimple case is, for now, wide open.  The second
              main goal of the proposal is to extend known rigidity results from geometry to
              a foliated setting with tangential geometry and with transverse invariant
              measure. Much work in this direction has been done by many mathematicians, but
              the procedures used have often been ad hoc in nature, with a different method
              developed for each individual theorem. The goal here would be to find an
              approach that would systematize the process and that would give, in some cases,
              stronger foliated results than were previously possible.  The proposal has two
              main goals. The first involves understanding the ways in which chaotic dynamics
              can happen in a space-time setting.  It is a tenet of general relativity that
              our universe is a space-time manifold and it should therefore be of some
              interest to know which space-times have a complicated (that is, "chaotic")
              collection of symmetries. The second main goal is to use a combination of some
              sophisticated dynamical machinery and some sophisticated geometric machinery to
              understand a collection of mathematical objects called "foliations."  These
              objects relate to dynamical physics, since the set of trajectories of a flow
              give rise to a foliation. However, in the incarnation that I am using, a
              foliation carries an enormous amount of structure, making it rich in a
              mathematical sense, but probably more complicated than what would be studied
              (currently!) by most scientists outside of mathematics.
