Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Direct Determination of the Metabolic Costs of Activity,
               Including Migration, in Adult Masu and Sockeye Salmon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9703681

Award Number: 9703681
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jill B. K. Leonard jill@cas.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Leonard  9703681    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Jill B.K. Leonard
              at the University of Hokkaido, Abuta,  Japan.  Dr. Leonard will work with Dr.
              Hiroshi Ueda,  Director of the Toya Lake Station, on a research project 
              entitled, "Direct Determination of the Metabolic Costs of  Activity, Including
              Migration, in Adult Masu and Sockeye  Salmon."    The proposed research will
              evaluate the relative metabolic  cost of migration in individual adult Masu and
              Sockeye  salmon in a lacustrine model system.  The migration process  is a
              common, energetically expensive life-history strategy  among animals, and the
              evolution of migration is linked to  their ability to physiologically adapt to
              a heterogeneous  environment.  Migratory fish are ecologically and 
              commercially important species that are dependent upon  successful migration
              for survival, but the energetic cost of  migration - integral to the
              evolutionary development of life-  history strategies - in adult salmonids
              relative to oceanic  life has not been studied in detail.  During the research,
               animals will be radio-tagged with electromyographic  transmitters and the
              activity levels between non-migratory  and migratory periods will be compared. 
              Additionally,  biochemical metabolic and hormonal parameters will be  measured
              in order to describe any direct effects of the  shift from non-migrant to
              migrant and the relationship  between biochemical changes and changes in
              activity will be  determined.  Results of the proposed research will provide 
              the first comprehensive evaluation in a field situation of  the energy required
              for migration relative to non-migratory  activity costs on an individual basis
              in adult salmonids.  ***
