Title       : Complex Analysis and Potential Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9703915

Award Number: 9703915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53904              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Feldman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dmitry Khavinson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT    Khavinson      Using techniques of partial differential
              equations and complex   analysis, Khavinson plans to study several  problems in
                nonlinear pde's, approximation theory and potential theory. He will  study
              the argument principle for solutions of the complex p-Laplace  equation and its
              relation to extremal problems for analytic functions,   qualitative properties
              of the best approximations in the mean by  analytic functions, the reflection
              principle and the "antenna problem",  and an inverse problem for double layer
              potentials.    Most of these problems although stemming from rather classical  
              mathematics will require the arsenal of the modern tools for their   solution
              and, though quite basic in their formulation, have been   resilient to all
              attempts to solve them. All of them have important   ramifications in other
              branches of mathematics and applications,   e.g. the "antenna problem" deals
              with the search for a best possible  "receiving" antenna for cylindrical waves
              beyond an obstacle, research   on double layer potentials would allow one to
              characterize the class   of plane curves and data for which one can solve the
              most important   boundary value problem - the Dirichlet problem - by direct
              formulae   involving the integrals of the double layer vs. standard procedures.
               Khavinson will work in these projects in collaboration  with three graduate
              students which should have a strong positive   impact on the graduate program
              and human-resource development  in Arkansas.
