Title       : CAREER: Image Metrics for Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9703265

Award Number: 9703265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Turk turk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the use of perceptually-motivated  image metrics
              across a range of important applications in  computer graphics.  A wide variety
              of tasks in computer graphics  assume some measure of similarity in appearance
              between two  images.  Such tasks include level-of-detail generation, raster 
              font design, cartographic element placement, texture synthesis  and shape
              transformation.  Too often the metrics used in such  work are poor at
              reflecting what a human would visually perceive  for the given task.  This
              project will re-visit several areas  within computer graphics and will apply
              visually-based metrics to  a number of applications with the goal of producing
              better  images.    Replacing the techniques that are used in existing
              applications  with perceptually-based measures of image similarity has the 
              potential to improve the results in a wide range of important  applications. 
              Applications that can benefit from the use of  image metrics include:    -
              Simulators for pilot and driver training.    - Computer aided design of
              mechanical parts.    - Automated map-making.    - Raster font creation.    -
              Interactive walkthroughs of large building interiors for  architectural review 
                - Comparison between "model" organs and the MRI or CT data of a  medical
              patient    - Vector and tensor field visualization for applications such as 
              weather prediction and stress/strain simulations of mechanical  and
              architectural structures.    This project will investigate using techniques
              from image  processing and computer vision to help define image metrics for 
              particular tasks.  Some of the properties that these metrics may  incorporate
              are: sensitivity to edge strength and orientation,  frequency responses at a
              number of scales, relative rather than  absolute measures of intensity and
              color within an image, and the  masking effects that noise has on perception. 
              Once a metric  is defined, an optimization procedure will be used to minimize 
              the differences between the generated image or geom etry and the  target
              object.  The choice of optimization technique will depend  on the application
              and on the form of the image metric.  Computationally expensive optimization
              methods may be acceptable  for off-line tasks.  Where speed is essential,
              heuristics may be  suggested by observations of the optimization routine while
              it is  executing.    The educational goals of this project are to introduce
              both  undergraduate and graduate students to computer science research,  to
              expose the community outside of academia to important  applications of computer
              graphics, and to disseminate the  programs, libraries and datasets that are
              developed by this  project to other researchers worldwide.  Students will be 
              involved in research both through the computer graphics classes  that are being
              developed and by working within a research group.  ***
