Title       : CAREER: Vibrational-State Selected Studies of Gas-Surface Reactions: Strategies
               for Chemical Control of Gas-Surface Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2000  
File        : a9703392

Award Number: 9703392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. Utz autz@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9161,9178,AMPP,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In this CAREER project supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry  
              Program of the Chemistry Division, Arthur Utz of Tufts University will   use
              supersonic molecular-beam techniques, infrared laser excitation of   gas-phase
              reagents, and ultrahigh vacuum surface characterization to   elucidate the role
              of vibrational energy, both alone and in combination   with translational
              energy, in promoting the reactivity of gas-phase   molecules incident on a
              solid surface.  Experiments will probe the   dissociative chemisorption of
              methane on a Ni(111) surface.  The   educational goal of this project is to
              stress the importance of active   learning.  For chemistry majors this will be
              accomplished through student   participation in original research, providing a
              hands-on experience that   should lead to a deeper and more lasting
              understanding of important   concepts and skills.  Cooperative learning methods
              and open-ended   laboratories incorporated into the curriculum should produce a
              similar   result for all the students enrolled in chemistry courses.  Other  
              educational methods, such as public information forums targeted at the  
              non-scientist, will help convey the importance of chemistry outside of   the
              classroom.  Comparing the reactivity of methane excited with different amounts
              of   vibrational energy will identify the nuclear motions most effective at  
              promoting chemical reaction and will help explain the molecular basis for   the
              dissociation of methane following adsorption on an ordered metal   surface. 
              These results have practical importance in understanding   materials
              deposition, semiconductor device fabrication, and heterogeneous   catalysis
              processes used in the chemical industry, and will help   understand how to
              improve the yields of desired products and reduce the   levels of unwanted
              byproducts.  The educational component of this work   should increase the level
              of understanding of chemistry for both   specialists and the general public and
              demonstrate the effectiveness of   such approaches to scientists in other
              fields.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
