Title       : CPMSA -- TEAMS - Teachers Emphasizing Achievement in Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a9703961

Award Number: 9703961
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3596068            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Burke burkej@sps.springfield.ma.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Negroni  (Principal Investigator former)
              Teresa Regina  (Principal Investigator former)
              Linda Y. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Erline Provost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Springfield Public Schools
	      195 State Street, Box 1410
	      Springfield, MA  011021410    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Peter Negroni  TEAMS  (Teachers  Emphasizing  Achievement  in  Mathematics 
              and Science) is an integrated, research based and systemic  five  year plan 
              designed by the Springfield (MA) Public  Schools to increase the  number  of 
              minority  students enrolling in and  successfully completing  precollege
              courses which will prepare them  to  pursue undergraduate  degree programs in
              the  sciences,  engineering  and mathematics.  The project  objectives have
              been developed to  meet this primary  goal.    1 .   To  increase  each year
              and by the end  of  the     five year project  to  increase  by  a factor of   
               three  the number  of minority students who     successfully complete Algebra
              in the 9th grade;       2. To  increase each year and by the end of the five   
               year project period  to increase by a factor of     two the number of 
              minority students  taking     advanced science, mathematics and  technology    
              course work, including honors and advanced     placement courses;       3. To 
              increase  the  number  and percent  of     minority students electing  to 
              enroll  in  the     High  School  of  Science  and     Technology by 5% per
              year for each of the five  project                       years;                
                         4. To  begin tracking the number of students     electing to major
              in SMET  courses  of  study     beyond high school with  the  first project    
              year as baseline data and to increase the     number  each subsequent year;    
                5. By  the  end of the five year project period,     to increase the number
              of minority group     teachers in mathematics, science  and     technology;    
                6. To  reduce the academic achievement gaps     between minority and
              non-minority students in     science and math by 5% per year  for five    
              years (with a total reduction of 25% by the     end  of  the five year project
              period);       7. For each project year, to improve the     instructional
              methods of math and science     teachers who receive training; and       8. To
              develop SMET pac kets of math/science  activities.    The TEAMS strategy
              complements the district's  dual philosophy  of increasing minority college 
              enrollment and increasing the  number of  students  excelling in math, science
              and  technology.                TEAMS will  involve  all 42  Springfield
              schools and will capitalize  on the  strong partnerships established by the 
              Springfield  Public Schools with the business,  higher education, social
              services  and minority  neighborhood communities.  Working  with  faculty from
              nearby   Hampshire  College  and  the  Five  College Partnership (Amherst,  Mt.
               Holyoke, Smith, Hampshire and U/Mass  Amherst)  , major project activities
              will involve:    Upgrading  teacher knowledge and skills in  summer  workshops
              and with continuous support  throughout the year;    Working  with  students to
              develop their  own  science  and math projects  which  they  will  conduct in
              the  manner  of authentic  researchers;    Providing  mentors, speakers and
              field trips  to  encourage more minority students to enter math  and science
              career fields;    Establishing  neighborhood  Math/Science  Education  Centers
              to  assist all students to be successful in their  Disseminating summer
              math/science booklets to  assist all students to  be  successful  in these 
              courses and to courses by  offering tutoring,  help with homework and SAT
              Preparation;  reinforce  what has  been  learned during the  previous school 
              year  as  well  as prepare  for   the upcoming  year;  Instituting 
              Math/Science  Expositions  where  students will present the  results  of their
              extended projects.  This will  be City-wide and follow a format of authentic 
              research presentations;    Placing  advertisements/PSA's  on local  television 
              stations  to showcase  what  students  are  doing  in  math and  science  and
              featuring  people employed in careers requiring math and  science;    Exposing
              students to real-world math and science  with projects at local college
              laboratories and  exposure to career options in SMET fiel ds:    Increasing  
              parental  involvement  by  assisting   with summer projects/activities, 
              increasing attendance at the Expositions and  attendance at Family Math and
              Science nights;    Educating  administrators and counselors to  encourage and
              assist minority  students  in  participating in higher  level  math  and
              science courses and providing  the necessary help in enrolling  in college in 
              SMET fields; and    Providing a summer experience for students at  the end of
              Grade  5 and Grade 8.
