Title       : Impurity Effects in Superfluid Helium Three
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9703575

Award Number: 9703575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Halperin w-halperin@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703575  Halperin    High resolution nuclear resonance (NMR) experiments on
              helium 3 are  proposed in order to study the normal and superfuid helium 3
              states.  Temperature dependent NMR frequency shifts in the normal state will be
               investigated as a function of magnetic field in order to identify their 
              origin which appears to be of fundamental significance.  High resolution  NMR
              experiments and heat capacity measurements will be performed on  superfluid
              helium 3 aerogels to understand the effects of impurities  introduced by the
              aerogel into this important superfluid system.  Close  interaction with
              theoretical work should allow us to establish the extent  to which anisotropic
              scattering models can account for our observations.  The basic tools that we
              propose to use are low temperature nuclear  demagnetization techniques to
              prepare samples of helium 3 imbibed into  highly porous silica aerogel.  The
              transition to superfluidity and the  strength of the order parameter and energy
              gap will be determined mainly  by nuclear magnetic resoncnce methods,
              complemented by acoustic  excitation of order parameter collective modes,
              thermal conductivity, and  heat capacity measurements.  %%%  The proposed work
              will further our understanding of a broad class of  materials of considerable
              interest in condensed matter physics and of  importance to a wide range of
              applications involving superconductivity.  The study of impurity  effects on
              the suppression of the transition  temperature for superfluidity in helium 3
              will give important insight  into the unusual superfluid behavior in helium 3
              as well as for other  similar Superconducting systems.  New phases and unusual
              properties  concerning the impurity helium 3 problem have recently  been
              discovered  by several groups including our own at Northwestern.  The
              impurities can  be introduced in the helium 3 using very dilute aerogel.  The
              aerogel  consists of tenuous strands of silica polymer of very high porosity. 
              The  helium 3 impurity problem is a model for un derstanding the limitations 
              and basic properties of new classes of superconducting materials  including
              high temperature superconductors.  The proposed work is also  relevant to the
              behavior of neutron matter in the cores of neutron stars.  These systems all
              have the common  important  characteristic of  spontaneously broken symmetries
              beyond gauge symmetry which is itself  responsible for the superfluid behavior.
               As such they are all extremely  sensitive to impurity effects which must be
              investigated if the basic  behavior of these systems is to be understood and if
              the potential for  their application is to be realized.  This situation is
              particularly  relevant to the case of the high temperature superconductors for
              which  the proposed work can be viewed as a paradigm.  ***
