Title       : Synthesis and Conformational Analysis of Novel Carbohydrate and Polypeptide
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9703652

Award Number: 9703652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. O'Leary doleary@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexader Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    714/621-8131

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Daniel J. O'Leary, of   the
              Department of Chemistry at Pomona College, with a Research in   Undergraduate
              Institutions award for his studies of the synthesis and   conformational
              analysis of novel carbohydrate and polypeptide structures.    Working with
              undergraduate researchers, Professor O'Leary investigates   the pattern of
              hydrogen bonding networks in partially isotopically   exchanged diols designed
              to form intramolecular hydrogen bonds, using NMR   isotopic perturbation
              techniques and appropriate theoretical analysis to   reveal hydrogen bonds and
              their arrays.  In order to probe the extent to   which long-range interactions
              help stabilize or destabilize carbohydrate   conformations in solution,
              Professor O'Leary synthesizes oligosaccharides   as models for hyaluronic acid
              and examines their conformational   preferences.  Synthesis of carbocyclic
              analogs of malformin A1, a   bicyclic pentapeptide containing a cyclo-cystine
              structural element,   helps to address the unusual conformational behavior of
              this naturally   occurring substance.  Professor Daniel J. O'Leary, of the
              Department of Chemistry at Pomona   College, is supported by the Organic
              Synthesis Program with a Research in   Undergraduate Institutions award for his
              studies of the three-dimensional   shapes (conformations) of biologically
              relevant molecules in solution.    Through the synthesis of comparatively
              simple model compounds and the use   of nuclear magnetic resonance techniques,
              Professor O'Leary probes the   factors controlling the specific shapes adopted
              by these molecules and,   by inference, the larger molecules for which they
              serve as models.  These   studies, carried out by undergraduate researchers,
              are expected to answer   questions regarding the effects of various groupings
              of atoms within   molecules on their conformational behavior, an issue of
              fundamental   importance in a wide range of fields, from biology to physical
              chemistry.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
