Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9703705

Award Number: 9703705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald S. Richards drichards@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 ABSTRACT      Richards      Richards will continue his program of research on
               hypergeometric functions defined on matrix spaces and on  symmetric cones. 
              Special attention will be paid to the theory of  operator-valued hypergeometric
              functions on the symmetric cones.  In the second part of the project the
              principal investigator  will continue his research on applications of these
              special  functions, and general techniques in harmonic analysis and 
              representation theory, to the areas of multivariate statistics,  total
              positivity, probability inequalities, and related  combinatorial problems.     
               Richards is interested in research problems Modern Analysis, a   subfield of
              mathematics, for two reasons. First, Modern Analysis   is an important branch
              of mathematics with fundamental links to   astronomy, chemistry, physics,
              statistics, as well as to other   areas of mathematics.  Richards primary
              expertise in Modern Analysis   is in the study of new classes of hypergeometric
              functions which  generalize the classical theory developed by Euler, Gauss,
              Bessel,   Ramanujan and many other famous scientists. Second, the principal  
              investigator is interested in these new types of hypergeometric   functions
              because of their fundamental importance in multivariate   statistics.  The
              research program will study these new hypergeometric   functions and their
              properties with the aim of finding solutions   to unsolved statistical problems
              which are of importance to applied   researchers in medical and environmental
              fields.
