Title       : CAREER:Reaction Dynamics of Polymerization and a Computer- Enhanced Dialectic in
               the Physical Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9703372

Award Number: 9703372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rigoberto Hernandez hernandez@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting   Professor
              Rigoberto Hernandez at the Georgia Institute of Technology as   part of the
              CAREER program for young scientists.  The objective of this   research is to
              characterize the time-dependent behavior of the   polymerization process.  A
              bond percolation model on a novel lattice has   been combined with an
              Ising-like Polymer Growth Hamiltonian (PGH) to   provide non-uniform and
              correlated bond formation/breaking probabilities.    It includes the pertinent
              reaction dynamics, but is simple enough to   accommodate the Monte Carlo
              treatment of high (long-length) polymers.   A   new stochastic Hamiltonian has
              been built around the potential of mean   force for the effective polymer
              `contour` length.  The change of the   macroscopic properties of the polymer as
              its length increases is included   through an effective friction which
              explicitly depends on this length.    Further study of the dynamics of this
              Hamiltonian, as well as its   connection to the polymer-growth lattice
              Hamiltonian, should provide   increased understanding of the connection between
              the monomer properties   and reaction conditions, and of the resulting material
              properties of the   polymer as a function of time.  Hard plastics, chewing gum,
              glues, proteins and coatings are but a few   examples of the diverse range of
              polymeric materials which have driven   the polymer industry.  Surprisingly,
              these materials are often obtained   from the same base monomers, varying only
              reaction conditions and   relative composition.  What existing theories often
              leave out in their   characterization of the final product is an understanding
              of the reaction   dynamics when viscous effects affect the reaction process. 
              This is   important in thermoset polymers used in the encapsulation of
              microchips;   the polymerization ends not because the reactants have been
              depleted, but   because of diffusional quenching due to the dramatic change in
              viscosity   as a function of the extent of reaction.  The goal in this research
               is   to understand the competition between the reactivity of the polymer and  
              changes in the material's viscosity as a function of temperature and   reaction
              profile.  The educational component of this proposal comprises   the
              development of a new physical chemistry course and a companion   web-based
              textbook, both of which emphasize the connection between   theoretical
              understanding and physical intuition.  The course will also   use various
              electronic forms of communication.  It is hoped that this   computer-enhanced
              dialectic (CED) will provide ample opportunity for the   student to learn not
              only how to answer questions, but also how to ask   the right ones.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
