Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: A Mid-Infrared Investigation of Mass Loss
               from Evolved Stars at High Spatial Resolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9703665

Award Number: 9703665
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory C. Sloan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,5912,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703665  Sloan      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support an eighteen-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Gregory C. Sloan to work with Dr.  Craig
              Hamilton Smith at University College at the University  of New South Wales in
              Canberra, Australia.  Twelve months of  this research will be supported by the
              International  Research Fellow Awards Program, and six months will be 
              supported by the U.S.-Australia Program.    Drs. Sloan and Smith will study
              late stages of stellar  evolution using a combination of high-resolution
              imaging,  long-slit spectroscopy, and polarimetry in the thermal  infrared.   
              As stars die, they shed most of their mass back into the  interstellar medium
              as they evolve into planetary nebulae  and supernovae.  As this material moves
              away, it cools,  allowing dust grains to condense out.  This circumstellar 
              dust represents the connection between one generation of  stars and the next. 
              Increasing our knowledge of the life-  cycle of circumstellar and interstellar
              dust is critical to  understanding how planets form around other stars, and
              even  how life itself might form.  Sloan and Miller will observe  several
              evolved sources using direct imaging, long-slit  spectroscopy, polarimetric
              imaging and spectropolarimetry.  Results of this research will be high-quality
              images and  spatially resolved spectra of the dust around several  extended and
              evolved stars, from which they will be able to  determine the geometry and
              chemistry of the mass-loss  process.  The polarimetric imaging and
              spectropolarimetry  will provide information about magnetic field strengths and
               distributions which can be compared with theory to assess  the importance of
              magnetic fields in regulating the dust  forma tion process.  One of the
              instruments they will use,  Smith's NIMPOL Imaging Polarimeter is the only
              instrument of  its type in the world.  ***
