Title       : Log Domain Filtering For Low-Voltage High-Frequency Integrated Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9703773

Award Number: 9703773
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Frey drf3@LEHIGH.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The wireless and high speed data communications industry is driven by the
              ability  to achieve high levels of integration in electronics.  The ever
              increasing  circuit complexity and demands to reduce power consumption have
              pushed available  technology to its limits.  These limits have been acceptable
              in the case of the  circuitry needed to realize the digital signal processing
              functions, but these  same limits are not at the threshold of compromising the
              performance of the  necessary analog signal processing circuitry which must be
              exist at the front end  of most systems.  The research here involves the
              development of a new concept in  the design of this analog circuitry that
              allows very low voltage operation of  high frequency circuits.  The "Log
              Domain" filters studied here permit the  development of next generation
              electronics that will operate using less power,  which translates, for example,
              to fewer batteries in portable equipment.    Log Domain, and more generically
              Exponential State Space (ESS), filters are the  result of a new paradigm in
              linear filter synthesis.  Specifically, the  nonlinearity of the transistors
              which comprise the active circuitry is designed  explicitly into the circuit
              formulation.  The investigators are studying the  mathematics of this design
              approach more fully so as to improve our understanding  of these circuits. 
              This research effort explores the effects of transistor  parasitics, such a
              finite beta, Early effect, and bulk resistance, on Log Domain  filter
              performance.  In addition, the state space mappings used to generate the 
              design equations for these filters are being studied to generalize the 
              formulation to include both class A and class AB filters.  Results on noise and
               distortion performance of these filters is also being examined.  Finally, the 
              practical performance of these filters is being investigated using a test IC 
              fabricated by Analog Devices, Inc.
