Title       : Rigidity of Actions of Higher Rank Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9703770

Award Number: 9703770
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86717              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Margulis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nantian Qian  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Actions of  connected semi-simple Lie groups and their discrete groups on
              compact manifolds reflect in many ways the properties of the groups. When the
              groups are of higher real rank, local rigidity and superrigidity of the groups
              often contribute to the corresponding properties for actions of the groups. It
              is conjectured that to some extent, all ergodic, volume-preserving actions of
              higher rank lattices can be built up from a list of standard actions: (a)
              actions by isometries on Riemannian manifolds, (2) actions on compact
              nilmanifolds by automorphisms, and (3) actions on homogeneous spaces by left
              translations. In particular, Anatole Katok, James Lewis, and Robert Zimmer
              conjectured that for any higher rank lattice action, there is a smooth
              invariant connection on an open dense set. The objectives of this research are
              to establish the local rigidity of the standard actions and to establish the
              algebraicity of group actions under favorable conditions. The investigator will
              employ Zimmer's cocycle superrigidity  to establish the rigidity properties of
              the actions in measurable tangential level. Then he will apply dynamical
              systems techniques to obtain the rigidity properties in topological tangential
              level. The transition from topological tangential level to smooth level --
              which is the key step to his objectives -- will rely on the use of techniques
              from dynamical systems, Lie theory and representation theory, ergodic theory,
              harmonic analysis and differential geometry.  Another goal of his research is
              to find smooth invariant connections for the group actions.    A group action,
              when preserving some appropriate structures, is a part of the group of
              symmetries of the object on which they act. One anticipates that the object is
              in some sense regular if there are sufficiently many symmetries of the object.
              One may further imagine that if the symmetries have many relations, there is no
              way to deform the object and keep those symmetries.  The proposed research
              takes the objects to be manifolds. T he researcher investigates essentially two
              problems. The first is to find the structure for the symmetries when there are
              many symmetries. The second is to identify the symmetries for which the
              manifolds cannot be deformed.  The significance is to provide unified
              approaches to the research of the rigidity of group actions, develop new
              methods to tackle the often encountered problems in this field of research, and
              ultimately establish that under certain conditions, a higher rank group action
              must be a part of the group of symmetries for a structure (so-called
              connection).
