Title       : Pattern Formation in Two and Three Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9703684

Award Number: 9703684
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar Knobloch   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703684  Knobloch    This project will involve the study of bifurcations and
              pattern formation in   systems with symmetry. Such systems arise naturally in a
              variety of   applications. The proposal focuses on the study of the
              consequences of   weak system symmetry--breaking perturbations for pattern
              formation in two   and three dimensions. In doing so it seeks to identify those
              aspects of   equivariant dynamics that are robust under symmetry-breaking  
              "imperfections". The approach promises to extend the applicability of  
              equivariant bifurcation theory to more realistic situations and is an  
              important step towards a theory of pattern formation in two and three  
              dimensions. Applications to a number of continuum systems are envisaged,  
              including pattern formation by the Faraday and Turing instabilities, and  
              acoustically driven shape oscillations of drops and bubbles.    This project
              will involve the study of the spontaneous formation of structure   in systems
              with symmetry. Such systems occur naturally in a variety of   applications, and
              may reflect the geometry of the system or a convenient   idealization.
              Symmetries are known to have a profound effect on the typical   behavior of the
              system. Near onset the process of structure or pattern   formation can be
              described by simplified equations called amplitude   equations. The form of
              these equations is dictated by the symmetries of the   system. Often the
              symmetries constrain these equations to such an extent   that only one
              possibility exists. The analysis of the resulting equations then   provides a
              complete understanding of the structure formation process, and   can be used to
              predict the type of structure that will form as the parameters   of the system
              are varied. Since in nature the assumed symmetries are   usually an
              idealization the proposal seeks to identify those aspects of the   structure
              formation process that are insensitive to small symmetry-breaking  
              imperfections, i.e., it seeks to identify those aspects that are robust. The a
              im   of the proposal is thus to extend the applicability of this type of theory
              to   realistic problems in both two and three dimensions. As examples of this  
              approach we shall study pattern formation in vibration-induced surface   waves,
              structure formation in chemical and biological systems via the   Turing
              instability, and the patterns on the surface of an acoustically excited   drop
              or bubble. An understanding of these relatively simple systems is a  
              prerequisite for extending the techniques to more complex systems.
