Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: A Networked Computing Environment for The
               Manipulation and Visualization of Geometric Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9703080

Award Number: 9703080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1226381            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence B. Wolff wolff@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yair Amir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Subodh Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Yarowsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell H. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Rao Kosaraju  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Goodrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Tamassia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-9703080  Wolf, Lawrence  Johns Hopkins University    A Networked Computing
              Environment for the Manipulation and Visualization of Geometric Data    This
              award is for the acquisition of an infrastructure for geometric computing
              providing a unified environment for five research laboratories in the
              Department of Computer Science at Johns Hopkins University (and one researcher
              at Brown University) having a large commonality in interests.  This
              infrastructure will be used primarily as follows: The Center for Geometric
              Computation will be developing an interactive interface for geometric
              computation over the internet which will be used by the participating research
              laboratories and made available to other laboratories; the Computer Graphics
              Laboratory will focus on interactive visualization of large and complex
              geometric environments which also includes efficient utilization of network and
              distribute computing resources; the Computer Vision Laboratory is working on
              computational techniques for the visualization of the differential geometry of
              surfaces, visualizing and matching of signatures for Automatic Target
              Recognition, and real-time image understanding techniques for medical imaging; 
              The Computer Integrated Surgery Laboratory will be conducting a number of
              projects in medical robotics including the development of techniques for
              minimally invasive surgery using navigation and guidance during neurosurgery
              and lung surgery, and, image and model registration techniques that use various
              2D imaging modalities.  The Natural Language Processing Laboratory will be
              studying document-space visualization in a high-dimensional space for
              information retrieval as well as clustering algorithms for high-dimensional
              word and document spaces.
