Title       : Multidimensional Diffusions and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9703891

Award Number: 9703891
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth J. Williams williams@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9703891  Williams   A number of mathematical problems for multidimensional
              diffusions arising in   applications are being studied. These are grouped under
              three headings. (i) Approximation   of multiclass queueing networks in heavy
              traffic. Most queueing network models cannot   be analyzed exactly and must be
              approximated by more tractable models. A certain class   of diffusion
              processes, known as reflecting Brownian motions, have been shown to  
              approximate heavily loaded single class and some multiclass queueing networks.
              However,   currently there is no general limit theorem to justify such
              approximations for heavily   loaded multiclass queueing networks with feedback.
              Although it is known that such   approximations do not hold in complete
              generality, the PI seeks to identify broad classes   of multiclass networks for
              which they do hold and to provide limit theorems to support   such
              approximations. (ii) Long run behavior of reflecting Brownian motions. For the 
               purpose of obtaining approximate measures of performance for queueing network
              models   and as a problem of intrinsic mathematical interest, it is natural to
              consider the long run   behavior of reflecting Brownian motions. In particular,
              conditions for positive recurrence   of semimartingale reflecting Brownian
              motions are being sought by study of a related   deterministic dynamical
              system. (iii) Stochastic differential equations with   discontinuous/degenerate
              coefficients and applications to nonlinear time series. The need   for
              nonlinear models in time series analysis has become increasingly apparent in
              recent   years. Continuous time models can greatly facilitate the analysis of
              irregularly spaced data.   A useful class of nonlinear continuous time models
              are the continuous time threshold   autoregressive models. These are defined by
              stochastic differential equations with a   discontinuous and degenerate
              diffusion coefficient. A compelling problem for future use of   these models is
              to resolve the problem of uniqueness for solutio ns of these equations when  
              the order of the model is larger than two. This problem, as well as
              multivariate versions of   it, are being studied.  Multidimensional diffusions
              processes are used as stochastic models in a wide   variety of applications in
              the physical, biological, engineering and social sciences.   Motivated by such
              applications, a number of mathematical problems for diffusions are   being
              studied. As an illustrative example, queueing networks are of current relevance
              for   analyzing congestion and delay in computer systems, communication
              networks and   complex manufacturing systems. These networks may process more
              than one class of   customer or job (e.g., voice, video and data may pass
              through each node in a   communication network), have complex feedback
              structures (e.g., as in reentrant lines for   semiconductor wafer fabrication)
              and are frequently heavily loaded. In general such   models cannot be analyzed
              exactly and one is naturally led to seek tractable   approximations, such as
              multidimensional diffusions. A challenging mathematical question   here is when
              is such an approximation valid? Results of recent years have revealed this to  
              be a complex issue for multiclass networks with feedback. This question and
              others for   multidimensional diffusions are being pursued under this grant.
