Title       : Valley Geometry Seminar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9703485

Award Number: 9703485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Cox   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan H. Durfee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Sipe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eduardo H. Cattani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Five Colleges Inc
	      97 Sprint Street
	      Amherst, MA  010022324    /   -

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Abstract for "Valley Geometry Seminar" (DMS-9703485) The purpose of this grant
              is to support the activities of the Valley Geometry Seminar.  We interpret
              "geometry" broadly to include algebraic geometry, differential geometry,
              symplectic geometry, differential topology, arithmetic geometry, geometric
              topology, and related areas.  Our principal activity is a weekly series of
              talks given by local speakers or experts from other colleges and universities. 
              Some semesters, the seminar will concentrate on a special topic.  Possible
              topics we will pursue in coming semesters include the Langlands program, toric
              varieties and mirror symmetry, and real algebraic geometry. The participants in
              the Valley Geometry Seminar come from Amherst College, Mount Holyoke College,
              Smith College, and the University of Massachusetts.  The purpose of the seminar
              is to give local mathematicians working in different areas of geometry the
              chance to speak about their recent work to an audience of sympathetic peers. 
              Also, by bringing in outside experts, we get to hear about recent developments
              in geometry.  The seminar is a crucial part of the research atmosphere for the
              geometers in our area.  Also, we have structured the seminar so that the talks
              are really useful.  Rather than the usual one-hour lecture, we encourage
              speakers to give a two-part talk, separated by a short break.  The first part
              consists of motivations and examples-the seminar members get to see the "big
              picture" of how the topic being discussed fits into the larger framework of
              contemporary research.  The second part of the talk then gives the technical
              details, for in mathematics, you not only have to discover something
              interesting, but you also have to be able to give an airtight proof.  Hence the
              second part is a necessary complement to the first part of the talk.  We find
              this format very useful and most of our speakers adopt this format.  Finally,
              some semesters we concentrate on a specific topic.  This means that some (but
              not all) of the talks conc ern aspects of the same topic.  In this way we can
              get some real depth in our understanding of the topic.
