Title       : Degenerate Stochastic Systems and Related Problems in Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9703596

Award Number: 9703596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92741              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salah-Eldin A. Mohammed salah@sfde.math.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703596  Mohammed    The investigator will continue his collaborative work with
              Denis Bell on the study   of degenerate stochastic differential equations and
              related problems in linear and   quasilinear second-order partial differential
              equations. The proposed research falls into   three parts. Part I deals with
              degenerate diffusions and their impact on linear partial   differential
              equations. In their recent work, the investigators have proved a very general  
              Hormander-type hypoellipticity theorem for second-order linear partial
              differential   operators. The hypotheses of this theorem allow Hormander's
              general Lie algebra   condition to fail at an optimal exponential rate on
              smooth hypersurfaces in Euclidean   space. Such operators have been termed
              superdegenerate. The investigators will establish   the existence of smooth
              solutions to the Dirichlet and Neumann problems associated with  
              superdegenerate operators. In Part II, the investigators will study the
              existence of smooth   densities for a wide class of degenerate stochastic
              hereditary equations. They will seek to   use their methods to establish
              hypoellipticity of the corresponding operators. In addition   to solving an
              infinite-dimensional hypoellipticity problem (apparently the first of its
              kind),   the estimates obtained here should lead to the  existence of a
              Lyapunov spectrum in   probability for singular hereditary systems. In Part
              III, they will use their methods to study   quasilinear second-order partial
              differential operators with superdegenerate principal parts.   These operators
              are closely related to superdiffusions. The objective of this part of the  
              research is to seek classical smooth positive solutions of the quasilinear
              Cauchy, Dirichlet,   and Neumann problems associated with such operators.  
              This research deals with two important problem areas that arise in physics and 
               engineering. The first area concerns an important class of mathematical
              models, called   partial differential equations, that are fundamental obje cts
              in modern day pure and applied   mathematics. These equations arose from the
              study of heat conduction, electrical   potential, and fluid flow. Partial
              differential equations have important connections with   several areas of
              mathematics, in particular probability theory and geometry. The second   area
              is devoted to a class of models that are used in physics, engineering and
              biology in   order to analyze dynamical systems whose evolution is influenced
              by random fluctuations   and past history. These models are very important in a
              variety of diverse areas ranging   from signal processing, stock market
              fluctuations, economic and labor models, aircraft   dynamics, materials with
              memory, and population dynamics. The investigators will use the   most current
              probabilistic techniques in order to develop a deeper understanding of these  
              models.
