Title       : CAREER: Monolayer Templated Growth of Organic Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9703102

Award Number: 9703102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guangzhao Mao gzmao@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9102,9161,9178,9231,AMPP,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9703102    This Career project investigates alternative
              interfacial chemical approach to crystal growth using monolayer templates.
              Morphological control is extremely important in the synthesis and processing of
              organic crystals, especially those with anisotropic electronic, optical,
              conductive, and electromagnetic properties.  Molecular-level model compounds
              are largely lacking in current approaches to crystal growth.  One class of
              polymethine dyes is well suited for such models, due to its (1) dichroic
              optical properties, (2) morphological sensitivity to interfacial forces, (3)
              J-aggregates and energy transfer within, and (4) functions in color photography
              and recording, as well as in ultra-fast lasers and strongly enhanced nonlinear
              optics.  The structure and morphology of organic crystals are determined by a
              delicate force balance of van der Waals, Coulombic, hydrogen bonding, and
              electron orbital forces.  Preliminary results have shown: (1) the polymethine
              crystal displays strong optical anisotropy; (2) its structure is sensitive to
              minor steric changes; and (3) its morphology is sensitive to substrate
              hydrophobicity.  It is possible to control crystal morphology by changing the
              nuclei attachment energy using monolayer templates with varying affinities to
              different crystal faces.  The goal of the proposed research is to grow organic
              crystals with uniform optical properties by controlling their microstructure
              and orientation at the substrate surface.    The principle of monolayer
              templated crystal growth is that the interfacial energy and specific binding
              sites enhance the attachment of similar crystal faces and inhibit the others. 
              In the following figure, crystal orientation can be achieved by using surface
              groups with different affinities to the faces of the crystal, and the crystal
              size can be limited by lattice mismatch and micro-domains in mixed monolayers.
              Solid-bound self-assembled and liquid-bound Langmuir monolayers are used as
              crystal growth templates.  Self-assembly  of silanes modifies the silica
              substrate by incorporating terminal groups of different critical surface
              tensions and degrees of electrophilicity.  The charge resonance and electron
              donor/receptor interactions have been suggested to be the origin of the
              spectral red-shift in J-aggregates.  Monolayers formed at the air/water
              interface of mixed custom-made chromophore-containing amphiphiles and regular
              amphiphiles are used to study comparatively the specific interaction between
              conjugated dye functional groups.    A combined approach of spectroscopic and
              microscopic methods is used to characterize the monolayer/crystal complex at
              the molecular level and in situ.  Real-time investigation of the microstructure
              and interfacial bonding development of dye crystals on monolayer templates will
              be carried out by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and Fourier transform infrared
              spectroscopy (FTIR).  In addition, the monolayer structure and surface energy
              are determined by a combination of contact angle, FTIR, AFM imaging and
              pull-off force measurements.  The crystal structure and optical properties are
              determined by AFM, polarized optical microscopy, and UV-vis spectroscopy with
              the aid of computer-generated three dimensional models.    Experimental results
              from the proposed research are expected to contribute to the field in the
              following ways: (1) functionalizing organic monolayers for crystal growth; (2)
              obtaining uniform optical properties by template-induced orientation of crystal
              faces; (3) understanding optoelectronic properties of dye crystals and
              J-aggregates based on microstructural study; (4) observing and understanding
              early stages of crystallization; and (5) assisting the development of
              photographic sensitizing dyes with versatile and new properties.  In
              conclusion, this program proposes an alternative chemical approach to rational
              design and assembly of organic thin films and crystals based on molecular level
              interactions and characterization.  It pursues the functionalization of organic
              thin films  as templates for crystal growth of an important class of materials.
               It has the potential of understanding the molecular principles behind the
              self-organization of ordered materials.    In the education plan, the PI plans
              to interface her research in interfacial materials engineering with the
              undergraduate education through the integrated Advanced and Materials
              Engineering Laboratory, and to bridge the gap between academia and industry by
              incorporating the latest development in automotive related research into the
              Graduate Certificate Program in Polymer Engineering.
