Title       : CPMSA -- Gateway to the 21st Century: Achieving Excellence in Mathematics and
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a9703953

Award Number: 9703953
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5030042            (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Jewell-Sherman djewell@richmond.k12.va.us  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Richmond Public Schools
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23219    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Smith, Searetha    City Demographics  The  City  of  Richmond, encompassing
              62.5 square miles,  is  the  nucleus  of a metropolitan area of approximately
              865,000  people.  The  city,  a  blend of the old and historic  with  the  new 
              and  modern, is the corporate headquarters for nine Fortune 500 firms,  a 
              sophisticated arts and cultural community, public and  private  institutions of
              higher education, and a strong sense of community  volunteerism.    Richmond is
              considered to be at the "hub of a learning community"  where  opportunities for
              mathematics, science, and  technological  development  abound.   There  are 
              six  institutions  of   higher  learning  located  in  the Metro Richmond area,
               along  with  the  Mathematics  and Science Center (MSC), the oldest  example 
              of  a  regional  partnership.   The MSC is  a  sphere  of  discovery  of 
              approaches,   abilities  and  interests  that  inspire   lifelong  learning  or
               a  career  choice.  "Alumni"  include  astronomers,  physicists, pilots, and
              teachers, many of whom return to teach in  Center programs.    On  a less
              positive note, Richmond has the highest population  in  the  state  of  youth 
              living  in poverty  (30  percent  live  in  households  receiving  Aid to
              Families with Dependent  Children).  This  is four times higher than the state
              average, over twice  as  high  as  any  other urban area in the state.  The
              percentage  of  Richmond's youth under 17 in single parent households (43.2%) 
              is  more than twice as high as the state average, and higher than any  other
              urban area in the state.  Approximately 13 percent of youth  ages 16 to 19 are
              not enrolled in school.    The higher skill levels required by many of the jobs
              available in  Richmond, and a dependence on public transportation by residents,
               have contributed to an unemployment rate which is twice that of  the
              surrounding counties.    School System Demographics  During the Summer of 1996,
              Richmond City Public Schools completed  Phase I of its curriculum revision in
              the  areas of mathematics  and science.  Teams of teachers completed a
              framework that is  aligned to Virginia's Standards of Learning for Mathematics,
               Science, and Technology.    Mathematics Curriculum  The elementary mathematics
              curriculum focuses on Number and  Number Sense; Computation and Estimation;
              Measurement; Geometry;  Probability and Statistics; and Patterns, Functions and
              Algebra.  Middle school curricula extend the math strands and students take 
              pre-algebra and algebra at the 7th or 8th grade level.  High  school courses
              include Algebra 1, Algebra 11, Geometry, College  Algebra & Trigonometry, AP
              Calculus, and SAT Mathematics.  Other  courses offered presently include Basic
              Algebra, Geometry, and  Consumer Mathematics.            Science Curriculum   
              The science curriculum focuses on Scientific Investigation;    Force; Motion
              and Energy; Matter; Life Processes; Earth/Space    Systems; and Cycles and
              Change.  Middle school curricula extend    the science strands and students
              take General Science, Life    Science and Physical Science as an integrated
              course.  High    School courses included Biology, Chemistry, Earth Science,   
              Biochemistry, AP Physics and AP Chemistry.
