Title       : AMP: New York City Allaince for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a9703600

Award Number: 9703600
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3148234            (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville Parker parker@tidis0.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9703600  Parker    The New York City Alliance for Minority Participation
              will consist  of seventeen campuses within The City University of New York 
              (CUNY), comprising both two-year and four-year colleges, and a  university
              graduate school, working together with private colleges,  members of the
              business community and national laboratories.  The  principal NYC AMP
              activities will involve undergraduate and  graduate science, mathematics,
              engineering, technology,  social/behavioral science, and educational
              initiatives that focus  on points in students; undergraduate and graduate
              experiences which  are most likely, without intervention, to precipitate a
              decision to  drop out of the SMET pipeline.  Transitions from high school to 
              college, from two-year college to four-year college and into  graduate school,
              as well as from graduate school into research,  teaching and industry will be
              addressed.  Alliance activities will  include the initiation of new programs;
              institutionalization and  expansion of Phase I programs proven effective in one
              or more units  of the university; collaboration with related activities funded
              by  state, private and other federal sources; a significantly greater  degree
              of coordination among the CUNY partners; and greater  involvement of outside
              partners.  As a direct consequence of the  NYC AMP we expect to double the
              number of underrepresented students  successfully completing baccalaureate and
              graduate degrees in SMET,  teacher preparation, and social/behavioral science;
              conducting  undergraduate and graduate research; as well as obtaining positions
               in SMET K-12 and college teaching, research institutions, and  industry.   
              The four main areas that will influence the increase of  underrepresented
              students through all points of the NYC AMP Network  Pipeline (se Appendix A)
              are TRANSITIONS, TEACHING, RESEARCH, and  INTERDISCIPLINARY.  Broad and
              permanent institutional change is  expected to come about as a result of the
              focus on these four  areas.    The minority SMET e nrollment and degree numbers
              reached at the end  of Phase I of the New York City Alliance will serve as the
              baseline  figures for Phase II.  Items listed in CUNY AMP's (Phase I) 
              Institutionalization Policy (see pages 2-3) will be adhered to.   Furthermore,
              the CUNY AMP (Phase II) budget will include the funds  for a project
              administrator, a senior administrative assistant, an  administrative assistant,
              a student office assistant, a newsletter  editor, and an evaluation
              coordinator, as well as seventeen CUNY  graduate students who will serve as
              individual campus activity  coordinators.  Approximately 74% of the NSF funds
              for NYC AMP  (Phase II) will be used for participant support costs.
