Title       : A General Theory for Distributed Signal Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9703730

Award Number: 9703730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick S. Blum rblum@eecs.lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9178,9216,HPCC,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The detection of signals in noise is a critical task for a number of practical 
              signal processing and communication systems.  The performance gains that can be
               achieved by using observations taken at multiple sensors are well known.  
              However, generally is too costly to transmit all the data generated by each 
              sensor to some central location to use in making a signal detection decision.  
              It is therefore of great interest to study distributed detection schemes, which
               provide acceptable performance while requiring only limited transmissions.  
              Research on distributed signal detection schemes for cases with dependent 
              observations has been lacking.  The goal of this project is to develop the 
              foundation of a theory for understanding distributed detection schemes for
              cases  with dependent observations from sensor to sensor.  The theory will
              predict when  the optimum distributed processing schemes will be different from
              the optimum  isolated sensor processing schemes.  The theory will also explain
              why this  occurs.    The approach draws heavily on weak-signal results we have
              already developed and  on recent preliminary results.  Specifically, we are
              attempting to represent the  optimum sensor processing in terms of known
              functions and unknown constants, as  we have done in the  weak signal cases. 
              Using such a representation should allow  one to determine when the optimum
              isolated sensor processings will be optimum and  to explain why the optimum
              isolated sensor processings are not optimum in some  cases.  While the focus is
              on developing much needed theory, the results will be  immediately useful in
              many applications.  Furthermore, some emphasis is being  devoted to developing
              design algorithms and to the study of nonparametric  distributed detection
              schemes for cases with uncertain statistical models.  Such  studies will
              produce tools and techniques for pressing practical problems.
