Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometry and Low-Dimensional Topology in Group Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9703756

Award Number: 9703756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Friedman rf@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zlil Sela  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703756  Sela       Zlil Sela intends to complete his sequence of papers on the 
              isomorphism problem for hyperbolic groups and the sequence of papers  on
              automorphisms of free groups.  He further plans to complete writing  his work
              on the structure of sets of solutions to systems of equations  in a free group,
              and on families of such systems depending on a set of  defining parameters. 
              This work is based on borrowing notions and  ideas from algebraic geometry and
              low dimensional topology and  implementing them in group theory.       Sela and
              E. Rips (Hebrew University) are engaged in a  long-standing investigation of
              fundamental algebraic structures known  as ``groups,'' structures which
              abstract and capture the essence of  symmetry.  One of three key problem of the
              field is the isomorphism  problem, the problem of telling when two groups,
              presented  differently, are really the same.  It is known that there can be no 
              general recipe for solving this problem, one that will work for a  completely
              arbitrary pair of groups.  For this reason, recipes have  been sought that work
              within large classes of interesting groups, and  Sela is closing in on such a
              recipe for the class of (Gromov)  hyperbolic groups, groups whose interest
              derives from being attached  to geometric objects known as manifolds, both
              arbitrary manifolds of  dimension three and negatively curved ones of any
              dimension.  The  ideas and techniques evolved in this work have led to other
              questions  and to unexpected answers, all bearing on the deep and intimate 
              connection between the algebra of groups and the geometry of  manifolds. 
              During the last year, Sela has developed a geometric  approach to sets of
              solutions of equations in a so-called free group.  The approach borrows heavily
              from algebraic geometry.  More recently  he has pushed this geometric approach
              further in order to study indexed  families of sets of solutions of equations
              in groups.  Sela and Rips  now expect that the structure theory they have
              developed will find  many  applications in group theory and in mathematical
              logic.  In  particular, they believe that the tools they have in hand will
              provide  positive answers to several questions posed by the logician Alfred 
              Tarski around 1950.  Since their techniques borrow heavily from low 
              dimensional topology, they hope that their structure theory will also  find
              applications to basic questions in low-d topology.  ***
