Title       : Workshop on Visual Cognition and Decision-Making in the Spatial Domain to be
               held in the Spring of 1997 in Solomons, Maryland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9703475

Award Number: 9703475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Gelfand jjg@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Epstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Marefat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The primary purpose of this workshop is to create a broad research summary and
              planning report on the topic of visual cognition to guide research in the
              interdisciplinary field. Visual cognition integrates visual perception with
              higher level domain knowledge, and serves as the interface to high-level
              reasoning, planning, communication, learning, and other cognitive abilities. 
              Many diverse, practical areas, such as automated manufacturing and robotics,
              mechanical design, transportation planning, education, and the representation
              and storage of spatial information stand to benefit from research in visual
              cognition.  A fuller understanding of higher-level cognitive processes and
              their development may hinge on an understanding of their relation to
              perception.  There is already a body of relevant work in computer science on
              these issues, categorized variously as diagrammatic reasoning, qualitative
              physical reasoning, geometric reasoning, and the formal logic of spatial
              reasoning, and there have been other meetings on visual cognition. But the
              field is of necessity strongly interdisciplinary (the three workshop organizers
              come from psychology, computer science, and  electrical engineering, for
              example), so  this meeting will attempt to be more comprehensive and
              integrative in nature, in order to accomplish its stated purpose.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
