Title       : Development of an Aberration Corrected X-ray Photoemission Microscope for
               Nano-XAFS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9703979

Award Number: 9703979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101210             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Tonner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703979  Tonner    This award provides support for a new type of microscope to
              be  developed, that has surface sensitivity, very high spatial  resolution, and
              performs spatially resolved x-ray absorption fine-  structure spectroscopy
              (XAFS).  This instrument will use the  recently invented methods of
              aberration-corrected electron optics  to improve the performance of x-ray
              photoelectron emission  microscopy (X-PEEM) by an order of magnitude.  The
              aberration-  corrected X-ray PEEM, or AX_PEEM, will be used in a number of 
              different research programs.  These include element-specific  magnetic domain
              microscopy, polymer-metal interface studies,  surface reactions on mineral
              substrates, and surface reactions on  single-crystal substrates.  These
              applications will use the  technique of nano-XAFS, which the AX-PEEM makes
              possible.  %%%  This instrument will perform core-level "spectro-microscopy," a
               new technique for the non-destructive mapping of chemical domains  at
              surfaces.  Specifically, it will be able to take a sequence of  images as a
              function of the energy of the incident radiation.  The resultant data can be
              interpreted as a set of XAFS spectra  from individual areas on the sample, or
              as images of the chemical  composition of the near-surface region of the
              sample, as derived  from the spatially varying XAFS spectra.  The new
              instrument will combine high voltage electrostatic  electron microscope lenses
              with an electron-mirror aberration  correction scheme.  The completed
              instrument will be a compact,  ultra-high vacuum compatible assembly, that will
              be installed in  a portable surface science chamber.  The nano-XAFS technique
              is  of interest to a widely interdisciplinary research community,  ranging from
              surface science to biophysics.  To meet these varied  needs, the system is
              designed to be easily installed on a number  of different synchrotron beamlines
              in the U.S.  ***
