Title       : Fluctuations in Asymmetric Processes with Static and Dynamic Random Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9703811

Award Number: 9703811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59079              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sunder Sethuraman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703811  Sethuraman   The fluctuation behavior of a single, or "tagged" particle
              moving in certain   asymmetric stochastic dynamical systems is studied.  The
              stochastic systems fall into two   model classes: Conservative particle
              systems, and Brownian trapping models.  The first   category includes the
              simple exclusion and zero-range systems, while the second category   considers
              variants of the "Wiener Sausage" model.  An important difference between these 
               two classes lies in that the random environments presented to a particular
              particle are   "changing in a comparable scale" in the first and "slowly
              varying" in the second. Although   the tagged particle fluctuations are well
              understood with respect to reversible versions of   these models, little is
              known when these processes possess a drift.  This project focuses on  
              developing various estimates and limit theorems which do not depend on
              symmetry, so as   to identify the non-reversible tagged particle fluctuation
              picture.   Two sample questions which are addressed in this work are: What are
              the effective   statistics governing the behavior of a typical passenger
              interacting with other passengers   moving in a complex Customs queue? Consider
              a thick porous stone roof of a cave; what   is the chance that a rain drop will
              weave its way through the fissures in the stone to drip   into the cave, and
              what strategy does it take to avoid being absorbed into the stone?    These two
              questions fit into the framework of the so-called "tagged" particle problem  
              which is the main subject of this project.  Abstractly, a particle, such as a
              passenger or a   rain drop, interacts with a random environment.  The goal of
              this project is to understand   the fluctuation probabilities of this particle
              interaction in various systems with   asymmetries.  The motivation for this
              work is that the most general situations in many   physical phenomena of
              interest, such as fluid flow, queuing, and chemical ion trapping   behavior,
              are well modeled by these asymmetric p rocesses.  The significance of this  
              project is that asymmetry is a main feature of the models considered;
              previously, research   proceeded under the less palatable assumption of
              symmetry which often simplified the   models beyond application.
