Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Pleistocene Faunas of Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1998      
File        : a9703937

Award Number: 9703937
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Shockey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0115000   Historical Sites                        
Program Ref : 0000,5926,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703937  Shockey      The International Research Fellow Awards Program  enables
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct  three to twenty four months of
              research abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for  joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and 
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month 
              postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Bruce J.  Shockey to work with Dr. Federico
              Anaya Daza at  the Museo Nacional de Historia Natural in La Paz,  Bolivia.   
              Dr. Shockey will be studying the Pleistocene  faunas of Bolivia.  To do this,
              he will work with  Dr. Daza on: conducting field work at Pleistocene 
              (Ensenadan and Lujanian) localities and assist in  the curation of specimens
              for the Museo Nacional  de Historia Natural (MNHNBol). Specifically he  will
              carry out work describing selected specimens  of ungulates, work on
              environmental  reconstructions based on morphological studies  and stable 
              isotopic analysis of enamel; and coordinating  studies of nonungulate taxa
              discovered with  international researchers.        The low latitude, which
              places Bolivia nearer to  the continental gateway for the North American 
              immigrants than Argentina; elevational gradients,  which offer opportunities to
              sample a range of  adaptations that may have been required for the  immigrants 
              to breech rugged barriers to the continent; and  the environmental diversity,
              ranging from rain  forest to the high, cold, and arid Altiplano of  Bolivia,
              make it a virtually ideal country in  which to study the interaction of
              immigrant and  native ungulates during the Pleistocene.    ***
