Title       : "CAREER: Excavating the Dynamical Fossil Record in Elliptical Galaxies: New
               Directions for Southeast Ohio"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a9703036

Award Number: 9703036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Statler tss@coma.phy.ohiou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1207,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Statler    A four-year effort in  research and educational activities
              in the  newly established astrophysics group in the Physics and Astronomy 
              Department at Ohio University (OU) will be carried out.  Particular emphasis
              will be placed on the new opportunities that  will be made available to
              graduate and undergraduate students and  to K-12 students and teachers in the
              region around OU.    The focus of the research component is the origin of
              elliptical  galaxies. Whether they formed through late major mergers of  spiral
              galaxies, by early multiple mergers of many small  protogalactic pieces, or by
              a combination of processes is  unclear. The evidence for or against any
              formation scenario is  ambiguous because it is not yet understood what
              observable  dynamical properties of the galaxies are necessary and unique 
              consequences of the possible mechanisms. But the distribution of  stars (and,
              where present, gas) in position and in velocity make  up a "fossil record" of
              the structural layers laid down in the  galaxy over time. A variety of
              activities in observation,  modeling, and numerical simulation are described
              with the intent  of reading and interpreting this record. Among these are a 
              groundbased observational program to map the stellar kinematic  fields of
              nearby ellipticals at unprecedented depth, spatial  resolution, and accuracy; a
              modeling program to determine the  intrinsic shape distribution; numerical
              simulations to identify  the stellar dynamical configurations implied by
              various formation  processes and to study the origins of kinematically distinct
               cores; searches for hidden disks or other kinematically distinct  components;
              and spectroscopic and photometric Hubble Space  Telescope studies of
              ellipticals at moderate and high redshift.    The educational component
              comprises graduate and undergraduate  research, major revisions to the
              undergraduate astronomy  curriculum at OU, and two significant K-12 outreach
              initiatives.  A school visitation program will be carried out tha t will  bring
               OU scientists into classrooms in the region to foster science  involvement and
              science literacy.  Visits will be coordinated  with teachers to blend the
              presentation into the existing lesson  plans; supplemental materials for
              teachers will be developed to  assist in class preparation. A summer research
              internship program  that will bring K-12 science teachers to OU and involve
              them  actively in research will be initiated.  One teacher applicant  per
              summer, for four summers, will be adopted as a junior member  of one of the
              Physics and Astronomy Department's research groups.  Firsthand experience with
              real science will contribute to better  science teaching in K-12 classrooms.
