Title       : CISE Research Infrastructure: Asymmetric Bandwidth Channels: Applications to
               Real-Time Computing and Robotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9703220

Award Number: 9703220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $834000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Vijay Kumar Kumar@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruzena K. Bajcsy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Insup Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Farber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              CDA-9703220  Bajcsy, Ruzena  University of Pennsylvania    Asymmetric Bandwidth
              Channels: Applications to Real-Time Computing and Robotics    This award is for
              the acquisition of infrastructure to support research which is to investigate a
              cost-effective and broadly deployed communication model, Asymmetric Bandwidth
              Channels, for which few abstractions in computer science are available. 
              Research into the application of systems characterized by low-bandwidth
              interactive channels between clients and server, and a high-bandwidth broadcast
              from server to clients will be conducted.  The proposed work will develop
              communications abstractions that applications can effectively use for such an
              infrastructure, and computational models for these abstractions.  Model
              performance will then be evaluated on a testbed of multiple semi-autonomous
              robotic agents.    The challenging problems to be addressed in this project
              include: (1) selecting which path to take from server to client; (2)
              determining the degree of broadcast channel sharing possible in a computer
              communications environment; and (3) scheduling transmissions from the shared
              broadcast terminal.  The research will also target three fundamental problems
              underlying coordination of robotic agents:  (1) development of world models
              based on observations of individual agents and exploration of an unknown or a
              partially known environment to build a complete model; (2) task planning based
              on the world model while accounting for possible uncertainties and latencies;
              and (3) control of robotic agents based on visual and other sensory
              information.
