Title       : Expanding the Spectral Envelope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9703720

Award Number: 9703720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Stoffer stoffer@stat.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stoffer   DMS-9703720    The concept of the spectral envelope was recently
              introduced as a general statistical method for the frequency domain analysis
              and scaling of qualitative-valued time series.  In the process of developing
              the technology, many other interesting extensions became evident.  This
              research involves the extension of the fundamental concept in various
              directions.  The first extension   involves matching two categorical sequences
              in an effort to discover whether they contain similar patterns and is motivated
              by the problem of matching of two DNA sequences.  The approach builds on the
              ideas used in defining the spectral envelope and focuses on what could be
              called coherency envelopes for measuring the similarity between two categorical
              time series.  Estimation is based on the fast Fourier transform so that the
              methods are computationally simple and fast, and can be applied to long
              sequences.  In another direction, the technology is extended to the analysis of
              qualitative spatial data.  The applications that motivate this project are
              automated image retrieval and pattern recognition with potential use in
              computer vision.  Specifically, this part of the research will focus on the
              analysis of categorical random fields via optimal scaling and the wave number
              spectral envelope.  Since many of the applications where the spectral envelope
              methodology has been an asset are situations where the assumptions of
              stationarity and homogeneity are not realistic, this research will explore the
              benefits of wavelet-based analysis over dynamic Fourier analysis.  Another
              extension of this research is to apply the concept to the analysis of
              real-valued time series collected in an experimental design where the primary
              interest is whether any, and how many, have common cyclic components.  This
              problem is motivated by numerous applications in the medical and behavioral
              sciences.    A statistical concept called the spectral envelope was recently
              introduced as a general method to study patterns in long seq uences of letters
              or symbols (such as codes).  The most well known application of this
              methodology is in biotechnology, specifically in the analysis of DNA.  In the
              process of developing the concept, many other practical extensions became
              evident.  This research involves the extension of the fundamental concept in
              various directions.  The first extension involves matching two non-numeric
              sequences in an effort to discover whether they contain similar patterns and is
              motivated by the biotechnical problem of finding similarities in two otherwise
              different genetic codes.  Another direction is to extend the technology to
              qualitative spatial data (such as images) with applications in automated image
              retrieval, automated pattern recognition, and computer vision.  This research
              will have an impact on robotics and automation technologies that will be
              useful, for example, in industrial manufacturing processes.  Moreover, the
              methodology used in matching sequences could have applications in computer
              vision and robotics where the problem is to automatically and quickly align two
              pictures of the same scene taken from different camera angles.  In addition,
              this research will focus on ways to incorporate this new technology into
              current medical applications such as understanding changes in biorythms in
              stressful situations.
