Title       : Measure-Valued Processes: Coagulation and Coalescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9703845

Award Number: 9703845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven N. Evans evans@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703845  Evans    Two classes of measure-valued stochastic processes are
              considered that possess the common feature of coalescence.  Members of the
              first class of processes describe the clustering as time passes of a collection
              of masses by a random sequence of binary collisions.  Known construction
              results are extended to new collision mechanisms and more general initial mass
              configurations.  Asymptotic behavior is studied in various limiting regimes. 
              Members of the second class of processes are space-time rescaling limits of a
              variety of spatial processes such as stepping-stone models and long range voter
              models, and are defined to be "dual" to the labeled partition process induced
              by a system of coalescing Markov processes.  Several questions concerning the
              sample path properties of such models are investigated.   The Principal
              Investigator will study two mathematical models involving coalescence of
              particles.  Models in the first class have been applied to chemical phenomena
              such as polymerisation and  physical phenomena of coagulation and condensation
              such as the evolution of galactic clusters by gravitational attraction.  There
              are also connections with questions considered in the construction of data
              bases.  The proposed research deals particularly with understanding what
              happens when one considers systems with extremely large numbers of coalescing
              objects, as is usually the case in applications.  Models in the second class
              have their origins in ecology and population genetics when one wishes to
              describe the evolution of geographically structured populations with large
              numbers of mobile individuals.
