Title       : Probability Measures of Vector Spaces; Basic Results and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9703740

Award Number: 9703740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Kuelbs kuelbs@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703740  Kuelbs  The principal investigator will continue his research in
              probability theory.  It includes non-logarithmic large deviation probabilities
              for partial sums of independent random vectors via dominating points in the
              infinite dimensional setting, and also the application of these results to a
              Gibbs conditioning principle for certain infinite dimensional statistics. Limit
              sets for random samples of processes, as well as related coverage problems will
              be examined, and a primary focus will be to further examine the link between
              small ball probabilities and metric entropy problems in approximation theory. 
              For Gaussian measures, this linkage has been useful in a number of problem
              areas, but a more detailed examination from several points of view is proposed.
              Problems concerning vector valued partial sums, empirical processes,
              self-normalized partial sums, and limit theorems for convex hulls for Brownian
              motion are also to be considered.  Applications of probability in modern
              science frequently involve the study of random quantities with many components
              (dimensions), or perhaps even of a geometric nature. Thus they require
              probability estimates and limit theorems which are applicable to random sets,
              or which are dimension free (hence, in essence, infinite dimensional). A major
              theme in the investigator's previous work and in much of the currently proposed
              research addresses both of these issues in a variety of settings. As a first
              example consider the link between small ball probabilities and metric entropy
              problems, which showed certain probability estimates are equivalent to problems
              in approximation theory. This link led to the solution of a long standing
              problem in approximation theory, and portions of the proposed research involve
              important unsolved analogues of this problem. Another example is the study of
              the Gibbs conditioning principle of statistical mechanics for statistics with
              infinitely many components. To begin to handle this type of problem one needs
              non-logarithmic estimat es of large deviation probabilities which are dimension
              free.  Such estimates were obtained recently, and their application to Gibbs
              conditioning is being initiated. Additional problems exhibiting these general
              features are also to be considered, and connect with classical geometry,
              analysis, and statistics.
