Title       : Stochastic Control Problems and Numerical Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9703895

Award Number: 9703895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Kushner hjk@dam.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703895  Kushner    A broad range of topics in stochastic systems will be
              treated.  The 1992 book of the P.I. (with P.Dupuis) is now the primary source
              of numerical methods in continuous time stochastic control, as well as of
              algorithms and convergence proofs.  There are publicly available codes for some
              classes of problems of great interest.  The great potential of the theory and
              algorithms has been well illustrated by examples from communications.  A number
              of important problems remain.  The aim is the development of a highly usable
              theory and set of techniques, so that numerical methods can take their place as
              a very practical and efficient approach to both investigation and design.  The
              methods will be extended to cover stochastic differential games.  Domain
              decomposition methods will be developed with the aim of facilitating the
              solution of problems in high dimensions.  Owing to the presence of the
              controls, these involve issues quite different from what has been done in the
              literature.  Higher order algorithms will be investigated.  The main difficulty
              here is that the classical methods of proof do not apply owing to the typical
              degeneracies and singularities in the problem.  Probabilistic methods need to
              be used, analogous to the weak convergence methods used to deal with the main
              numerical algorithms.  The work on control problems in high speed
              communications will be continued.  The recent work has demonstrated the great
              value of the heavy traffic-diffusion approximation methods, when combined with
              numerical exploration for the problems considered. Due to the large number of
              independent users, heavy traffic approximations of the control problem is
              feasible.  The aim is to show that good (or nearly optimal) policies for the
              simpler (limit/aggregated) system are also good (or nearly optimal) for the
              actual physical system, thereby simplifying design and analysis.  One then
              develops convergent numerical methods to explore the problem in many different
              ways, obtaining information on the trad eoffs in the various losses as
              functions of the design parameters.  Recent work along these lines has obtained
              information of importance to design which could not have been obtained by other
              current approaches.
