Title       : Acquisition of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Mass Spectrometer
               for the Analysis of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9703946

Award Number: 9703946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chrys Wesdemiotis wesdemiotis@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703946  Wesdemiotis     This award provides support for a  time-of-flight mass 
              spectrometer equipped with matrix-assisted laser desorption /  ionization
              (MALDI-TOF-MS), for the analysis of polymeric  materials.  The instrument will
              support ongoing and future  studies within the Departments of Polymer Science
              and Chemistry  at the University of Akron, a leading center of polymer research
               for over forty  years.  Many of the projects carried out in these  departments
              regularly require characterization of the mass,  composition, integrity, and
              purity of synthetic polymers.  These  issues can be addressed with high
              specificity by MALDI mass  spectrometry, a technique that is not currently
              available at the  University.    Polymer research at the University of Akron is
              focused on the  synthesis of novel polymeric materials and the examination of 
              their physical and mechanical properties.  Specific research  areas will
              benefit from MALDI-MS including  (1) synthesis of new  organic and
              silicon-organic polymers, (ii) development of new  methods for polymer
              functionalization, (iii) new polymerization  mechanisms including living
              cationic polymerization and group-  transfer polymerization, (iv) preparation
              of cyclic and radial  star-branched polymers, (v) evaluation of the
              relationship  between structure and properties of macromolecules, and (vi) 
              biopolymer / synthetic polymer comparison studies. The instrument  will also be
              accessible to other researchers at the University of  Akron who need MALDI-MS
              to solve analytical problems.  %%%  The University of Akron is an active
              participant in the Edison  Polymer Innovation Corporation (EPIC), a
              state-sponsored  consortium with Case Western Reserve University and local
              polymer  corporations.  Joint projects within this consortium have  fostered
              close ties between the Department of Polymer Science and  researchers in the
              EPIC community which, at present, lacks a  MALDI mass spectrometry capability
              for synthetic polymers.  The  planned MALDI-MS facility at the  University of
              Akron will provide  this service to EPIC collaborators and to other scientists
              in  northeast Ohio requiring mass spectrometry for the solution of  structural
              problems.  MALDI-TOF-MS is the method of choice for  the analysis of polymeric
              materials.  It can supply rapidly and  accurately the molecular weight and
              molecular weight distribution  of polymers.  With lower molecular weight
              polymers (<10 kDa), the  technique provides insight about the repeat units, end
              groups,  and other compositional properties.  For polymers of reasonably  low
              polydispersity (Mw/Mn < ~1.5), MALDI has the ability to  determine directly
              average molecular weight parameters.  For  polymers of higher polydispersity,
              narrow fractions (obtained,  e.g., via GPC separations) can be successfully
              analyzed by MALDI.  Such information is essential for giving definitive answers
              to  the challenging problems encountered in synthetic and mechanistic  polymer
              studies.  ***
