Title       : Brownian Motion and Random Partitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9703691

Award Number: 9703691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pitman pitman@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703691  Pitman   Recent work of the principal investigator and co-authors has
              made connections   between random partitions, random discrete distributions,
              random trees, and the lengths of   excursions of Brownian motion and other
              stochastic processes. The present project   continues the study of these
              relations and their applications. Sheth's model for   gravitational clustering
              of galaxies leads to problems related to the additive coalescent in   which
              each pair of sets in a partition of a finite set is merging at a rate which is
              the sum of   the sizes of the two sets. Asymptotics of this additive coalescent
              define a discrete measure   valued process which can be constructed by cutting
              Aldous's continuum random tree at   points of a suitable Poisson process. It is
              proposed to study this and other measure-valued   Markov processes which model
              coalescent phenomena, and to look for novel applications   of these processes. 
                 Brownian motion provides the doundation of the modern theory of continuous
              time   random processes with continuous paths, and has applications in fields
              as diverse as   physics and mathematical finance. Random partitions find
              applications to combinatorics,   physics and genetics. Statistical models for
              physical processes of coalescence and   fragmentation are of interest in a
              number of fields. The evolution of a partition of particles   into clumps can
              be variously interpreted, for example, as a partition of atoms into  
              molecules, a partition of molecules into polymers, or a partition of stars into
              galaxies. In a   chemical setting, atoms coalesce to form molecules, and
              molecules coalesce to form   polymers. In a cosmological setting, stars
              coalesce to form galaxies. The proposed   research focuses on models for an
              irreversible process of coalescence of a partition of a   continuum with finite
              total mass into a finite or countable collection of sub-masses, with  
              conservation of mass.
