Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Sequence-Specific Binding of Peptide
               Nucleic Acids to Folded RNA Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1997       
File        : a9703804

Award Number: 9703804
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Armitage   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703804  Armitage      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour  months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a three-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Bruce A. Armitage to work with Dr. Peter E.
               Nielsen at the Panum Institute in Copenhagen, Denmark.    Dr. Armitage will
              study the interaction of peptide nucleic  acid (PNA) oligomers with RNA
              molecules.  His major  hypothesis is whether the interaction  of PNA with
              synthetic  ribozyme RNA will inhibit ribozyme self-splicing.  This work  will
              give increased understanding into the interaction of  PNA with folded RNA
              molecules, which are essential  components in the development of PNA as an
              antisense  therapeutic and diagnostic agent.    Dr. Nielsen is one of the
              inventors of PNA and therefore is  most experienced in the synthesis and
              application of these  molecules.  In addition, Nielsen's colleague, Dr. Henrik 
              Nielsen will contribute expertise in RNA and ribozymes.  Dr.  Armitage
              completes the collaboration with his experience in  quinone chemistry and
              photochemistry.  ***
