Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Nonlinear Waves and Instabilities in
               Optical Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9703769

Award Number: 9703769
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose Nathan Kutz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,5956,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703769  Kutz      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a six-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Jose Nathan Kutz to work with Dr. Ping-king
               Alexander Wai at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University in  Kowloon, Hong Kong. 
                This project will involve the investigation of a broad range  of issues
              concerning nonlinear pulse dynamics in optical  fibers which have direct impact
              on current communication  technologies.  Specifically, the PI will study
              dispersion  management and NRZ (non-return-to-zero) pulse dynamics, and  the
              dynamics and stability of modelocked fiber lasers.  If  time permits, he will
              go on to investigate the area of  optical switching.  Kutz has studied the
              propagation of NRZ  pulses in dispersion management systems, which is a first 
              step towards the understanding of current all-optical  transoceanic
              communication systems.  He will combine his  expertise with that of Dr. Wai in
              the development of a  general theory of the evolution of NRZ-formatted pulses. 
              To  study these problems, Kutz will use scientific modelling,  asymptotic
              analysis, dynamical and nonlinear wave theory and  numerical simulation.    ***
