Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structured Deformations and the Microgeometry of Continua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9703863

Award Number: 9703863
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Owen do04@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703863  Owen      The proposed research is part of an ongoing project to
              incorporate into  continuum mechanics in a systematic manner the effects of
              geometrical  changes at small length scales.  The approach employed here
              differs from  many others, in that it enlarges from the outset the collection
              of  deformations that a body can undergo to include non-classical  "structured
              deformations."  The present, "front-end" approach provides  flexibility in
              modelling and gives simple and direct predictions of  important phenomena such
              as yielding, hysteresis, and dissipation for a  variety of microstructures. 
              The key mathematical idea employed is that  the limit of a sequence of
              derivatives of functions may differ from the  derivative of the limit of the
              sequence of func- tions.  The difference  between these two quantities gives a
              concrete measure of the amount of  deformation due to "disarrangements" at
              small length scales.  Existing  theories of crystalline solids, liquid
              crystals, polycrystalline metals,  and granular materials introduce measures of
              such deformations via  "internal variables" or "directors", e.g.,  plastic
              deformation,  molecular orientation, or void fraction.  Although these
              variables have  natural physical interpretations, in standard approaches they
              must be  accepted as primitive objects within a theory; for structured 
              deformations, counterparts of these variables can be calculated directly  as
              limits of averages of geometrical changes at the microlevel.  The  proposed
              research will provide precise definitions and useful formulas  for kinematical
              quantitities such as "velocity and stretching due to  slip" and "velocity and
              stretching without slip", will achieve new  refinements of general balance laws
              and dissipation inequalities, and  will obtain parallel refinements of specific
              constitutive relations that  distinguish one material body from another.       
              A principal challenge faced by applied mathematicians who model complex 
              phenomena such as the bending of a metal bar, t he appearance of  contrasting
              optical fields on a liquid crystal display, and the flow of  sand through a
              hopper is that of incorporating into the mathematical  equations the influence
              of the microscopic structure of each substance.   Considerable success has been
              achieved in individual cases of  technological importance, but there is lacking
              a clear and useful  language for systematically including microstructure.  As a
              result,  shifting, say, from studies of deformations in a bar to studies of
              sand  flowing through a hopper requires starting nearly from the beginning of 
              the modelling process.  The proposed research is part of an ongoing  program to
              provide a new, relatively simple mathematical language that  will permit a more
              efficient and economical procedure for modelling  these and other phenomena. 
              The initial successes of this program help  to provide simple and useful
              answeres to questions such as why a paper  clip springs back to a complex,
              curved shape when removed from a stack  of papers and does not spring back to
              the simple, straight shape that it  may have assumed early in its manufacture. 
              The proposed research will  continue the quest for a more unified and efficient
              approach toward   understanding and predicting complex phenomena based on
              knowledge of  microstructure.
