Title       : Pattern Formation in Semi-Discrete Excitable Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9703630

Award Number: 9703630
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart P. Hastings sph@math.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hastings  9703630    Semi-discrete models of excitable media consist of coupled
              systems of  ordinary differential equations, with each unit describing the
              electrical  kinetics in a single "cell".  They are intermediate between
              continuous  (pde) models and purely discrete models, or cellular automata.  The
              investigator  studies whether principles developed for cellular automata models
              apply to  the more realistic semi-discrete case.  He considers specific models 
              developed from experimental data to give quantitative descriptions of  neural
              behavior.  A model of special interest is that of Morris and Lecar,  describing
              voltage oscillations in barnacle muscle fiber.  This model has  different
              features from the well-known FitzHugh-Nagumo system, features  that are found
              in a number of experimental settings and that, moreover,  appear amenable to
              mathematical analysis.  The investigator  explores the role of  various
              parameters in the system in the propagation of spatial patterns.  Among the
              factors to be considered are excitation threshold, coupling  strength, relative
              rates of fast and slow processes, spatial geometry of  the medium, and the
              relative time spent in the excited and refractory  states.    The goal of this
              project is to develop an understanding of pattern  formation in semi-discrete
              excitable media.  The main intended application  is to neurobiology, though
              excitable media are found in many biological  and chemical systems.  Isolated
              cells are called ``excitable'' if they  exhibit a threshold phenomenon in
              response to a brief external stimulus,  but cannot support continued
              oscillations on their own.  A semi-discrete  model describes collections of
              excitable neurons coupled by a linear or  nonlinear diffusion mechanism. 
              Examples include nerve, cardiac, and  muscle tissue, supporting phenomena such
              as wave propagation down a  myelinated axon, waves of electrical stimulation
              that sweep through heart  muscles, and spreading cortical depression, a brain
              wave phenomenon.
