Title       : Dissertation Research: Precolumbian Maya Terracing in the Xunantunich Area,
               Belize, Central America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9703989

Award Number: 9703989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Ashmore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, Mr. L. Theodore Neff will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will continue his examination of terraces
              associated with the Mayan site of Xunantunich which is located in lowland
              tropical west-central Belize. The site is large - it covers an area exceeding
              10 km. in maximum diameter - and was occupied during the height of Classic
              Mayan development. Therefore it serves as an appropriate location to study how
              the Mayans integrated thousands of individuals into highly organized societies
              which sustained themselves in a relatively unproductive environments. In recent
              years archaeologists have come to recognize that Mayan peoples developed
              complex agricultural systems significantly different from the slash and burn
              technique which is applied in many lowland areas today. Researchers have
              focused particular attention on widespread series of raised fields which were
              formed by mounding earth in swampy waterlogged environments. Less attention has
              been paid to other approaches and Mr. Neff will examine a terracing system
              which was widely used at Xunantunich and is present at other Mayan sites as
              well. In particular he is interested in the articulation between agriculture
              and social organization and he has noted correlations between different
              arrangements of terraces and the number of associated house mounds. He believes
              that it is possible to reconstruct the social organization at the site and
              determine the extent to which variations in group organization affected
              specific agricultural practices. To accomplish this he needs first to
              understand more about the terraces themselves and this award will allow him to
              collect the necessary information. He will conduct test and then larger scale
              excavation in a carefully selected number of terraces. On this basis he hopes
              to determine when in the site's history they were built, how they were
              constructed and what crops were grown on them. This requires careful
              stratigraphic excavation and the analysis of soil, cultural and plant remains.
              Radiocarbon dates will also be obtained.  The Mayan peoples developed a complex
              society using technologically simple means in environmental contexts which
              today can support only low population densities. Mr. Neff's research will
              provide additional insight into the adaptations which allowed this success. He
              will collect data of interest to many archaeologists and the project will
              assist in training a promising young scientist.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
