Title       : CAREER: Generalized Search Technique for Indexing Complex Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a9703972

Award Number: 9703972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Hellerstein jmh@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses two main challenges. The first is to produce a software
              development environment   for easily generating indexing techniques for new
              complex data, e.g., maps, images, sound, video,   sequences, documents, etc.,
              with large database workloads. This is being done by (1) implementing a data  
              structure called a Generalized Search Tree (GiST) in the context of an
              Object-Relational database   management system, and (2) developing a graphical
              GiST visualization and debugging system. The   second challenge is to undertake
              a rigorous mathematical investigation of how and when one can develop  
              efficient indexes; this is referred to as a Theory of Indexability.
              Indexability theory is akin to complexity   theory, which has guided software
              developers in understanding how and when one can develop efficient  
              algorithms. The main distinction is that indexability focuses on space/time
              tradeoffs for indexes, and on   the fundamental secondary-storage challenges
              involved in database indexing. Execution of this research   agenda will produce
              a framework in which data domain experts (e.g., biologists, chemists, earth
              scientists,   computer multimedia researchers, etc.) can (1) identify whether
              their workloads are indexable, and (2) if   so, easily develop efficient
              indexes for their workloads, integrating these indexes with minimal effort into
                Object-Relational database management systems. An additional effort is to
              integrate the development   environment into a curriculum for teaching both
              basic and advanced techniques in indexing and   indexability. This curriculum
              includes the software itself, along with assignments being tested in  
              undergraduate and graduate courses at Berkeley taught by the principal
              investigator.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
