Title       : CAREER: A Research, Education, and Technology Transfer Proposal in Statistical
               Signal Processing with Emphasis on Nonlinear System Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a9703312

Award Number: 9703312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51250              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Tong Zhou gtz@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              While linear approximations and models possess simplicity and tractability in 
              analysis, most real life problems entail nonlinear effects.  Nonlinear system
              of  current interest in signal processing and communications are encountered
              with  satellite links, high-speed telephone channels, power amplifiers,
              magnetic and  optical recording systems.  This research is exploring novel
              techniques for  identification, performance analysis, and mitigation of
              nonlinear systems.  The  goal is to use state-of-the-art statistical signal
              processing tools to analyze  long-standing issues in nonlinear modeling and
              applications to tele-  communications problems.    The present approach is
              taking a fresh look at the traditional Volterra model and  exploiting carefully
              designed cyclostationary inputs that result in closed-form  kernel expressions
              with input-output data.  Such solutions will apply to finite  memory Volterra
              models of any order, reduce computational complexity and noise  effects even
              with relatively short data records, and allow for analytical  performance
              evaluation using variance expressions.  The investigator plans to  simulate and
              test the resulting algorithms using real data received from  satellite links
              where amplifiers are driven to the nonlinear saturation region.   She is also
              studying blind nonlinear Volterra system identification that relies  on single
              or multi-sensor data only.  The potential of blind nonlinear channel 
              estimation and equalization is of paramount importance when no training inputs 
              are available, or when new communicators join a multiport broadcast and 
              transmission cannot be interrupted for training.
