Title       : PECASE: Mechanical Function of Residual Stresses in Anulus Fibrosus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2001  
File        : a9703299

Award Number: 9703299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori A. Setton setton@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,1187,9120,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703299  Setton  Cartilaginous tissues, such as the intervertebral disc,
              articular  cartilage and meniscus, have a limited blood supply and low cell 
              density and so are particularly susceptible to degeneration  induced by aging
              and daily wear.  Current treatment options for  degenerating tissues include
              fusion of the joint to prevent  further motion, or replacement of the joint
              with an artificial  prosthetic.  These treatments are limited in their
              effectiveness,  however, and are appropriate only for repair of end-stage 
              disease.  There is a great need for new methods of restoring the  mechanical
              function in these cartilaginous tissues.  Our long-  term interest is in
              developing a tissue-engineered approach to  controlling function in the
              intervertebral disc with a focus on  inhibiting or reversing progressive
              degeneration.  In this 4-year  plan, we propose a comprehensive research
              activity and  complementary educational program focused on biomechanics and 
              tissue engineering with application to the intervertebral disc.  Our research
              plan is focused on studies of a mechano-chemical  coupling mechanism in the
              intervertebral disc which influences  tissue function through biochemical
              composition.  This coupling  mechanism gives rise to swelling-induced residual
              stress and  strain fields in the anulus fibrosus of the intervertebral disc 
              which may be important in contributing to the load-bearing  functions of the
              intervertebral disc.  The primary objective of  this research plan is to
              determine the function of these residual  stress and strain fields in the
              anulus fibrosus, as well as in  synthetic biomaterials with potential for disc
              repair.  The  motivating hypothesis is that these residual stresses and strains
               significantly contribute to the mechanical function of the  intervertebral
              disc by improving its ability to provide for  compressive load-bearing in the
              spine.  A set of design criteria  based on residual stresses, residual strains,
              and compressive  behavior will be defined for the anulus  fibrosus, and used to
               engineer a novel biomaterial for tissue repair in the  intervertebral disc. 
              The proposed research plan is organized  about four specific aims.  First, new
              experimental methods will  be developed to quantify the residual strain fields
              in the native  anulus fibrosus.  Second, theoretical model advancements will be
               pursued to calculate the residual stress fields in the native  anulus
              fibrosus.  Third, experiments will be performed to  directly test the
              hypothesis that residual stresses and strains  modify the compressive
              load-bearing behavior of the anulus  fibrosus.  Fourth, these methods will be
              applied to evaluate  synthetic biomaterials supplied through industrial
              collaborations  for their utility in intervertebral disc repair.  Teams of 
              industrial and academic collaborators will work together to  develop and
              evaluate new biomaterials for restoring mechanical  function in the
              intervertebral disc.  A complementary educational  plan in biomechanics and
              tissue engineering has been designed for  students at the high school,
              undergraduate and graduate levels.  First, an internship program will be
              organized for second-year  undergraduate students from underrepresented
              minority  backgrounds.  The broad objective of this aim is to maintain 
              interest in a subset of students who suffer from low retention  rates in the
              undergraduate engineering education.  Second, the  undergraduate and graduate
              engineering curriculum will be revised  to expand course offerings in
              biomechanics.  The broad objective  of this aim is to provide a direct channel
              for incorporating  applied research in educational programs at the
              undergraduate and  graduate level.  Third, a new hands-on biomechanics
              laboratory  will be developed for high school students as part of the Women  in
              Engineering Outreach Program at Duke.  The broad objective of  this aim is to
              provide female high school students with a problem-  solving and
              confidence-building experience in engineering, and  expose them to female
              faculty and  engineering graduate students  in leadership roles.  The
              integration of these research and  education plans is expected to promote
              partnerships for the  transfer of engineering research to the industrial
              sector, to  increase the numbers of underrepresented minorities and women in 
              engineering, to better prepare these students for achieving  excellence in
              engineering in an academic or industrial setting,  and to expose a broad base
              of students to the excitement of  discovery and learning that is characteristic
              of research in  engineering.  ***
