Title       : CAREER: A Career Development Plan for Research and Education in High Speed
               Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1998       
File        : a9703275

Award Number: 9703275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dipak Ghosal dghosal@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes the PI's research and education plans for the next  five
              years and beyond. One part of the research plan focuses on the the  design and
              analysis of network control algorithms for detection and  control of focused
              overloads that are stimulated by media events. The goal  is to design new
              network control algorithms which can dissipate these  focused overloads either
              by limiting the rate at which event related  requests are allowed into the
              network or by dynamically creating resources  to meet the demand. The other
              part of the research plan focuses on the  design of parallel and distributed
              server technologies.  The key aim is to  design the software and hardware
              architectures of the servers such that  they are scalable, fault-tolerant, and
              robust under network overloads and  instabilities.  The education plan focuses
              on developing new curriculum,  both at the undergraduate and the graduate
              levels with emphasis on  experimentation and prototyping. Furthermore, these
              courses will develop  the key areas of expertise that the industry needs to
              develop applications  for the next generation high-speed networks. The
              education plan involves  active participation in a few specific outreach
              programs both within the  university and the surrounding community. The goal of
              these outreach  programs is to ensure that the information is available to
              everybody and  to demonstrate the opportunities in a global information
              network.     URL for this project is
              http://networks.cs.ucdavis.edu/~ghosal/CAREER
