Title       : CAREER: Lossless, Near-Lossless and Lossy Plus Lossless Image Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9703969

Award Number: 9703969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nasir Memon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    This project involves a career development plan that incorporates a
              balance  of research and educational activities.  The principal area of
              research  proposed is lossless image compression.  The goal is to develop
              lossless  image compression techniques that integrate lossy and lossless
              compression  in a single frame-work, providing state-of-the-art lossy and
              lossless  compression.  Such techniques will be of great value for specific 
              applications like teleradiology and the World-Wide-Web, and for  applications
              in ``network-centric'' computing in general.  Part of this  research will
              involve collaborative activity of an international nature.    Also proposed in
              the research plan is the development of near-lossless  image compression
              schemes that give quantitative guarantees about the loss  in reconstruction. 
              Near-lossless compression techniques can result in  significant reduction in
              bit-rates while preserving the integrity of  scientific images with respect to
              the post-processing operations that are  typically carried out on such images. 
               Collaboration with earth and space  scientists will be an integral part of
              this activity.    The educational component of the proposal addresses the
              broader field of  multimedia communications. The main objective of the
              educational plan is  establish a multimedia communications laboratory that
              supports education  and research activities of a multidisciplinary group of
              students and  faculty.  A sequence of multidisciplinary courses in multimedia 
              communications are proposed to be developed.  Also proposed are a series of 
              activities like summer internships, departmental colloquia, research 
              experience for undergraduate site, etc. that go above and beyond the normal 
              academic year faculty responsibilities.  The objectives of the educational 
              plan are in tune with department needs and priorities and well integrated  with
              the research goals of the PI.
