Title       : Nonlinear Wave Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9703850

Award Number: 9703850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Ablowitz markjab@boulder.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9703850  Ablowitz    Research involving a class of physically significant
              nonlinear systems   arising in the study of nonlinear wave motion is proposed. 
              Included in the   studies are a new class of localized multidimensional
              solutions which can   be related to a topological number; i.e. an index or
              winding number.    Associated with the self dual Yang-Mills equations is a
              novel class of   nonlinear ordinary differential equations, referred to as
              Darboux-Halphen   (DH) type systems. These equations can be integrated by
              associating them   with, and analyzing, certain linear monodromy problems. The
              linear   problems have monodromy data which are evolving.  The solutions of DH 
               systems can be extremely complicated, exhibiting natural boundaries and  
              dense branching in the complex plane.  In special cases the solutions are  
              expressed in terms of automorphic functions.  Frequently researchers use  
              numerical simulation to obtain approximations to solutions of nonlinear   wave
              equations. Research by the PI and collaborators has demonstrated that  
              computational chaos can be induced from truncation and roundoff errors.   Use
              of integrable systems is extremely important since analytical results can   be
              compared with numerical simulation.    The study of nonlinear wave equations
              has wide ranging applications in   physics and engineering. Intimately related
              to the studies in this proposal is   a class of equations, called integrable
              systems.  The mathematics of   integrable systems and their solutions have been
              shown to play an important   and fundamental role in our understanding of a
              variety of real world   phenomena.  Integrable systems usually admit a special
              class of extremely   stable, localized wave solutions, referred to as solitons,
              which arise   frequently in physical contexts. For example, in the study of
              fluid dynamics,   huge soliton internal ocean waves, sometimes a mile in
              length, and   hundreds of feet in amplitude, have been located in many parts of
              the ocean;   e.g. near the coast of  Oregon. Such waves can be devastating to
              anything   caught in their path, hence knowledge of where such internal
              solitons are   located in the ocean is of interest. Another application of
              solitons is in the   study and designing of efficient long distance
              communication systems.   Solitons eliminate the need for electronic signal
              regenerators which can   seriously inhibit data rates. Researchers have used
              solitons successfully in   the laboratory and currently they are being used in
              prototype   communication systems. It may well be that future high data rate  
              communications systems will be designed to propagate multiple soliton   waves.
