Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Problems in Compressible Fluid Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9703703

Award Number: 9703703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95150              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Hoff hoff@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703703  Hoff    This is a proposal to continue the investigation of various
              questions  relating to the existence, stability, regularity, large-time
              behavior, and  numerical approximation of solutions of systems of certain
              partial  differential equations arising in various areas of continuum
              mechanics.   Discontinuous solutions are of particular interest, and will play
              a  unifying role in the project. A fairly well-developed theory has been 
              attained for flows in the whole space which are not subject to external  forces
              and which are small.  These results will be extended to regions  with
              boundaries and to flows with large initial data and with forcing  terms. A
              continuous-dependence theory will be developed, sufficient to  provide a
              framework in which numerical procedures for approximating these  solutions can
              be studied. The entire analysis will be extended to systems  of differential
              equations arising in related physical problems, such as  magnetohydrodynamics
              and viscoelasticity. Finally, recent work concerning  the pointwise behavior of
              Navier-Stokes diffusion waves will be continued:  the derivation and pointwise
              analysis of diffusion waves will be carried  out for related systems of
              physical interest, and a stability analysis of  planar viscous shock waves with
              respect to multidimensional perturbations  will be given.     The proposer will
              study various mathematical questions concerning  important models of
              compressible fluids and materials.  These models arise  in a broad range of
              applications, including supersonic flight, dynamic  meteorology, semiconductor
              theory, and the design and use of viscoelastic  materials.  While the main goal
              in constructing these models is to achieve  a predictive capability, they are
              far too complicated to be "solved" in  any explicit sense.  On the other hand,
              adequate approximate solutions can  frequently be generated by computer
              methods.  The intelligent design of  such methods depends crucially, however,
              on a rigorous understanding of  why solutions do e xist, in what sense, and in
              what ways they are sensitive  to noise in the data.  The primary goal of this
              project is therefore to  provide such a rigorous mathematical analysis for
              these models; a  secondary objective is to apply these mathematical insights to
              the  intelligent design and analysis of algorithms for generating approximate 
              solutions.
