Title       : The Structure of Expanding Rational Maps as Holomorphic Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1997        
File        : a9703724

Award Number: 9703724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73357              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Pilgrim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The structure of expanding, or hyperbolic, rational maps as holomorphic
              dynamical systems on the Riemann sphere will be investigated.  The approach is
              motivated by the analogy between the theories of rational maps and Kleinian
              groups developed by McMullen and Sullivan.  To an expanding, (equivalently,
              geometrically finite without cusps) torsion-free Kleinian group one may
              associate a topological object-the quotient compact three-manifold obtained by
              quotienting hyperbolic space together with the domain of discontinuity on the
              Riemann sphere at infinity by the action of the group.  To an expanding
              rational map one may also associate a topological object-the map viewed as a
              branched covering of the sphere to itself, up to a homotopy-theoretic form of
              equivalence.  A characterization of those branched coverings which are
              equivalent to an expanding rational map is known.  However, in contrast to the
              case of Kleinian groups, little is known in general about how combinatorial
              properties of these branched coverings are reflected in the geometry and
              dynamics of the corresponding rational maps and in their parameter spaces. 
              Motivated by the role played by the theory of incompressible surfaces in the
              study of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, the combinatorics of branched coverings will
              studied.  This analysis will be used to develop general combination and
              decomposition theories for ratimnal maps and general characterizations of
              adjacencies and compactness properties of hyperbolic components in parameter
              spaces of rational maps. A dynamical system is a mathematical model now widely
              used in many disciplines to describe biological, physical, and social
              phenomena.  The main theme in the subject is that even a very simple model can
              yield extremely complicated behavior.  Therefore one often simplifies the model
              first to make the problem tractable.  Next, one needs tools to attack these
              problems.  Finally, one looks for a reduction of the problem to a combinatorial
              one, i.e., one which, in principle, a computer can sol ve.  This project
              concerns reducing the dynamics of one-dimensional holomorphic functions (which
              are the simplest dynamical systems to which the powerful tools of complex
              analysis apply) to a combinatorial problem.  This problem, when formulated
              correctly, looks remarkably similar to one in a different field whose solution
              is already known.  The main goal of this project is to take these known results
              and, reasoning by analogy, formulate and prove new results in holomorphic
              dynamics.
