Title       : Applications of p-adic Uniformization to Vanishing Cycles and Galois
               Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a9703820

Award Number: 9703820
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Baruch College
	      One Bernard Baruch Way
	      New York, NY  100105526    646/312-2205

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jordan  9703820    Bruce Jordan proposes to study applications of p-adic
              uniformization to arithmetic.  This theme runs throughout some of the great
              accomplishments of the last decade, but it is just now being isolated and its
              role recognized.  As one example, it is the key to Ribet's proof of Serre's
              Conjecture Epsilon and a crucial ingredient to Taylor and Wiles's subsequent
              proof of the Shimura-Taniyama Conjecture for semi-stable elliptic curves.  For
              arithmetic over the rational numbers (which is the setting for  the Ribet and
              Taylor/Wiles result), the point is that by Cerednik/Drinfeld Shimura curves are
              p-adically uniformized and this enables one to simultaneously study both the
              Hecke structure and  the action of inertia for a prime of bad reduction on the
              points of finite  order on their jacobians.  The various theorems proved here
              should all generalize to any setting where one has an analogous  p-adic
              uniformization, even to cases of higher dimension.  Jordan wants to study these
              cases in increasing order of complexity: Shimura curves over totally real
              fields, quaternionic Hilbert modular varieties over totally real fields, and
              finally Shimura varieties uniformized by unitary groups.    This project falls
              into the general area of arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two of the
              oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry.  This combination has
              proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that
              withstood generations.  Among its many consequences are new error correcting
              codes.  Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and
              compact disks.
