Title       : Importance Weighting in Dynamic and Static Monte Carlo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9703918

Award Number: 9703918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wing H. Wong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703918  Wong    In this research, dynamic weighting is developed as a method
              for dynamic Monte Carlo simulation that has the capability to efficiently
              sample relevant parts of the configuration space in the presence of many steep
              energy minima.  This method relies on an additional dynamic variable, namely
              the importance weight, to help the system overcome steep barriers. A new,
              non-Metropolis theory is introduced to guide the construction of such weighted
              samplers.  The method is designed to work in combination with the complementary
              idea of sampling a complexity ladder.  A second topic studied in this research
              is the use of rejection control in sequential importance sampling.  This is
              introduced in order to cope with difficulties of having highly skewed weights
              in static importance sampling Monte Carlo.  It will enhance the usefulness of
              static Monte Carlo in the simulation of high dimensional systems.    In
              statistics, Monte Carlo is an essential computational tool in the evaluation
              and study of likelihoods and posterior distributions.  The importance of this
              technique in practical Bayesian inference cannot be overstated.  Furthermore,
              the advances in Monte Carlo theory and method resulting from this investigation
              are of a general nature and have significance to many other areas in modern
              science and technology.  In physical sciences, dynamic Monte Carlo has long
              been an indispensible tool in the study of fluids, spin systems, phase
              transitions and critical phenomena, material growth and defect, and the
              behavior of polymers.  In biology, Monte Carlo advances our understanding of
              protein conformations, and plays an important role in genetic and evolutionary
              analysis.  In engineering, partly through its pivotal role in stochastic search
              methods, Monte Carlo is useful in such diverse areas as expert system, network
              optimization, machine learning and chip design.  Therefore, the findings of
              this research are expected to bring considerable benefit to many current areas
              of strategic importance rang ing from material research to protein engineering.
