Title       : Domain Growth in PMN-type Relaxor Ferroelectric Oxides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9703550

Award Number: 9703550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Davies davies@sol1.lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1774,9161,9237,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9703550  Davies    Preliminary experiments that have been conducted on a member 
              of the PMN-relaxor family, PMT  Pb(Mg1/3Ta2/3)03  indicate  that the annealing
              temperatures utilized in all the previous  attempts to promote domain growth
              lie in a range where the  perovskite is kinetically inert.  By taking special 
              precautions that inhibit the volatilization of PbO,  higher  temperature heat
              treatments reveal that the size of the  domains and degree of cation ordering
              can be increased by  more than an order of magnitude.  These observations 
              unambiguously show that the currently accepted "space  charge" models for the
              PMN relaxors are invalid.  In this  model the fine-scale inhomogeneities in the
              arrangements of  the metal cations in the "B-sites" of the perovskite 
              structure are interpreted in terms of the formation of  negatively charged
              ordered nano-domains dispersed in a  positively charged disordered matrix.  The
              primary  experimental support for this interpretation comes from the  apparent
              absence of any growth of the domains or change in  the degree of ordering with
              extended thermal treatment.  This project will explore several new avenues of
              research  that emanate from these results and focuses on the structure  and
              properties of selected niobate and tantalate relaxor  systems.  The goals of
              these studies are: (1) to establish  how the structural state of PMN-type
              relaxors respond to  different high temperature treatments; (2) to develop new 
              crystal chemical models for the cation ordering that are  consistent with these
              observations; (3) to characterize how  the new variable of degree of order and
              domain size affects  the dielectric response of the PMN relaxers and; (4) to 
              exploit these models to develop new relaxor ceramics.  %%%  Since their
              discovery over 35 years ago, relaxor  ferroelectrics have attracted widespread
              interest for  applications in multi-layer capacitors, transducers, 
              electro-optic devices, and thin film memories.  It is now  well known that the
              dielectric properties  of relaxor systems  are intimately linked to the
              localized disorder in their  crystal structures.  However, a full understanding
              of the  origins of the structural inhomogeneities and their  relationship to
              the physics of the relaxor response does not  yet exist.  This is particularly
              true for the lead-based PMN  (lead-magnesium-niobium oxide) complex perovskite
              relaxors,  the most well known and widely studied family of relaxors,  which
              are the focus of this exploratory study.  The  extensive studies that have been
              conducted on the PMN  systems have led to the establishment and acceptance of
              one  model as a basis for explaining their structures and  properties. 
              Preliminary work by the Principal Investigator  has shown that this model may
              not be correct.  The project  will perform experiments to confirm the PI's
              model that will  then be used to develop new relaxor materials.  ***
