Title       : Mathematical Sciences Issues in Phase Transformations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9703483

Award Number: 9703483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Fife fife@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703483  Fife    Solid and liquid materials can exist in different ``states'',
              whether  the concept of state is that of the usual liquid/solid phase, or some 
              other condition like a variant of a crystal, etc.  The processes which  cause
              and accompany changes of state, while usually known in broad  terms, often also
              have mysterious aspects.  The understanding of these  processes is a basic
              thrust of present day materials science.  In the  face of little known basic
              physics, mathematical models are continually  being proposed in the hopes of
              shedding insight.  The present proposal  focusses attention on certain classes
              of continuum models for the  spatio-temporal variation of phase
              transformations.  In typical cases,  this variation consists of motion of an
              interface between two phases  or between more general types of states.
              Different models do not  always predict the same thing, an example being the
              detailed nature of  the motion of the interface in anisotropic media.  One aim
              in the  proposed work will be to better elucidate the differing assumptions of 
              important classes of models, and to tie these different assumptions  more
              clearly with their predictions. Special attention, in comparing  these models,
              will be paid to nonlocal ones. Finally, a mysterious  specific type of phase
              transformation for solid binary alloys known as  discontinuous precipitation or
              cellular precipitation will be further  modeled and analyzed.     The
              development of new high performance materials is vital to economic  and other
              national interests.  Among the many properties of materials  which are relevant
              to their performance is  the possibility of  progressive phase change and the
              development of  interfaces between  alternate solid phases or crystalline
              variants. There is need for a  great deal more basic understanding of the
              processes by which such  interfaces are formed and move.  This research will
              contribute to this  understanding by the development, comparison, and analysis
              of  mathematical models of these phen omena based on physical laws.
