Title       : CAREER: Bistatic and Mobile Multiple-Doppler Technique Development and
               Educational Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2001       
File        : a9703032

Award Number: 9703032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549379             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua M. Wurman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1076,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9703032  Wurman         Under the Faculty Early Career Development Program
              (CAREER), the  Principal Investigator will pursue research and educational
              activities associated with  two new and innovative uses of Doppler radars for
              meteorological research.   Single  or multiple Doppler radars at fixed sites
              have been utilized for many years in  meteorological research and some aspects
              of their use are very mature.  Due to  technological advances, research Doppler
              radars have evolved to the state where they  can be mounted in mobile 
              ground-based and airborne platforms.  Under other  support, the Principal
              Investigator has begun to develop two mobile ground-based  Doppler radar
              systems which provide many advantages over fixed sites.  Primary  among these
              are the ability to acquire many more data sets and to obtain data at  much
              higher spatial resolution.  Along with these advantages, however, also comes 
              special problems in data analysis/synthesis.  For example, higher elevation
              angles  than normally encountered with fixed radar sites may cause some
              potential problems.   Additionally, the possibility of collecting data while
              moving also provides special  challenges in developing optimal experimental
              designs and in analysis of data.          The second area of research the
              Principal Investigator will pursue is the use  of bistatic multiple Doppler
              networks.  This is a network consisting of one  transmitting radar with a
              network of many, distributed receivers.  This is very new  technology that has
              the advantage, among many others, of providing relatively  inexpensive mapping
              of wind fields over large areas.  The Principal Investigator will  continue
              research into the best design and utilization of such networks.        Under
              the educational component of this CAREER award, the Principal  Investigator
              will incorporate the mobile Dopplers and bistatic networks into graduate 
              courses as well as host Summer workshops for students.  This will integrate
              students  into research that is at the very cutting e dge of development of new
              meteorological  radar technologies.  ***
