Title       : CAREER: Nonlinearity and Uncertainty in Control System Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9703294

Award Number: 9703294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy A. Freeman freeman@ece.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9703294  Freeman    A basic purpose of feedback is to reduce the effect of
              uncertainty on the behavior of a system.  When applied inappropriately,
              however, feedback can also increase the risk of instability and other
              undesirable phenomena.  An obstacle to the successful design of feedback
              controllers has long been the presence of nonlinearity in models and in real
              systems.  The goal of this project is to develop innovative methods for
              designing feedback controllers for uncertain nonlinear systems and to educate
              future engineers and researchers in their application.  This project will build
              the foundation of an integrated program of research and education in nonlinear
              and robust control theory in the Robert R. McCormick School of Engineering and
              Applied Science at Northwestern University.  The educational goals of this
              project are to revise existing undergraduate and graduate courses in systems
              and control and to develop new graduate courses on nonlinear control system
              analysis and design.  Selected topics from the proposed research activities
              will be integrated into these courses.  These activities will contribute
              substantially to the educational objectives of the Council on Dynamic Systems
              and Control, a new interdisciplinary program at Northwestern with participating
              faculty and students from five engineering departments.  The research goals of
              this project are to further develop the nonlinear control design techniques
              pioneered by the PI and co-workers and to deepen the current understanding of
              fundamental issues in nonlinear control theory.  During the course of this
              project, the PI will identify those flexibility's in new and existing nonlinear
              design methods which can be exploited to obtain good controllers for practical
              applications.  For example, one task is to create new tools for incorporating
              nonlinear control constraints ubiquitous in real systems into the control
              design procedure, a departure from the traditional approach of ignoring such
              constraints during the design.  Another  task is to analyze the effects of
              measurement error on the behavior of nonlinear feedback loops and to develop
              design techniques for reducing such effects.  In collaboration with Rockwell
              Science Center in Thousand Oaks, California, the new nonlinear design methods
              will be applied to problems in automotive control, aircraft control, and
              industrial automation control.  This project will result in a significant
              contribution to the growing discipline of nonlinear control theory,
              particularly in the area of robust nonlinear control.  Design guidelines
              developed during the course of this project will be invaluable to the control
              engineer who is trying to apply the state-of-the-art methods to real control
              problems.  Furthermore, this project will make a substantial impact on the
              interdisciplinary graduate program in systems and control at Northwestern.  Not
              only will students who take the proposed design courses be exposed to the
              latest breakthroughs in the field of nonlinear control, they will also develop
              an appreciation and basic understanding of the effects of nonlinearity in
              feedback loops created by nature or designed by engineers.
