Title       : CAREER/EPSCoR: Cooperative Agents for Conceptual Search and Browsing of World
               Wide Web Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a9703307

Award Number: 9703307
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Gauch sgauch@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1045,9139,9150,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this project are four-fold: (1) to investigate ways to support
              distributed searching agents for the Web; (2) to evaluate the effectiveness of
              ontology-based Web browsing agents; (3) to study the use of of visualization
              agents for the Web; and (4) to keep a record of changes to the ontology to
              study how information changes on the Web. This approach has the following
              advantages: First, distributing the search process makes more equitable use of
              computing and network resources and allows search agents to be customized to
              reflect local interests and preferences. Second, an ontology-based browsing
              agent allows for more serendipitous access to Web resources. Unlike the current
              browsing structures (e.g., Yahoo), these browsing agents associate appropriate
              resources with each concept automatically. The ontology may adapt over time at
              individual sites, allowing the browsing structure to evolve as the Web itself
              evolves. Third, the ability to visualize large portions of the Web in a more
              abstract way allows users to quickly get an impression of what type of
              information is available. Fourth, by keeping a history of changes to the local
              ontologies, the ebb and flow of the importance of concepts locally and globally
              can be presented. Finally, undergraduate and graduate students are being
              exposed to a truly interdisciplinary research through their involvement in a
              long term project that combines expertise from several fields, primarily
              computer graphics, artificial intelligence, distributed processing and
              information science. The World Wide Web (WWW) offers the promise of unlimited
              access to electronic information. However currently, the reality is electronic
              access to unlimited anarchy. This project is addressing the use of conceptual
              ontologies to bring order to the chaos.
