Title       : Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential and Integral
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9703683

Award Number: 9703683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $221722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lars B. Wahlbin wahlbin@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Lars Wahlbin    Abstract    It is proposed to work on several problems in the
              numerical analysis of  finite element methods for partial differential and
              integral  equations.  A. Maximum-norm estimates for finite element methods in
              second order  hyperbolic problems: In contrast to the situation for elliptic
              and  parabolic problems, the theory in the case of hyperbolic problems is  very
              incomplete.  B. Superconvergence in finite element methods: The main problem is
              to  ascertain when (and when not) superconvergence holds up to boundaries.  C.
              Finite element methods in problems with anisotropic diffusion: In  the
              singularly perturbed case, very little is known.  D. Finite element methods in
              partial integro-differential equations:  The main problem lies with enormous
              memory and work requirements in  problems with an integral-type memory term.   
                  It has been estimated that 2/3 of all computer runs involving 
              approximation of scientific or engineering models are useless: not  because
              they are necessarily wrong but because you do not know that  they are right and
              so cannot trust them. This is particularly annoying  when you are formulating a
              new model and want to find its predictions  to test against reality. You do not
              know whether a peculiar prediction  is inherent in the model or crept in via a
              faulty computer simulation  of it.  The present proposal is aimed at
              investigating how a selection of  widely used simulation methods behave on
              mathematical problems with  various quirks. It will thus give guidelines to
              people using numerical  methods and help them in judging whether a particular
              series of  computer runs is reliable or not in representing a scientific model.
