Title       : Evaluating Ground Liquefaction Potential by Piezovibrocone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9703736

Award Number: 9703736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Mayne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn J. Rix  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9703736    The objectives of this research program are to develop new 
              instrumentation, test methodology, data acquisition, and field  procedures  for
              the direct in-situ and site-specific assessment of soil  liquefaction 
              potential by cone penetration testing.  The program consists of a collaborative
              group effort between  Georgia Tech  and Virginia Tech, and is being co-funded
              with the United States  Geological  Survey. It includes the assembly of a
              vertically-vibrating  piezocone  penetrometer (piezovibrocone), laboratory
              calibration chamber  testing, a  companion series of laboratory cyclic triaxial
              and simple shear  testing,  and field trials at geotechnical experimentation
              sites.  Current methods of assessing the liquefaction susceptibility of  loose 
              sands and silts during earthquake shaking rely strongly on  empirical 
              correlations and methodologies. Present state-of-practice  procedures for 
              liquefaction evaluation include both in-situ and laboratory test  methods  that
              require correction factors which are not fully understood,  nor well  defined. 
              The vibrocone consists of a cone penetrometer coupled with a  vibrating  shaker
              mechanism that induces liquefaction of the soil in the  vicinity of  the probe
              during penetration into the ground. Vertical penetration  tests  are conducted
              under both static and dynamic excitation in paired  side-by-side soundings.
              Comparisons of cone tip resistance values,  sleeve  friction values, and
              penetration pore water pressures from  adjacent  soundings are made to
              ascertain the liquefaction potential and  other  properties of the subsoils.
              The penetration test is designed to  allow a  rational interpretation by
              analytical theories which incorporate  important  soil behavioral aspects such
              as dynamic loading, cyclic pore  pressure  generation, initial stress state,
              and residual undrained steady-  state  strength. As envisioned, the
              piezovibrocone will thus offer an  improved and  systematic framework for
              evaluating the liquefaction  susceptibility of  loos e ground in
              seismically-active regions. Additionally, it  should have  value for assessing
              the applicability and effectiveness of ground  modification techniques such as
              vibroflotation, vibro-replacement,  and  densification by blasting.
