Title       : Japan JSPS Program: A Search for the Cosmic Infrared Background with the Near
               Infrared Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9703818

Award Number: 9703818
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Lim   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lim  9703818    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the  Promotion
              of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Mark Lim at the Institute
              for Space and Astronautical Study,  Kanagawa, Japan.  Dr. Lim will work with
              Dr. Toshio  Matsumoto, Professor of Galactic Evolution, Division of 
              Astrophysics, on a research project entitled, "A Search for  the Cosmic
              Infrared Background with the Near Infrared  Spectrometer."    The Cosmic
              Infrared Background (CIB) is a diffuse space  background composed of the light
              from unresolved primeval  galaxies.  Current theoretical work addressing the
              CIB  describes a picture of starlight emitted from the first  galaxies forming
              a near infrared (NIR) component brightest  at a wavelength of a few microns. 
              Some of this starlight  may be absorbed and reemitted by dust and seen as a far
               infrared component.  The proposed research consists of a  complete analysis of
              NIR data using the Near Infrared  Spectrometer (NIRS), which is mounted on the
              Infrared  Telescope in Space (IRTS) satellite.  NIRS is a grating  spectrometer
              with wavelength coverage of 1.2 to 4.2  \micron~with a resolution of 0.12
              \micron.  The primary  scientific goal of the research would be to detect or 
              constrain the amplitude of the CIB using competing systems  of analysis in an
              effort to obtain the most reliable data.  Results of the research will assist
              in the characterization  of the CIB and interstellar chemistry and will aid in
              the  development of future U.S. and Japanese space missions.  ***
