Title       : Japan STA Program: Optimal Control of Floating Wave Energy Converters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9703749

Award Number: 9703749
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Umesh A. Korde   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Korde  9703749    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency 
              (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Umesh Korde at the  Japan Marine Science
              and Technology Center (JAMSTEC),  Yokosuka, Japan.  Dr. Korde will work with
              Dr. Yukihisa  Washio, Senior Research Engineer, on a research project 
              entitled, "Optimal Control of Floating Wave Energy Devices."    Over the last
              two decades, various types of devices have  been developed to absorb wave
              energy, with near-shore,  shallow-water devices being far easier to install and
               maintain.  The practical problem currently confronted by  researchers,
              however, is how to develop applications that  absorb increased available wave
              energy in deeper waters.  The principal component of most devices is the
              primary  energy converter, a technique that oscillates in response to  the
              waves and converts these oscillations into revolutions  via a turbogenerator or
              reciprocations of a pump.  On  floating devices, the primary converter motion
              normally  occurs using the floating hull as a reference, a process  that
              reduces the energy-conversion efficiency.  Significant  improvements would
              result if one could provide on board the  hull an actively controlled body
              which serves as a steady  frame of reference. The primary goal of the proposed 
              research is to develop such a system.  The secondary goal is  to develop a
              time-domain control method that adjusts the  primary converter dynamics on a
              wave-by-wave basis to  optimize the energy absorbed in irregular waves.  ***
