Title       : SBIR PHASE II: New Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and Processing Technology for
               Highway Design and Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9703948

Award Number: 9703948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309998             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Manthey manthey@camsysinc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CamSys Inc
	      1223 Peoples Ave
	      Troy, NY  121803511    518/276-4082

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1037,1473,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop an
              innovative Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and Processing System for special
              areas of highway design.  To design and maintain transportation systems,
              three-dimensional data on specific areas are collected by means of aerial
              photography, manual surveys, and labor intensive data processing.  The current
              aerial photography methods, however, are not capable of collecting data on
              areas that may not be seen readily from an aerial position, such as bridges and
              rock faces.  The goal of the proposed project is to develop a portable,
              easy-to-use, digital camera-based system that used close-range photogrammetry
              techniques to accurately model these areas.  The proposed data acquisition
              system consists of a high resolution digital camera, total station, and a
              photogrammetry calibration target, as tested during the Phase I program.  The
              feasibility of such a system was also demonstrated by a highway experiment
              conducted while receiving assistance from the New York State Department of
              Transportation (NYSDOT).  A novel feature of the proposed system is that it is
              tailored to the accuracy desired for different applications through the use of
              a mathematical model.  The main research objectives focus on implementing,
              testing, and improving methods to obtain accurate camera position and
              orientation data, and developing an innovative method of automating 2D point
              correspondence in digital images.  The new prototype system offers significant
              labor and time savings in gathering photogrammetry and ground survey data.  
              Potential commercial applications of the research include assessing bridge
              condition, modeling rock faces, reproducing crime scenes and archeological
              objects.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
