Title       : Evolution Equations in Modeling Chemically Reacting Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9703716

Award Number: 9703716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Matalon matalon@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Matalon  9703716    The objectives of the proposed work is to derive and analyze
              simple  mathematical models of reacting flow systems by means of asymptotic and
               perturbation methods supplemented by numerical computations. The problems 
              that will be addressed are related to phenomena that have been observed 
              experimentally and are not yet completely understood. They fall in two 
              categories: the first class of problems is concerned with premixed flames 
              propagating in tubes, while the second class is concerned with diffusion 
              flames (non-premixed combustion) that result from evaporating liquid fuels. 
              The mathematical formulation of these problems can be reduced to a single,  or
              a couple, of evolution equations that contain the main ingredients of  the
              physical problem and are to be solved numerically. For premixed flames 
              propagating in tubes the evolution equation takes the form of an 
              integro-differential equation that describes the instantaneous shape and 
              location of the flame front. For the burning of liquid films one finds, in 
              general, two equations: one for the dynamics of the interface between the 
              liquid and gas phases, and the other for the diffusion flame sheet which is 
              the interface where the fuel vapor burns with the ambient oxidant.     
              Combustion processes are extremely complicated; they encompass subjects 
              concerned with energy generation and heat transfer, rates and mechanisms of 
              chemical reactions, fluid flow and mass transport. They cover a broad range  of
              important engineering technologies as well as topics of primary societal  and
              environmental concerns. A fundamental way to gain understanding into  the
              complex phenomena that one observe in various combustion systems is  through
              mathematical modeling. This approach enables one to identify the  underlying
              physical mechanisms responsible for the observed phenomenon, to  study the
              interaction between the various physical parameters and to  explore whether
              this interaction leads to the observed behavior. A deep  understandin g often
              leadq to suggestions of new directions for experiments  and design. The
              problems in this study are concerned with premixed flames,  relevant to
              internal combustion engines and aerospace propulsion systems  where the fuel
              and oxidant are intimately mixed prior to ignition, and  combustion of liquid
              fuels, relevant to accidental spillage and fire spread  where, under special
              circumstances, burning may occur with the available  ambient oxidant.
