Title       : Stochastic Processes with Applications to Ecology and Theoretical Population
               Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9703694

Award Number: 9703694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88758              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia M. Neuhauser cneuhaus@cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703694  Neuhauser   The projects are divided into two primary research areas,
              the theoretical investigation of ecological models in the context of
              interacting particle systems, and genealogical processes in theoretical
              population genetics. Interacting particle systems are continuous time Markov
              processes on the integer lattice in which each site is in one of several
              states. Local rules determine the dynamics of the systems. They provide an
              ideal framework to investigate the role of the spatial structure in models in
              ecology. In joint work with Dr. Stephen Pacala (Princeton University) the
              principal investigator will consider the consequences of spatial structure in
              classical models in ecology, such as the Lotka-Volterra model of interspecific
              competition. The nonspatial version is very well understood. Including a
              spatial component will likely yield new phenomena. In joint work with Dr.
              Stephen Krone (University of Idaho) the principal investigator will study the
              spread of a population in a heterogeneous environment by using the
              two-dimensional contact process in a random environment. In theoretical
              population genetics, Dr. Neuhauser plans to study genealogies under various
              selection schemes, for instance, frequency-dependent selection and overdominant
               selection. It is planned to rigorously derive genealogies and to use them to
              investigate sample properties in both spatial and nonspatial settings.   The
              causes and effects of spatial structure have long been central topics in
              population and community ecology. In joint work with Dr. Stephen Pacala
              (Princeton University) the principal investigator will study the effects of
              competition on the spatial structure of communities. Local interactions and
              competition in spatial communities can cause clumping of individuals of the
              same species which can lead to a reduction in biodiversity. In joint work with
              Dr. Stephen Krone (University of Idaho) the principal investigator will
              consider the spread of populations in heterogeneous environments and how habi
              tat destruction and subsequent restoration affects the ability of populations
              to recover. Genealogies are an important tool in population genetics to
              investigate properties of samples of genes. Dr. Neuhauser plans to investigate
              frequency-dependent and overdominant selection. Both modes of selection are
              known to be able to maintain a high degree of genetic diversity. Little is
              known about genealogies under such selection schemes which are important, for
              instance, in plant breeding systems or in the major histocompatibility complex.
