Title       : Space Decomposition Methods in Nonsmooth Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9703952

Award Number: 9703952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Mifflin mifflin@math.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Robt. Mifflin   Abstract for DMS-9703952            Abstract for Space
              Decomposition Methods in Nonsmooth Optimization        The proposed research
              concerns developing theory and methods for implicitly    combining polyhedral
              and quadratic approximation to produce a rapidly    convergent algorithm for
              minimizing a nonsmooth function of many variables.    The idea is to use a
              bundle method to determine a so-called VU-space    decomposition such that on
              V-space the cutting-plane aspect of bundling works    fast and on U-space a
              quasi-Newton approximation of a Hessian of a     U-Lagrangian can be employed.
              Such methods can be used to solve large or     complicated optimization models
              via separation of variables or constraints.    For example, a water pressure
              control problem of finding values for flow    rates and pump pressure gaps to
              minimize pumping cost subject to maintaining    water pressures in allowable
              ranges at all points in a pipe network can be    solved via separation of the
              variables. If the flow rates are fixed then the    subproblem of finding
              optimal values for the pressure gaps is an easy-to-    solve linear
              minimization problem. With this approach the outer problem of    finding
              optimal values for the flow variables is a nonsmooth problem whose    solution
              can be found efficiently via the techniques to be developed.      The
              computational methods proposed for development are significant because    they
              can be applied in many practical decision-making situations. These    include
              decomposition of large or complicated models such as those occurring    in
              allocation of scarce resources, traffic assignment, manufacturing,   
              structural engineering, logistics and strategic planning. The pipe network   
              problem in the first paragraph is an important example occurring in civil   
              infrastructure design. It illustrates the need to make trade-off decisions   
              when considering conflicting design criteria such as simultaneously having   
              high reliability and low cost. Another area of applica tion is in power system 
                planning subject to environmental protection constraints. These decision   
              models will increase in importance as deregulation of the energy supply   
              sector takes effect. These problems naturally decompose into higher level   
              problems of deciding which types and sizes of power generation plants to   
              build and lower level problems of deciding how best to operate the various   
              units to meet daily energy demand. Additionally, this research fits in well   
              with ongoing efforts in high-performance computing, because its methods    will
              utilize parallel processing to solve larger or more complex decision-    making
              problems than are currently possible to solve.
