Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Quantum Integrability and Strong-Weak Coupling Quality of
               the Affine Toda Field Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9703595

Award Number: 9703595
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: ANDREW J. BORDNER   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bordner  9703595    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Andrew J. Bordner
              at the Yukawa Institute for Theoretical  Physics, Kyoto, Japan.  Dr. Bordner
              will work with Dr. Ryu  Sasaki, professor, on a research project entitled,
              "Quantum  Integrability and Strong-Weak Coupling Duality of the Affine-  Toda
              Field Theories."    The proposed research will examine the equivalence involved
               in a quantum field theory that displays characteristics of  strong
              interactions between fundamental particles, yet, at  the same time, indicates
              weak mutual interactions.  This  equivalence would be useful in understanding
              how to  calculate physical quantities in a strongly coupled theory,  such as
              that describing nuclear forces.  The proposed  research will examine a
              particular class of theories  designated "Affine-Toda field", the rationale
              being that  they are hypothesized to exhibit not only strong-weak  coupling
              equivalence, but are also hypothesized to allow the  calculation of all
              physical quantities without any initial  approximation methods.  In the past,
              physical quantities  have been calculated only in theories with a weak
              coupling,  and then only using approximation methods.  This solvability  has
              led to a postulated form for the S-matrix, a concept  that describes the
              scattering of an arbitrary number of  particles as a result of coupling.  The
              research will  provide a valuable test of how different quantum field  theories
              are in fact different formulations of the same  theory, a finding that may
              eventually provide a solution for  how to predict properties of nucleons from a
              fundamental  theory of quarks.  ***
