Title       : CAREER: Computer Aided Analysis and Design of Power Electronic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2000     
File        : a9703449

Award Number: 9703449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dragan Maksimovic maksimov@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  ECS-9703449  Maksimovic    The objective of this project is to develop
              numerical techniques for computer aided analysis, modeling, syntheses and
              design of power electronic systems, and to integrate the developed tools in the
              power-area curriculum.    In the first phase of the project, numerical
              techniques and a simulation tool are developed for piecewise-smooth systems. 
              Piecewise-smooth (PWS) system modeling is proposed as the general approach that
              includes full range of modeling options: from idealized piecewise-linear (PWL)
              models suitable for fast transient simulation over many switching cycles, to
              detailed nonlinear models for accurate predictions of waveforms within a
              switching cycle.  As a result, the developed PWS simulator is able to perform a
              complete range of simulation tasks and to aid analysis and design of a wide
              range of power electronic applications including power system and utility
              interfaces, motor drives, renewable energy systems and switching power
              supplies.  The PWS simulator is based on new numerical techniques including:
              unified representation of PWL, PWS and smooth nonlinear elements to obtain a
              constant system matrix, efficient iteration over nonlinearity using numerical
              continuation methods, and a PWS state determination algorithm to eliminate
              convergence problems around fast switching transitions.    The second phase of
              the project concentrates on applications and extensions of the PWS .simulator:
              (1) comprehensive computer-aided steady-state analysis of switching power
              converters, including general, efficient and robust algorithms for finding
              periodic steady-state solution, tracing steady-state characteristics over a
              range of parameters, and tracing operating-mode boundaries in the parameter
              space; (2) automated small-signal and large-signal dynamic modeling of power
              electronic systems; (3) a framework for higher-level CAD tools such as
              synthesis, tolerance analysis and design optimization tools.  The developed
              techniques are implemented in software suitable for  use in power electronics
              and power systems research, development and education.  The tools are
              integrated into two undergraduate power-area courses - an Energy Conversion
              lecture course and a new, hands-on Power Electronics laboratory.  A set of
              interactive WEB pages is developed to combine on-line simulation tools with
              supporting laboratory and course materials.
