Title       : CAREER: Light: A Fundamental Primitive for Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9703399

Award Number: 9703399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Gortler sjg@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The process of creating a virtual environment or object in  computer graphics
              typically begins with modeling the geometric  and surface attributes of the
              objects in the environment along  with any lights.  Great effort has been
              expended to develop  computer aided design systems that allow the specification
              of  complex geometry and material attributes.  Similarly, a great  deal of work
              has been undertaken to produce systems that simulate  the propagation of light
              through virtual environments to create  realistic images.  Despite these
              efforts, it has remained  difficult or impossible to recreate much of the
              complex geometry  and subtle lighting effects found in the real world.    The
              modeling problem can potentially be bypassed by capturing the  geometry and
              material properties of objects directly from the  real world using some
              combination of cameras, structured light,  range finders, and mechanical
              sensing devices.  When successful,  the results can be fed into a rendering
              program to create images  of real objects and scenes. Unfortunately, these
              systems are  still unable to completely capture small details in geometry and 
              material properties.  Existing rendering methods also continue to  be limited
              in their capability to faithfully reproduce real world  illumination, even if
              given accurate geometric models.    This project will develop techniques for
              using a representation  of light (radiance) as a basic primitive for computer
              graphics.  This primitive will augment the traditional geometry-based 
              primitives used in computer graphics.  This framework will  provide a unified
              method for encoding the complete appearance of  a complex model, and allow the
              rerendering of an object at speeds  independent of the its geometric or
              lighting complexity.  Moreover, this framework will allow one to use a video
              camera to  sample the radiance information of a real world scene or 
              environment. This sampled information can then be organized  properly to allow
              for redisplay of the scene interactively from  any  virtual camera at any
              viewpoint.    The research is fundamental in that it explores an entirely novel
               primitive for computer graphics.  This primitive is one of the  most natural
              ways to represent the complicated visual information  present in a scene.   
              The research will facilitate the interactive viewing of captured  real world
              scenes.  No other known method has the ability to  directly represent the
              information captured by a video camera,  and use this information for
              interactive generation of new  realistic images.  The success of this project
              will have impact  in such diverse fields as simulation, interactive virtual 
              environments computer education, the visual archival of objects,  and the
              transmittance of the appearance of objects in 3D  catalogs.
