Title       : Workshop on Mathematical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1997    
File        : a9703489

Award Number: 9703489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4916               (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Wollkind dwollkind@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward F. Pate  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wollkind  9703489       The investigator and his colleagues organize a three day
               Workshop on mathematical biology at Washington State University.  The workshop
              is interdisciplinary and should be a focal point for  the meeting of
              theoretical and experimental scientists of  numerous backgrounds, especially
              from the Pacific Northwest  region.  An important emphasis is attracting young
              scientists to  attend the workshop, and providing them a fertile ground for
              open  communication with senior scientists on topics at the cutting  edge of
              theoretical and mathematical biology.  Because of the  geographical location,
              young scientists from eastern Washington,  Idaho, and Montana very rarely get
              such opportunities for open  discussions with experienced researchers.  Similar
              workshops have  been held regularly since 1991.  In these workshops, topics
              have  ranged from developmental biology and medicine to ecology and 
              epidemiology.  In many instances, the informal contacts made at  these
              workshops proved valuable in forming new research  collaborations.       There
              has been a recent surge of interest in the use of  quantitative mathematical
              approaches to understand better the  exceedingly complex phenomena exhibited by
              living organisms.  To  further this goal, the investigator and colleagues
              organize a  workshop in mathematical biology.  The workshop is 
              interdisciplinary, attracting researchers with both theoretical 
              (mathematicians, geneticists , physicists, physical chemists) and  experimental
              (biologists, biochemists, epidemiologists,  ecologists) backgrounds. 
              Contributed papers and discussion focus  on ways in which quantitative,
              theoretical, and experimental  methods can be combined to augment each other in
              an effort to  explain more fully specific problems arising from areas such as 
              developmental biology, medicine, ecology, and epidemiology.  An  important
              emphasis is attracting young scientists (recent Ph.D.'s  and graduate students)
              to attend the workshop, and in providing  them a fertile ground  for direct
              communication with senior  scientists on topics at the cutting edge of
              theoretical and  mathematical biology.  Given their geographical location,
              young  scientists from eastern Washington, Idaho, and Montana very  rarely get
              such opportunities for open discussions with  experienced researchers.  Similar
              workshops have been held  regularly since 1991.  In many instances, the
              informal contacts  made at these workshops have proved valuable in forming new 
              research collaborations.
