Title       : CAREER: Structure, Defects, and Chemistry of Transition Metal Oxide Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2000  
File        : a9703267

Award Number: 9703267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol A. Haney                          
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulrike Diebold diebold@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
                The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)  project,
              supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program, is the
              characterization of the surface chemistry,  structure, and defects of
              transition metal oxide surfaces that  have broad scientific and technological
              application.  Professor  Diebold and her undergraduate and graduate students at
              Tulane  University will use a range of surface characterization  techniques in
              this work including scanning tunneling microscopy,  X-ray photoelectron
              spectroscopy, ion scattering spectroscopy,  and thermal desorption
              spectroscopy.  The aim of this CAREER  research project is to probe the
              formation of defects and the  reactivity of these oxide surfaces at the atomic
              level to  establish a foundation for understanding the chemistry that  occurs
              at these surfaces.  Educational thrusts beyond involvement  of students in this
              research involve the development of a new  surface science course to complement
              the laboratory experience  and an outreach and mentoring program centered
              around the  establishment of a mobile scanning tunneling microscopy 
              laboratory.   Transition metal oxide surfaces are used in the fabrication of 
              gas sensors, catalysts, coatings for corrosion protection, and  environmental
              degradation systems.  Professor Diebold and her  students at Tulane University
              will apply several surface  spectroscopic methods that provide atomic scale
              spatial  resolution to the study of the chemistry, structure, and defects  of
              transition metal oxide surfaces with support of this CAREER  research project. 
              The chemistry that occurs at the surfaces of  these oxides is highly dependent
              on the structures that exist  there.  Knowledge of how these structures control
              these chemical  reactions will be produced by this work.  This hands-on 
              experimental program will have a positive educational impact on  the
              undergraduate and graduate students working on this project.   Portable
              scanning tunneling microscopy experiments and other  surface science
              experiments will be developed to bring the  excitement of this work to high
              school students in the New  Orleans and Mississippi Delta areas.  This activity
              will raise  these students' awareness of the excitement that can be 
              experienced in a scientific career.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
