Title       : CAREER: Markov Chain Algorithms for Combinatorial Problems from Statistical
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9703206

Award Number: 9703206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Randolph Franklin               
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana J. Randall randall@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research endeavors to explore uses of Markov chains,  focusing on
              applications in statistical physics and computer  science.  Markov chains are
              used in these disciplines to study  features of a combinatorial set by allowing
              (1) the sampling of  configurations and (2) estimating the set's cardinality. 
              In  statistical physics such sets arise as models of simple physical  systems,
              where the configurations typically represent  arrangements of molecules in the
              system.  Sampling provides  insight into the thermodynamic properties of the
              system, such as  the specific heat and free energy.    Recently in computer
              science, several new techniques have been  developed for proving that certain
              classes of Markov chains are  rapidly mixing.  In fact, there has been
              considerable success  with algorithms for precisely the types of problems
              arising from  physical models.  This project represents three new ways of 
              continuing this research in directions which will be beneficial  to both
              fields.    (1) Develop provably efficient algorithms for other combinatorial 
              problems.  Two problems of interest are: (a) k-coloring, which  arises in the
              Potts model for antiferromagnetism, and the Ice  model, and (b) Hamiltonian
              cycles on lattice regions and  hypercubes, which has applications in
              cryptography (for  encrypting images and generating random Gray code) and
              biophysics  (for studying compact conformations of polymers).    (2) Design
              sampling algorithms for finite lattice regions which  will give insight into
              the corresponding problems in infinite  lattices (i.e., the continuum limit).  
               (3) Develop decomposition techniques for bounding the mixing rate  of Markov
              chains and study applications using "`simulated  tempering."    Finally, this
              interdisciplinary research will be complemented by  the design of new courses
              which focus on (and encourage projects  related to) recent research results and
              through the organization  of workshops and seminars which bring together
              scientists from  the relevant disciplines.
