Title       : Scaling Limits for Stochastic and Quantum Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9703752

Award Number: 9703752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horng-Tzer Yau yau@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laszlo Erdos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9162,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9703752  Yau   The  incompressible  Navier-Stokes equation have been proved  as
              the   hydrodynamical limit equation of stochastic  lattice gas  models in 
              dimension 3. The first   project investigates the following three related
              topics:  (i)  the  scaling limit of  tagged   particles, (ii) the equilibrium
              fluctuation and  (iii) the appropriate time scale for dimensions   1 and 2. 
              The first problem emphasizes the  individual behavior of a typical particle
              instead   of the collective behavior of all the particles. The second problem
              is a question about the  central limit theorem. The third problem addresses 
              the time scale  in dimensions 1 and  2,   which is conjectured  to be very
              different from the diffusive scale in dimension 3. The   second project 
              studies the relaxation  rates of the Kawasaki dynamics of  Gibbs states in  
              infinite volume. This is believed to be  a power law. The method is  based on
              the Poincare   inequalities (spectral gap), logarithmic Sobolev inequalities
              and some entropy estimates.   The third project concerns the scaling limit of a
              quantum particle in a random potential.   There are two limiting cases: the low
              density  limit and the weak coupling limit. In both   cases, the phase space
              density of the quantum evolution  defined through  the Wigner   transform or
              the coherent state is expected to converge weakly to  a linear  Boltzmann  
              equation with  collision kernel given by the quantum   scattering  cross
              section.   This research addresses in particular the following two questions:
              (1) What is the   typical behavior of an individual particle in a fluid? Though
              the collective behavior of fluid    has been studied intensively, the important
               question of the propagation of individual    particles in the fluid has not.
              The project will study this question with stochastic models   which are
              believed to capture the essential behavior of  the fluid.  (2) How does a wave 
               travel in random media. It is believed that  with high disorder, a wave in
              random media    becomes loca lized. The important question is to analyze the
              low disorder region when a   wave propagates. This can be considered as a model
              for conduction  of current in a   semiconductor, or propagation of radio waves
              or seismic waves. The practical  equation   governing all these diverse
              phenomena  is the  Boltzmann equation. This study will try to   validate the
              Boltzmann equation from more basic models involving  wave equations in   random
              media and to understand its next order corrections or fluctuations.
