Title       : Stress, Hormones and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9120608

Award Number: 9120608
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin H. Bronson Bronson@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Stress can have long-term consequences on the health of                   
              individuals.  Therefore, it is pertinent to develop strategies                 
              for adapting and reacting to stress.  Indeed, most mammals have                
              evolved behavioral and neuroendocrine mechanisms to cope under                 
              severe conditions.  The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is                 
              regarded as a model system illustrating the way the central                    
              nervous system responds to stress.  Dr. Bronson has identified a               
              group of mammals, in a natural population in Australia, that do                
              not change their behavior but continue to be stressed to the                   
              point that death is inevitable.  No other mammal incorporates                  
              life-terminating stress as a normal part of its life history                   
              strategy.  Therefore, the neuroendocrine linkages between stress               
              and behavior in these animals must differ sharply from those                   
              known for other mammals.  Dr. Bronson's initial goal is to                     
              establish a successful breeding colony of these unique animals in              
              the United States.  He will then isolate and understand the                    
              behavioral and neuroendocrine mechanisms that allow this species               
              to maintain normal, but now destructive behavior, under                        
              conditions of stress.  The dramatic robustness of the                          
              relationship between stress and behavior in these animals offers               
              real hope of dissecting and understanding its neuroendocrine and               
              neurochemical mechanisms.  Comparing these data with our present               
              knowledge constitutes a powerful tool for establishing principles              
              about stress and behavioral that are universally important.                    
              Working with this unique animal model could prove important for                
              exploring the way behavior can modulate the immune system as well              
              as developing adaptive mechanisms to cope with acute and chronic               
              stress.
