Title       : Dissertation Research: Chimu and Inka State Facilities, Chicama Valley North
               Coast, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9120465

Award Number: 9120465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Banks L. Leonard  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Timothy Earle, Mr. Banks Leonard will               
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  Building on previous              
              fieldwork in the region, he will conduct an intensive survey of                
              the Chicama Valley in northern coastal Peru to locate and examine              
              Chimu and Inka archaeological sites.  The work has three phases.               
              First, Mr. Leonard will employ air photographs to locate large                 
              formal sites.  He will then study these on the ground through                  
              mapping and surface collection.  Extant above-ground architecture              
              will be carefully described and photographed.  Secondly, an                    
              intensive surface survey of a 2 km. wide transect in each of                   
              three areas will be conducted to locate smaller sites.  They will              
              be dated and their functions determined.  Finally, Mr. Leonard                 
              will trace and map major irrigation canal systems to reconstruct               
              prehistoric agricultural practices and trace their development                 
              over time.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The arid inhospitable coast of Peru saw the rise of several                    
              kingdoms before the arrival of the Spanish.  The Chicama Valley                
              documents two of these: the Chimu state which developed locally                
              and a later Inka empire which was externally imposed and extended              
              from Bolivia to Argentina.  Archaeologists are interested in how               
              states arise and are maintained and what types of variation among              
              them may exist.  Because environment and geography may be                      
              controlled, the Chicama Valley provides an excellent locale to                 
              examine this issue.  Preliminary work by Leonard indicates that                
              large numbers of sites (many unstudied by archaeologists) are                  
              present and that the dry desert environment has resulted in                    
              excellent preservation of cultural remains.  Mr. Leonard posits a              
              number of hypotheses about how control of this region may have                 
              been maintained and the archaeological data will allow him to                  
              test these.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to many archaeologists.  It will increase our                 
              understanding of how complex societies arise and are maintained.               
              It will also further the training of an extremely promising young              
              scientist.
