Title       : The Relationships Among Science, Production and Consumption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9120629

Award Number: 9120629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Paul   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Professor Paul is examining the relationship among science,                    
              production and consumption.  His study examines such issues as the             
              use of technology to improve product quality, the role of                      
              government in protecting the health of its citizens, the sometimes             
              competing role of government in promoting economic development, and            
              the process of the spread of technology through capitalistic                   
              enterprise and government initiative.                                          
                                                                                             
              Professor Paul is examining these issues in the context of the                 
              application of science in the development of the wine industry both            
              in France and in California.   The study begins with the efforts of            
              scientists to cope with the disastrous infestation of the plant                
              louse which wiped out all of the old French vines.  Scientists                 
              "invented" a post-phylloxera vine to cope with this and other                  
              infestations (oidium, blackrot, mildew, etc.).  No less a scientist            
              than Louis Pasteur played a major role in the development of the               
              new science of oenology, drawing on fundamental research in botany,            
              chemistry, biology and medical science.  Importantly, Professor                
              Paul will show how scientists were directed in their research by               
              consumers and their developing tastes for wine.  Scientists                    
              harnessed their expertise to develop a wine based on a taste model             
              whose formation is a complex historical and aesthetical process.               
              The producer, scientist and consumer had to reach consensus on a               
              fundamental long-term if tacit agreement on the nature of this                 
              taste model.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This history of oenology promises to make significant contributions            
              to our understanding of how science is applied to meet not only the            
              "needs" but the "taste" of its users.  The study should be of                  
              interest to historians of science, technology and medicine as well             
              as cultural and social historians and those interested in the                  
              history of wine.
