Title       : Sensory Coding in the Toadfish Saccular Hair Cell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9120497

Award Number: 9120497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoinette Steinacker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Caribbean Neurosci Fdtn
	      201 Blvd. del Valle
	      San Juan, PR  00901    809/721-4149

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to characterize the resonant                     
              frequencies and ionic currents of toadfish saccular hair cells in              
              an attempt to reveal either a regional mapping of these properties             
              or a grouping of particular electrophysiological properties.  Such             
              grouping may reveal a coding in the hair cells of the saccule that             
              is neither regional nor solely for frequency, but perhaps for other            
              properties of the sensory stimulus.  It is anticipated that this               
              work will lead to an understanding of the function of the saccule              
              and to future experiments that will define the role of these ionic             
              currents in sensory coding in hair cells in general.  The ionic                
              currents in the hair cells will be characterized and then related              
              to the hair cell morphology.  The saccular macula has macro- and               
              microscopic morphological division (by light and scanning electron             
              microscopy); cells will be sampled from these regions for the                  
              experiments to be performed.  The magnitude and kinetics of                    
              activation and deactivation of the four potassium currents found in            
              the hair cell will be determined.  I(k) will be isolated by                    
              blocking IK(Ca) with TEA or charybdotoxin at voltages where the A              
              current is inactivated.  Voltage paradigms designed to reveal the              
              A current and inward rectifier will provide a map of these currents            
              by cell type and location.  Also, the resonant frequency of each               
              hair cell will be determined.  Hair cell resonant frequencies will             
              be correlated with the currents measured below and mapped on the               
              saccule.  While in currrent clamp, action potential production by              
              the hair cell will be tested using positive current steps.  The                
              hypothesis underlying this research is that the diverse complements            
              of ionic currents found in toadfish saccular hair cells are not                
              configured to code only frequency, but also may enable the cell to             
              respond optimally to other attributes of the auditory stimulus.                
                                                                                             
              There is considerable unexplained diversity in hair cell ionic                 
              currents.  It does not appear that the diversity is due to a                   
              regional distribution of cell types attributable to segregation by             
              auditory (fast kinetics, high frequency) or vestibular (slow                   
              kinetics, low frequency) function.  Additionally, the range of                 
              resonant frequencies in the saccule (107 - 175 Hz) does not include            
              either the toadfish calling frequency (up to 250 Hz) or hearing                
              freqency (up to 700 Hz).  These and other observations cast some               
              doubt on the concept that current kinetics are coding only                     
              characteristic frequency.  Perhaps one set of cells codes frequency            
              and another transients, e.g.  The experiments are therefore                    
              designed to look for sub-sets of cells with specific ionic current             
              composition that may respond differently to simulated transducer               
              currents.  These sub-sets will be classed with their morphology,               
              particularly hair cell bundle morphology, site of origin and                   
              response to three putative efferent transmitters.  Due to the                  
              technical difficulties of using either sound or bimorph stimulation            
              at characteristic frequency ranges in isolated cells, simulated                
              transducer currents will be used.  Simulated currents also have an             
              advantage in that features of the stimulus can be manipulated to               
              test their interaction with ionic currents.
