Title       : Center for Photo-Induced Charge Tranfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9120001

Award Number: 9120001
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Donald M. Burland                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15853600           (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Whitten  (Principal Investigator former)
              Anne M. Kelley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lewis J. Rothberg LJR@chem.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 9171      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9163,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide renewed support for the Science and                    
              Technology Center for Photoinduced Charge Transfer. All of the                 
              Center research projects will be jointly directed by University                
              of Rochester faculty members and researchers from the Eastman                  
              Kodak Company and/or Xerox Corporation.  The research will be                  
              concerned primarily with providing answers to three fundamental                
              questions: What are the structural, environmental and energetic                
              factors that control the fundamental rates and efficiencies of                 
              electron transfer, charge separation and charge transport?  How                
              can these factors be manipulated to obtain new chemistry and                   
              useful reaction products? How can new materials and devices be                 
              developed for photochemically based technology?  The various                   
              Center research projects will investigate photoinduced charge                  
              transfer in a wide variety of chemical systems, including                      
              gas-phase clusters, homogeneous solutions, organized assemblies                
              such as Langmuir-Blodgett films, solids, and across interfaces.                
              Each project will make use of a wide variety of skills, usually                
              drawn from more than one branch of science.  Synthetic organic                 
              chemistry will be used to build new molecules with particular                  
              photochemical properties, and complex systems will be assembled                
              using a variety of methods, including surface science, polymer                 
              science and molecular biology. All the systems under study will                
              be characterized using modern spectroscopy and other tools of                  
              physical chemistry, including state-of-the-art, ultrafast laser                
              techniques.  Theoretical studies will be an important component                
              of the research, with theory being used in several projects to                 
              both guide and interpret experiments.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              Photoinduced charge transfer is of intense current interest to                 
              researchers in several disciplines and is the basis of imaging                 
              science and technology.  The participation of Kodak and Xerox                  
              researchers in the Center provides an effective conduit for                    
              technology transfer, and some of the basic research findings of                
              Center projects have already been put into practical use at                    
              Kodak and Xerox. The Center provides an excellent environment                  
              for multidisciplinary training of graduate students and                        
              undergraduates, and the Center has also been the site of a                     
              summer research program for high school teachers.  Center                      
              researchers have also designed and built a low-cost scanning                   
              tunnelling microscope which will be manufactured for use in                    
              college and high school laboratories and in the training of                    
              industrial researchers in the use of this type of instrument.
