Title       : Theory of Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9120166

Award Number: 9120166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana A. Browne browne@phys.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Callaway  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theory of Magnetic Materials - The goal of this project is to                  
              investigate the energy levels, wave functions, and derived                     
              properties of electrons in solids from two points of view. Density             
              functional theory is the basis for most current calculations of the            
              electronic structure of solids from a single-particle point of                 
              view.  Development of improved computational techniques is                     
              proposed, which are then to be applied to a range of systems of                
              special interest, including transition metals and high-Tc                      
              superconductors.  The alternate viewpoint concerns systems in which            
              the electron-electron interaction is strong, so that the single-               
              electron picture is inadequate for description of the electronic               
              behavior.  This project proposes to find and interpret exact                   
              solutions of the many-body problem on finite clusters, and                     
              subsequently generalize these result to larger systems.                        
              %%%                                                                            
              The electronic structure of solids determines virtually all of                 
              their physical properties.  This proposal seeks to extend our                  
              ability to calculate and describe this structure in two ways.  The             
              most commonly used technique for determining electronic structure              
              will be improved to allow their application to systems which are               
              currently intractable.  Secondly, a class of materials which are               
              very resistent to any conventional description (called "strongly               
              correlated") will be treated by finding the structure of very;                 
              small clusters of these very difficult materials, and using these              
              cluster results as a basis for determining the properties of the               
              corresponding bulk materials.
