Title       : Japan STA Program: Kinematics and Calibrations of Parallel-Link Manipulators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1992      
File        : a9120186

Award Number: 9120186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6560               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles W. Wampler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : General Motors Res Lab
	      30500 Mound Road Box 9055
	      Warren, MI  480909055    /   -

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 5959,
Abstract    :
              Japan STA Program:  Kinematics and Calibrations of Parallel-Link               
              Manipulators                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This award will provide supplementary support to enable Dr.                    
              Charles Wampler of General Motors Research Laboratories to                     
              conduct collaborative research with Dr. Tatsuo Arai for 6 months at            
              the Mechanical Engineering Laboratory in Tsukuba, Japan.  They                 
              will utilize the forward kinematic control algorithms Wampler has              
              developed to test a prototype parallel-link manipulator robot Dr.              
              Arai designed and built.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The Stewart platform, a parallel-link manipulator, has mainly been             
              used for aircraft simulators and similar applications since the mid            
              1980's.  Dr. Arai has designed and built a prototype Stewart-                  
              platform manipulator for use in underground excavation.                        
              Excavation requires the manipulator to exert large forces, and in              
              order to optimize the manipulator's ability to exert such forces, a            
              seventh serial-link leg was added to the center of Arai's                      
              manipulator, effectively reducing the size of workspace.  Dr.                  
              Wampler proposes to develop a way to eliminate the seventh leg by              
              adding extra joints and instrumentation to the original six legs, to           
              calibrate the robot with six legs, then to test their theoretical work         
              on Dr. Arai's robot.  Dr. Arai's expertise in robotics, particularly           
              the parallel-link manipulator, complements Dr. Wampler's                       
              experience in kinematics of manipulators and numerical solution of             
              polynomial systems.  This collaborative research will provide                  
              Wampler with first-hand knowledge of leading-edge Japanese                     
              research in robotics.
