Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Earthquake Potential of Folds in Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1994 
File        : a9120583

Award Number: 9120583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77101              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Yeats yeatsr@terra.geo.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 9170      NSF PLANNING & EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1553,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a long-term visit by Professor Robert                  
              Yeats, Department of Geosciences, Oregon State University, to                  
              Japan for a cooperative research project with Dr. Yoshi Kinugaso               
              of the Seismotectonic Research Division at the Geological Survey               
              of Japan in Tsukuba.  The Research will include a study of the                 
              recognition and evaluation of seismogenic blind thrusts.                       
              Earthquakes that occur in fold belts can be studied using surface              
              geology and subsurface well logs and seismic lines, particularly               
              those that occur in petroleum-producing regions.  A better                     
              understanding of the tie between folds, faults and seismegenesis               
              in recent years is partly the result of a growing awareness of                 
              the extreme hazards posed by fault propagation fold systems in                 
              highly populated regions of California.  Research will include a               
              study of the structural aspects of earthquake faults that do not               
              cut the surface but instead appear to be accommodated by                       
              regional-scale folding.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Results of the research have the potential of broadening U.S.                  
              databases on seismogenic zones expressed at the surface as folds.              
              Additionally, the research could lead to the possibility of                    
              constraining earthquake size by considering the possibility of                 
              fault and fold segmentation as well as slip rate.  The Geological              
              Survey of Japan is well known for their ongoing research in the                
              area of evaluating seismic risks from surface faulting.  Their                 
              expertise, coupled with Professor Yeats' expertise in the area of              
              seismic risks from blind faults, should provide a fruitful                     
              collaboration.  It is expected that this collaborative effort                  
              will continue after the formal agreement has terminated.
