Title       : The Structure and Function of Sex Chromosomes in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1992     
File        : a9120699

Award Number: 9120699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Meagher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise E. Costich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1123,
Abstract    :
                   A stable genetic mechanism for sex determination is a                     
              prerequisite for the maintenance of separate sexes in a species.               
              This in turn requires that those genes promoting or suppressing                
              female and male expression be located on the same chromosome.                  
              Chromosomal sex determination, uncommon in plants, is widespread               
              in animals and is almost invariably accompanies by morphological               
              differentiation of the X and Y chromosomes.  The relatively                    
              recent origin of sex chromosomes in plants means that, in many                 
              cases, closely related species which lack sex chromosomes, also                
              exist.  The existence of variation in sex chromosome                           
              differentiation within a closely related group of plants provide               
              a model system for the study of the origin of sex chromosomes.                 
              The Y chromosomes in Silene will be studied as a test of                       
              theoretical predictions concerning their structure, function, and              
              evolutionary development.  To trace the evolutionary history of                
              the Y, a collection DNA-based genetic markers will be generated                
              from Y chromosomes isolated using flow cytometry and subsequently              
              digested using restriction enzymes.  The resulting Y-specific DNA              
              probes will be cross-hybridized with metaphase chromosomes of S.               
              latifolia as well as related species with and without separate                 
              sexes the expectation is that the Y chromosome will have some                  
              regions of similarity with the X .  Auras of non-homology serve                
              to prevent recombination that would disrupt the 'active Y' sex                 
              determination of S. latifolia.  Second, the Y chromosome in S.                 
              latifolia is believed to be partially dysfunctional.  A                        
              quantitative genetic analysis of Y chromosome effects on floral                
              phenotypes will be using performed regressions over a range of                 
              degrees of relationship (e.g. parent: offspring,                               
              grandparent:grand-offspring, half-sib, etc.).  This study will                 
              integrate diverse approaches, from molecular cytogenetics to                   
              quantitative genetics, and will greatly enhance our understanding              
              of the genetic events involved in sex differentiation.
