Title       : Specification of Neuronal Shape and Connectivity in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1991    
File        : a9120084

Award Number: 9120084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85587              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Tanouye   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The aim of this research is to deduce how the genome specifies                 
              neuronal connections by focussing on mutation that alter a                     
              particular identifiable synapse in the adult Drosophila nervous                
              system.  The synapse is part of the giant fiber escape                         
              system; it connects the giant fiber interneuron and the jump                   
              muscle motoneuron.  Mutations which alter the structure and/or                 
              function of the giant fiber-jump muscle motoneuron connection may              
              be identified by a combination of behavioral,                                  
              electrophysiological, and neuroanatomical methods.  One such                   
              mutation defines the bendless (ben) gene which appears to play a               
              key role late in the formation of neuronal connections.  It may                
              be involved in the final recognition events between a presynaptic              
              neuron and its post-synaptic target.  Dr. Tanouye will conduct a               
              detailed genetic and phenotypic analysis of ben to determine the               
              nature of its role in neuronal connectivity.  He will then clone               
              the ben gene, determine if its product has amino acid homology to              
              other known molecules, and study the spatial and temporal pattern              
              of its expression.  The detailed genetic and molecular                         
              description of how one particular synapse is formed may serve as               
              a model that gives insight into the general problem of neuronal                
              connectivity.
