Title       : Functional Organizations of Segmental Reflexes During Natural Multi-Articular
               Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9120818

Award Number: 9120818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol Colby                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234671             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Pratt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jane M. Macpherson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Good Samaritan Hosp&Med C
	      
	      Portland, OR  97210    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The control of complex movements involves the integration of                   
              central motor programs and inputs from sensory receptors in muscles            
              and skin that are activated by the movements themselves and by                 
              external stimuli. These sensory receptors provide powerful inputs              
              to spinal reflex circuits that can significantly modify ongoing                
              movements. Each modality of sensory input from the periphery has               
              multiple, parallel connections with the spinal cells (motoneurons)             
              that activate muscles. These pathways can be either excitatory or              
              inhibitory, and they can be distributed to motoneurons that                    
              activate either extensor or flexor muscles. The purpose of this                
              award to Dr. Carol A. Pratt is to study the role of peripheral                 
              sensory inputs in the control of standing (stance). The hypothesis             
              to be tested is that the functional organization of spinal reflexes            
              dynamically changes depending on the characteristics and                       
              requirements of the movement so that sensory feedback can be used              
              optimally to fine tune the movement. This research will provide                
              information about the role of sensory inputs in the control of the             
              complex, multi-articular movements, which comprise stance. This                
              basic knowledge will contribute to our understanding of posture                
              control, and will provide important information that can be used in            
              the technical development of prosthetic devices.
