Title       : Exchange Networks on the North Coast of New Guinea: Collaborative Field Studies
               and Historical Research Using American and German Museum Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1992    
File        : a9120301

Award Number: 9120301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71836              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Terrell terrell@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Welsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project involves collaborative research involving personnel               
              from the Field museum in Chicago, the Papua New Guinea (PNG)                   
              National Museum, the Department of Anthropology at the University              
              of PNG, and the Museum for Volkerkunde in Dresden, Germany.  The               
              researchers will study the extent and pattern of exchange                      
              relations in the West Sepik district of PNG, which have                        
              integrated local communities into larger human associations or                 
              "regional systems".  The project will build on prior research                  
              based on a collection of artifacts at the Field museum.  Using                 
              photographs of these artifacts, the researchers will describe the              
              manufacture, use, cultural meaning and local socioeconomic                     
              significance of the area's material culture, will reconstruct                  
              historical patterns of manufacture and trade, and study the                    
              current changes in material culture.                                           
                                                                                             
              This project is important because the study of material                        
              culture in one small scale, tribal society can reveal general                  
              principles of the creation and maintenance of sociality among                  
              diverse communities.  Although PNG is legendary for innumerable                
              small cultures speaking different languages, they were all                     
              connected by trade systems, and this sort of research can reveal               
              the principles which cross ethnic boundaries to relate diverse                 
              communities.  These principles can then be used to understand                  
              cross-ethnic relations in other places in the world.
