Title       : Magnetospheric Boundary Identification from Energetic Particle Measurements on
               Polar-Orbiting Satellites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1993      
File        : a9120072

Award Number: 9120072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Timothy E. Eastman                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Lyons   (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Roeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harlan E. Spence  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aerospace Corporation
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  90009    /   -

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We have determined that two important magnetospheric boundary                  
              regions on the side, the low-latitude boundary layer (LLBL) and                
              the cusp, can be identified from energetic particle observations               
              as well as from observations of magnetosheath-energy particle                  
              precipitation on polar-orbiting satellites.  We propose to                     
              analyze simultaneous observations of magnetosheath energy                      
              particles obtained from the S3-3 satellite in order to identify                
              these boundary regions, to analyze processes occurring within                  
              these boundary regions, and to investigate the mapping of these                
              regions from the magnetosphere to the ionosphere.  We will                     
              compare the identification obtined using the criteria developed                
              be Newell and Meng ?1988! for magnetosheath-energy particles.  In              
              this way, we will investigate the accuracy of both techniques as               
              well as determine the advantages of using energetic particle                   
              measurements to supplement and verify the identification                       
              obtainable using the Newell and Meng criteria.  In addition,                   
              using the measured angular distributions of particles, we will                 
              investigate the extent to which the LLBL lies on closed field                  
              lines and estimate the locations of auroral acceleration regions               
              relative to each of the magnetospheric boundary regions and to                 
              the open-closed field line boundary.  We also propose to                       
              determine criteria for distinguishing between precipitation from               
              the LLBL and that from the plasma sheet boundary layer.  We will               
              use the criteria to study the important transition between these               
              two boundary layers as mapped to the ionosphere.  Using the                    
              electric and magnetic field data from S3-3, we plan to study the               
              spatial relations between the convection reversal, field-ligned                
              currents, the different boundary regions, and the open-closed                  
              field line boundary.  In this way, we hope to gain significant                 
              information on the extent to which the magnetospheric electric                 
              field is generated by reconnection versus viscous interaction and              
              on the generation regions for day side field-aligned currents.                 
              Finally, using precipitation data from the identically                         
              instrumented, almost co-orbiting, DMSP F6 and F8 satellites, we                
              will pursue the separation of temporal and spatial effects over                
              latitudinal scale sizes as small as 10km within the day side                   
              boundary layers.
