Title       : Coordination Mechanisms: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9120074

Award Number: 9120074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $960406             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Marschak marschak@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shmuel S. Oren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene L. Lawler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pravin P. Varaiya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Umesh V. Vazirani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award is for continued support of an interdisciplinary                    
              research program on problems of coordination. The research began               
              in 1989 when the Principal Investigators were successful                       
              competitors in the first NSF Special Initiative on Coordination                
              Theory and Technology. The Principal Investigators' disciplines                
              are Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Economics and                    
              Operations Research.  Some of the problems under study are                     
              primarily theoretical; some of them require computational                      
              experimentation; and some of them model the tasks of real                      
              organizations.  The problems may be viewed in the following way:               
              a designer is given a organization-a group of persons/processors               
              each of whom has private information about some aspect of the                  
              organization's changing environment.  The organization's task is               
              to compute a specified function of its current environment; often              
              the value computed can be interpreted as an ACTION that is the                 
              organization's desired response to its environment.  The designer              
              has to construct a MECHANISM (sometimes called a "protocol")                   
              which (1) tells each person/processor what to do (what                         
              computations to perform, what messages to send to whom) at each                
              of a sequence of steps, and (2) achieves the task when the                     
              sequence stops.  The designer wants the mechanism to be quick and              
              cheap-according to several interesting cost measures-as compared               
              to the other mechanisms that also achieve the task.  The                       
              investigators also conduct an interdisciplinary Seminar on                     
              problems of coordination-in which the investigators, graduate                  
              students and visitors take part.  The investigators also guide                 
              dissertations on coordination problems which often take                        
              interdisciplinary approach.
