Title       : The Ecology of Nematodes in Antarctic Dry Valleys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1992      
File        : a9120123

Award Number: 9120123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana H. Wall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Nematodes are microscopic invertebrates found in all ecosystems.               
              They are particularly abundant in soils, where they live in water              
              films surrounding soil particles. They play an important role in               
              nutrient cycling in soil food webs by feeding on microscopic plants            
              and animals as well as bacteria and other decomposers. This study              
              will continue the first intensive ecological investigation of                  
              nematodes in the Dry Valley ecosystems in Antarctica. During the               
              1990 and 1991 austral summers, Nematodes were found to occur in Dry            
              Valley soils over a wide range of soil properties (moisture,                   
              salinity, nitrogen and carbon contents). The proposed research will            
              increase our understanding of the abundance and trophic role of                
              nematodes by sampling them in various habitats (soil properties and            
              microbial activity) from a wide range of soil formations,                      
              elevations and locales in the Dry Valley region of southern                    
              Victoria Land. In response to harsh conditions nematodes can assume            
              a cryptobiotic state in which their metabolism becomes undetectable            
              and there are both physiological and morphological changes to the              
              animals. Studies of cryptobiosis in the field and laboratory will              
              determine the potential duration of nematode activity in this cold             
              desert and will complement research on nematode population                     
              dynamics. A field experiment will be conducted to examine the                  
              response of nematodes and total soil microbial activity to                     
              temperature, moisture and energy availability in the soil. Total               
              soil response will be determined as carbon dioxide efflux and                  
              substrate-induced respiration, a measure related to soil microbial             
              biomass. The genetic diversity of populations of the dominant                  
              nematode in the Dry Valleys will be evaluated using molecular                  
              biology techniques. It is hypothesized that if nematodes are easily            
              dispersed by wind, this diversity will be comparable over a wide               
              area.
