Title       : Mechanisms of Na and Ca Transport Across the Plasma Membranes of Squid Giant
               Axons, Structure-Function Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1992     
File        : a9120177

Award Number: 9120177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luis A. Beauge lbeauge@immf.uncor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The interior of the cells is electronegative respect to the                    
              extracellular media.  However, against the natural tendency of                 
              the positively charged Na and Ca ions to accumulate into the                   
              cells, they are much more concentrated in the external side.  To               
              maintain that situation a net steady Na and Ca extrusion must                  
              take place while energy is consumed.  For Ca, two proteins                     
              located in the plasma membrane cooperate to that end: (i) the Ca               
              pump, which uses energy from ATP hydrolysis, and (ii) the Na/Ca                
              exchange which, though it takes that energy from the inward Na                 
              gradient, is also stimulated by ATP.  The studies will                         
              characterize the structure-function relationships of the Na/Ca                 
              exchanger employing the squid giant axon.  Under dialysis, this                
              preparation is unique for it allows almost complete biochemical                
              control of intra and extracellular environments and also of the                
              transmembrane electrical potential.  Answers to the following                  
              specific questions can be expected to provide an increase in our               
              understanding of how extraordinary electrochemical barriers to                 
              their movements.  (i) Is ATP stimulation is exerted directly on                
              the exchanger or are other structures, perhaps kinases, involved?              
              (ii) What amino acids (structural units of proteins) are relevant              
              to the functions of the exchanger?  In this case compounds known               
              to selectively block different amino acids or chemical groups                  
              will be used. The physiological relevance of the Ca extruding                  
              systems is evidenced by the fact that intracellular ?Ca!                       
              regulated blood flow and pressure and neural and endocrine                     
              functions.
