Title       : Item and Associative Information in Human Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1994       
File        : a9120911

Award Number: 9120911
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Clark clark@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Research in human memory has shown that one's memory for an event              
              is a structured collection of different kinds of information.                  
              For example, if we meet someone at a cocktail party, we might                  
              store visual information regarding the person's appearance,                    
              phonemic and verbal information representing the person's name                 
              and its spelling, semantic information and impressions, plus                   
              various kinds of background context.  This research will                       
              investigate the roles of different kinds of information in recall              
              and recognition.  The research focuses on the distinction between              
              item-specific and associative information, a distinction which                 
              has a long history in psychology, and is a cornerstone of current              
              mathematical models of memory.                                                 
                                                                                             
              In 10 experiments (plus several variations), people will study                 
              lists of words; the kinds of materials and the encoding                        
              conditions will vary across experiments.  Following list                       
              presentation, these individuals will be tested using free and                  
              cued recall and item and associative recognition testing                       
              procedures.  These testing procedures vary in the kinds of                     
              information and the kinds of retrieval processes which are                     
              necessary for adequate performance.  For example, recall and                   
              associative recognition depend primarily on associations formed                
              between words, whereas item recognition does not.  An important                
              question in this research regards the role of nonnecessary                     
              information.  For example, associative information need not be                 
              retrieved in making recognition decisions about individual words.              
              What role does the associative information play?                               
                                                                                             
              Regarding retrieval processes, recall tasks require the recovery               
              and production of retrieved information, whereas recognition                   
              testing does not.  Comparisons among these test procedures and                 
              how they are sensitive to manipulations in materials and study                 
              conditions will provide important information concerning the                   
              representation and retrieval of information from memory.                       
              Moreover, the results of these experiments will be important in                
              testing and developing current mathematical models of memory.
