Title       : Theoretical Solid State Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1993  
File        : a9120269

Award Number: 9120269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $780000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin L. Cohen cohen@jungle.berkely.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Louie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9218,9256,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted in theoretical condensed matter physics             
              and materials research covering the fields of semiconductors,                  
              transition metals, surfaces and interfaces, superlattices, defects,            
              superconductivity, materials under pressures, clusters and many-               
              body effects in solids.  The major objective is to explain and                 
              predict the properties of real materials at the microscopic level              
              from first principles.  Several different approaches are employed.             
              Structural and bonding properties are obtained using ab initio                 
              pseudopotential density functional formalism; excited-state                    
              properties are calculated using a quasiparticle self-energy                    
              approach; ground state properties of correlated electronic systems             
              are studied using a quantum Monte Carlo approach.  A host of solid             
              state properties are obtained with these methods.  Among these are:            
              structural information, phase stability, optical and photoemission             
              spectra, charge density distributions, surface and interface                   
              characteristics, vibrational and mechanical properties, electron-              
              phonon interaction parameters, magnetic properties, superconducting            
              transition temperature, and a variety of other solid state                     
              phenomena.  Some specific new directions are planned in the areas              
              of solids with novel structures at high pressures, superhard                   
              materials, excitation spectra in solids, electron correlations in              
              two-and three-dimensional systems, superconductivity in                        
              conventional, high temperature and "buckeyball" solids, metal and              
              semiconductor clusters, solid hydrogen at megabar pressures, and               
              semiconductor surfaces, interfaces and superlattices.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              A broad theoretical and computational program will study the                   
              electronic structure and properties associated with materials and              
              condensed matter systems under a variety of conditions and in                  
              different states.  This group is one of the world leaders in this              
              area of materials research.
