Title       : Materials Research Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1996      
File        : a9120668

Award Number: 9120668
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15954000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Klein klein@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at the University of                   
              Pennsylvania supports a broad, interdisciplinary program of                    
              materials research which is currently organized into                           
              four primary thrust areas.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Research on reduced dimensionality and structure in macromolecular             
              systems addresses the design, synthesis and structural                         
              characterization of materials created from one- and                            
              two-dimensional structures, with emphasis on macromolecular                    
              materials with properties that cannot be realized in traditional               
              crystalline or polymeric materials.  The thrust on structure and               
              micromechanics of interfaces is investigating the characteristics              
              of interfaces controlling the deformation, fracture, and fatigue               
              behavior of multiphase materials. The research is focussed on high             
              temperature metallic alloys and composites, and the approach ranges            
              from studies of atomic and electronic structure to continuum                   
              mechanics. Research in the surfaces and interfaces thrust aims at              
              atomic and molecular level understanding of surfaces and novel                 
              interfacial structures, and their influence on chemical reaction               
              dynamics.  In the advanced polymers thrust, investigators seek to              
              achieve the design and synthesis of new families of organic,                   
              inorganic and hybrid polymers of technological importance and to               
              understand their behavior.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The University of Pennsylvania MRL also supports focussed research             
              initiatives to respond to special opportunities in materials                   
              research through a multidisciplinary team approach; two initiatives            
              currently supported address fullerenes and materials simulation,               
              respectively.  The MRL also operates and maintains major central               
              facilities for materials research.  It provides seed funds for                 
              exploratory research, supports programs in education and human                 
              resources in the materials field, and supports a range of programs             
              involving knowledge transfer and outreach to industry and other                
              sectors.  The MRL currently supports the activities of about 39                
              faculty members, 8 postdoctoral research associates, 52 graduate               
              students, 22 undergraduates and 9 technical and scientific staff               
              members.  The MRL central facilities also support a substantial                
              amount of research that is funded primarily from other sources.                
              The University of Pennsylvania MRL is directed by Professor E. Ward            
              Plummer.
