Title       : Conflict and Cooperation in Honey Bees: Queen Piping and Afterswarming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1992       
File        : a9120639

Award Number: 9120639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119778             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Kirk Visscher visscher@mail.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The high level of coordination shown by social insect colonies is              
              of both economic and theoretical interest:  The social events in               
              honey bee colonies underlie bees' usefulness as pollinators and                
              honey producers, and our ability to manage them successfully.  At              
              the same time, this coordination presents a special puzzle to                  
              evolutionary theory, since intra-colony conflict is expected in                
              some circumstances.  Genetic differences between individuals in                
              colonies mean that any particular way of dividing the colony's                 
              resources among the reproductives will produce different genetic               
              payoffs for different individuals, leading to conflicting                      
              interests between them.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This study examines the production of swarms by honey bee                      
              colonies, with particular attention to the piping behavior of                  
              queen bees, a phenomenon long observed but never adequately                    
              explained.  The study tests a hypothesis that worker bees, by                  
              manipulating the options available, redirect the interests of                  
              newly-reared queen bees into alignment with the workers' own                   
              interests.  This turns a situation of conflicting benefits to                  
              different individuals into one of common, though lesser,                       
              benefits.  The study tests the role of queen piping as                         
              communication of the factors that direct this realignment of                   
              interests.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The research will contribute to a general theory of social                     
              behavior by testing how selection at the level of individuals can              
              lead to traits at the level of groups, and how the barriers to                 
              evolution of highly cooperative behavior may be crossed.  It will              
              increase our understanding of honey bee reproductive behavior,                 
              which forms the basis for genetic management of bees.
