Title       : Cyclogenesis and Frontogenesis Processes Over Western North America and Vicinity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1993   
File        : a9120331

Award Number: 9120331
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance F. Bosart bosart@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Dr. Bosart is one of the leading synopticians in the field of             
              atmospheric sciences.  He will continue and expand upon his                    
              previous work on midlatitude cyclogenesis and frontogenesis,                   
              relying on climatological and case study investigations which                  
              encompass atmospheric processes on the planetary, synoptic and                 
              meso-scales.                                                                   
                   Dr. Bosart will pursue three major research thrusts.  The                 
              first is an investigation of the cyclone and frontal formation in              
              the intermountain regions of the western United States.  A                     
              particularly difficult forecast situation arises when upper                    
              tropospheric disturbances encounter mountain barriers.  Sometimes              
              the subsequent flow pattern results in the development of a quasi-             
              stationary storm system in the mountain regions.  At other times,              
              the disturbance will continue moving eastward.  Through his                    
              analyses, Dr. Bosart would like to distinguish between the                     
              conditions which cause these two very different weather patterns.              
              The second major area of research is the study of merger and                   
              separation of wave disturbances at different levels in the                     
              atmosphere affect storm development.  Finally, Dr. Bosart will take            
              on a new research project, looking at the interaction between the              
              midlatitude cyclone development and transient disturbances                     
              emanating from the subtropical jet stream.                                     
                   In addition to their intrinsic scientific interest, the                   
              questions Dr. Bosart hopes to answer have direct implications for              
              improved operational weather forecasting.
