Title       : CHARACTERISTICS OF OPTICAL GUIDED-MODE RESONANCE FILTERS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9120856

Award Number: 9120856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Albert B. Harvey                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Magnusson magnusson@ee.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant is to study the guided-mode                                         
              resonance properties of periodic dielectric                                    
              structures in waveguide geometry.                                              
              Theoretical work indicates that such                                           
              structures can function as efficient switches                                  
              and as arbitrarily narrow-band lossless                                        
              filters.  Both theoretical and experimental                                    
              work is proposed.  The rigorous coupled-                                       
              wave theory will be used to study the                                          
              guided-mode resonance properties of both                                       
              bulk and surface-relief grating structures in                                  
              detail.  The resonances will be                                                
              characterized with respect to the optical                                      
              wavelength, grating thickness, angle of                                        
              incidence, grating period, bulk permittivity,                                  
              incident-wave polarization and permittivity                                    
              modulation amplitude.  Multiple dielectric                                     
              layer geometries will be considered and                                        
              the performance of the guided-mode                                             
              resonance filters will be compared with the                                    
              classical, fundamentally different, Fabry-                                     
              Perot filters.  The theory will be                                             
              experimentally tested.  For this, bulk-                                        
              grating filters will be holographically                                        
              recorded in a dichromated gelatin                                              
              waveguide film on glass and quartz                                             
              substrates.  Surface-relief grating filters will                               
              be produced in yttrium iron garnet                                             
              waveguides on gadolinium gallium garnet                                        
              substrates.  Dynamic, turnable filters will be                                 
              produced by laser-inducing gratings in                                         
              photorefractive crystal (GaAs) films.  The                                     
              significance of the research is that new,                                      
              fundamental phenomena associated with                                          
              diffractive structures are being explained.                                    
              Many useful applications of this work can                                      
              be envisioned, including laser cavity filters,                                 
              narrow-line mirrors, tunable filters, electro-                                 
              optic switches, and enhanced thin-film                                         
              designs.
