Title       : Research on Related Topics in Financial Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1994     
File        : a9120554

Award Number: 9120554
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene F. Fama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Portfolio models and models of capital market equilibrium play an              
              important role in financial economics.  Past work by the                       
              investigator developed and tested these models and extended the                
              reasoning of financial economics to issues in macroeconomics.  The             
              project continues this line of research by studying systematically             
              the variables that explain the cross-section of expected stock                 
              returns.  The existing literature identifies many variables (firm              
              size, leverage, market to book value of equity, earnings-to-price              
              ratios, measures of risk) that are related to the cross-section of             
              expected returns.  Preliminary suggest that the cross-section                  
              variation in expected returns can be explained by just two factors,            
              the size of the firm and the market to book equity value.  The                 
              robustness of this empirical finding will be checked.  The ultimate            
              goal is a comprehensive empirical description and an explanation               
              of the interaction between business conditions, the cross-section              
              of expected returns, and the variation through time in expected                
              returns.  The project also continues a study of the permanent and              
              temporary variation in output and its components, especially                   
              investment.  This work is important in its own right and it will               
              eventually lead to a more detailed explanation of the links between            
              expected returns the real activity.                                            
                                                                                             
              The detailed study by this project of the relations between the                
              variation of expected returns through time and the structure of                
              expected returns across financial markets contributes to our                   
              understanding of the efficiency of capital markets, i.e., the                  
              general notion that in pricing securities the market correctly uses            
              all relevant available information.  Recent work has shown there               
              is much variation in the expected returns on common stocks,                    
              Government bonds, and corporate bonds.  Some scholars claim that               
              "excessive" variation in the capital markets is evidence of                    
              irrational fads.  This project demonstrates that there are stable              
              empirical relationships between the variation and dividend yields              
              and term-structure variables that are common to a wide range of                
              securities and related to business conditions.
