Title       : SGER: The Influence of Landscape Variation on Avian Demography: The Feasibility
               of Using GIS Analytical Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  1991   
File        : a9120661

Award Number: 9120661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimberly A. Sullivan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Edwards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   Preservation of biological diversity requires that variation              
              in the landscape, and its importance to population persistence be              
              well understood.  Studies using traditional methods have                       
              demonstrated that a relationship exits between bird species and                
              vegetation composition and structure, but have not been able to                
              evaluate how this variation affects population statistics.                     
              Recently developed geographic information systems (GIS)                        
              analytical techniques using Landsat satellite images will be                   
              combined with a long-term data set on populations of the Yellow-               
              eyed Junco, to better understand the potentially large influence               
              of landscape variation on the structure and persistence of                     
              populations.  Fine-scaled landscape characteristics will be                    
              linked to estimates of survivorship and mortality, productivity,               
              movement patterns and abundance patterns.  The proposed research               
              will provide a new paradigm for researchers studying bird                      
              population biology and conservation.  It will also test the                    
              effectiveness of "patch occupancy" models in estimating                        
              demographic trends and predicting population persistence.  If                  
              accurate "patch occupancy" models can be developed, it will be                 
              possible to collect such data on many more species in a greater                
              array of habitats than can now be accomplished with labor                      
              intensive mark- recapture studies.  Conservation biologists and                
              government agencies need cost effective, accurate methods of                   
              evaluating habitat, estimating bird population trends and                      
              predicting population persistence.  The proposed research will                 
              help develop these models and analytical techniques.
