Title       : Hohokam Ceramics and Social Organization During the Sedentary Period
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9515289

Award Number: 9515289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89437              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Abbott abbottd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. David Abbott will conduct an
              analysis of ceramics collected from Hohokam sites located in Arizona's Phoenix
              Basin. He will focus on the early Sedentary period of Hohokam development and
              analyze potsherds carefully excavated from a number of sites. The geological
              region in which these are located is extremely diverse and the composition of
              sands and clays which potters employed varied significantly from subarea to
              subarea. Abbott's prior work has demonstrated that it is possible to examine
              sherd matrix and determine the source of the raw material. Through such
              microscopic and electron probe analysis he will determine the points of origin
              for thousands of sampled sherds. On this basis it is then possible to
              reconstruct sedentary period ceramic exchange systems and thus gain insight
              into social organization.  Hohocam peoples were agriculturists who lived in a
              harsh semi-arid environment and who depended on large and complex irrigation
              systems to produce crops. Dr. Abbott has completed a similar analysis of
              ceramic exchange during the following Classic period and the results indicated
              that exchange occurred primarily within individual irrigation subsystems. This
              indicates that social organization and the control and management of irrigation
              were tied closely together. The Sedentary period work will shed light on how
              this system developed. Although canals were present during the Sedentary
              period, preliminary results indicate that exchange may not have followed the
              Classic pattern and were not closely tied to irrigation canals.  It correct,
              this conclusion would contradict widely held archaeological assumptions. 
              Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arose. This process
              often occurred in semi-arid environments and researchers have postulated that
              the need to develop and maintain irrigation systems played a central role. Dr.
              Abbott's research speaks directly to this question. It also sheds light on how
              people at a simple level of technology were able to subsist in harsh
              environmental conditions. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and shed new light on America's past.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                              
