Title       : Private Sector Dynamics in China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9515173

Award Number: 9515173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144474             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Parish   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      1155 E. 60th Street
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This study examines the emerging small-enterprise sector in China, with an
              emphasis on the problems that are shared with the small, informal sector in
              market societies and other former socialist states.  Data for the study come
              from intensive interviews with entrepreneurs, large surveys that include the
              emerging self-employed and small-business sector, a 1993 survey of 1,440
              private entrepreneurs, and a record of the continuing success or failure of
              these enterprises over the subsequent three years.  The study provides a
              baseline model of the regional characteristics (economic development level,
              proximity to suppliers and consumers, etc.) that promote different types of
              enterprises.  The study then delves into three theoretical debates.  The first
              debate concerns the interplay between formal and informal sectors, with an
              emphasis on state-sector / private-sector interaction.  This part of the
              inquiry will reveal the niches private enterprises can occupy -- ranging from
              more flexibly-specialized, lower labor cost subcontracting through simple
              avoidance strategies, where the formal sector produces high-volume,
              standardized goods and the informal sector produces low-volume, cheaper quality
              goods.  The second debate concerns whether economies can grow in the absence of
              firmly established private property rights.  Inspired by studies of the role of
              informal social network ties in peripheral East Asia and elsewhere, this study
              examines whether informal social ties provide predictability and reduce
              transaction costs in ways that partially substitute for firmly established
              private property rights.  The third debate concerns the social origins of
              entrepreneurs.  This study examines the role of blocked mobility in forcing
              individuals into different entrepreneurial paths.  %%%   The research will
              provide fundamental scientific insights into general questions of human
              adaptation to radical social change, exploiting the fact that China is
              presently undergoing rapid economic transformation.  At the same time , it will
              assemble valuable information on socio-economic conditions in China that will
              be useful to policy makers, both in China and the United States.
