Title       : Proyecto Maya-Colonial: Postclassic Political Geography of Central Peten,
               Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9515443

Award Number: 9515443
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330573             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Rice drice@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grant D. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prudence M. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Don Rice and his colleagues will
              conduct three field seasons of archaeological research in the Peten region of
              Guatemala. This research builds on a previously NSF supported project. The goal
              of the work is to understand what happened to Mayan cultures after the collapse
              of the `Classical Maya.` Archaeological evidence clearly demonstrates the
              degree of social complexity which was achieved at the height of Mayan
              development. Priest emperors ruled over large areas of lowland Middle America.
              A writing system was devised and the importance of monumental architecture is
              demonstrated by temple mounds which survive to present times. Both
              archaeological and textual data indicate that large numbers of people were
              integrated into single political units and that traditional agricultural
              techniques served to provide adequate food in a difficult lowland tropical
              environment. In approximately the 9th century AD however this classic Mayan
              society `collapsed` and the reasons for this are poorly known.  DR Rice and his
              colleagues have focused on the time interval between the 9th and 17th centuries
              AD, when Europeans conquered this area. They have worked from early Spanish
              texts which described, and located - in a general way - major Mayan towns.
              Through on the ground survey they have located many of these and conducted
              trial excavations. This information has provided the framework for the current
              major excavation project which will allow the Mayan `decline` to be traced over
              a ca. 800 year interval. Drs. Rice, Rice and colleagues will excavate portions
              of 41 structures to obtain comparative data on site histories and functions of
              specific civic-ceremonial structure types.  This project is important for
              several reasons. It will provide information on a little understood period of
              prehistory. The data it produces will be of interest to many archeologists and
              it will increase our understanding of how complex societies arise, and also
              decline.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
