Title       : Iwawi Ceramic Style Study Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9515336

Award Number: 9515336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148756             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Isbell huari@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. William Isbell and his colleagues
              will conduct archaeological research at the site of Iwawi, a four-hectare mound
              on the shore of Lake Titicaca in Bolivia. It is located 23 km from Tiwanaku
              which, it has been argued, was the capital of the earliest empire in the Andes.
              While it has been hypothesized (although yet to be proven) that Iwawi served as
              a port for Tiwanaku, it is clear that the site was occupied for two millennia
              and that people fished and collected lacustrine resources. They also cultivated
              raised fields whose fossil remains surround the site. Prior work at Iwawi has
              indicated that the mound contains a clear  intact stratigraphy and is rich in
              floral and faunal remains as well as ceramics and other artifacts. The site
              also contains a number of burials. While a number archaeologists have worked in
              the Titicaca basin for many years the research has been hampered by lack of an
              accepted chronology. Dating, as in many parts of the world, is based on the
              analysis of ceramic assemblages but in this region a secure ceramic chronology
              has not been established. Without this, it is not possible to determine the age
              of the many surface structures and remains which are abundant in the region. In
              their past NSF supported work, Dr. Isbell and his colleagues began the
              painstaking task of creating such a ceramic sequence and the current award will
              allow them to complete the process. They will also analyze the faunal, floral
              and other materials collected and these will provide insight into how the
              inhabitants lived and how their behaviors changed over time.  Complex societies
              appear to have arisen independently at roughly the same time in many parts of
              the world and archaeologists wish to understand the processes responsible for
              this phenomenon. Because Tiwanaku was the first of the great Andean empires it
              can provide an example of this process from beginning to end and therefore
              archaeologists have focused attention on it. Tiwanaku evidently supported large
              numbers of people in a high, cold and inhospitable environment and
              archaeologists wish to understand what subsistence strategies were followed.
              Dr. Isbell's work will not only shed new light on these issues but also provide
              a chronological tool of great value to other researchers.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
