Title       : Margaret Mead: An American Oracle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9515387

Award Number: 9515387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Yans-McLaughlin vyans@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Most scientists  may seem to the general public to be a rather colorless lot. 
              Scientific breakthroughs revolutionize our lives, but the scientists themselves
              rarely become figures who are easily recognized by the public.  Few scientists
              have the flare of a Richard Feynman who captured national attention during the
              Challenger investigations or the audacity of a Carl Sagan to hold forth on his
              own television series.  Fewer still, of these "public" scientists are women. 
              Yet one woman stands out as a quintessential scientist in the public eye: 
              Margaret Mead.    From her publication of Coming of Age in Samoa when she was
              27 years old, Margaret Mead oriented her career in anthropology  not only to
              advance her position in that field but to become what Dr. Yans-McLaughlin has
              called a "public oracle" for science.  Rather than addressing questions of
              interests to a narrow academic specialty, Margaret Mead always examined
              question which were of interest to the general public.  In that first book, she
              addressed issues of sex and gender, growing up, the generation gap, and change
              in the modern world.      Dr. Yans-McLaughlin argues that Mead (1901-1978)
              devoted her entire career to situate her research in a way that appealed to the
              broadest of popular interest. How she did this throughout her career and its
              affect on her own scientific research, on  the discipline of anthropology, and
              on the practice of science in general in the United States will be the center
              of this research.  This project engages and promises to contribute to scholarly
              literature in the history of anthropology, the history of social sciences, the
              study of gender in science and the history of women in the scientific
              professions.
