Title       : Democratization, Regional Change, and Ethnicity in the Southern Balkans: The
               Case of the Rhodope Region of Bulgaria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9515244

Award Number: 9515244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184940             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Pickles GEG198@POP.UKY.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9515244  John Pickles  U. Kentucky    This project examines (sub-national)
              regional economic and political change in a society undergoing a shift from a
              command to market oriented economy, the southern Rhodope region in Bulgaria. 
              This shift and its associated decentralization, demonopolization, and
              liberalization have brought to the subject region, like many peripheral regions
              in Central and Eastern Europe, withdrawal of industrial investment, decline in
              agriculture, and increasing social polarization.  In the Rhodope, the social
              change has most negatively affected the large Turkish-speaking minority.  The
              research project is focused on three forms of transition:  (1) the
              democratization of local and national state power, new civil institutions, and
              the emergence of ethnic politics focused on the Turkish-speaking population; 
              (2) decentralization of control over industry, regional restructuring of
              production, branch-plant closure, and mass unemployment;  and (3) privatization
              of tobacco production and the effects of continued monopoly power in tobacco
              marketing.  The three research questions are:  (1) How have the economic
              changes affected support for ethnically based political parties and actors
              since 1989?  (2) How has the rise of the Turkish-dominated political party
              affected the nature of regional economic change?  (3) What roles do gender and
              ethnicity play in these changes, within households, manufacturing plants, and
              local politics?    Working with Robert Begg of Indiana University of
              Pennsylvania and Mueke Meurs of The American University (via subcontracts) and
              colleagues in the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences and the University of Sofia,
              the PI will interview political and institutional leaders, industrial managers,
              and households, and will make use of secondary statistical data.    The
              research results should have relevance for our increasing recognition of the
              causal linkages among economic, political, and social-identity (gender,
              ethnicity) change in local settings.  The results s hould have relevance to
              other peripheral regions in rapidly changing counties of Central and Eastern
              Europe.  The research itself will add to the English-language writing and
              expertise on this world region.
