Title       : Reconstruction of Global Ice Age Ice Sheets from Global Sea-Level and
               Earth-Deformation Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  1999   
File        : a9515322

Award Number: 9515322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33514              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Clark clar@calvin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvin College
	      3201 Burton, S. E.
	      Grand Rapids, MI  49546    616/957-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Clark  9515322   The two main goals of the proposed work are:  1) to reconstruct
              the change in thickness of all of the large ice sheets that once covered much
              of the Earth's surface during the last ice age, and 2) to explain sea-level
              changes and earth deformation that have occurred during late-glacial and
              postglacial time as a result of glacio-isostatic processes.  The reconstruction
              of ice-age ice sheets has usually been attempted by glaciologists and
              Quaternary geologists who model the flow of ice sheets and assume the climate
              and other boundary conditions are known.  Because the great weight of the ice
              sheets caused the earth to deform an alternative approach is to use earth
              deformation data (e.g. sea-level data, tide-gauge data, geodetic/GPS data or
              proglacial and postglacial lake shoreline tilt data) and a numerical  model of
              viscous flow within the Earth's mantle to infer the weight of the ice sheets as
              they advanced and then retreated.  The success of initial attempts to perform
              this "inversion" for the North American Laurentide ice sheet have demonstrated
              the feasibility of performing the global calculation.  To insure that the
              predicted ice sheets are plausible the numerical inversion procedure utilizes
              quadratic programming methods to provide physical constraints upon the
              predicted ice sheets.  The predicted ice sheets can be constrained to be always
              non-negative, less than a prescribed maximum thickness, with thickness profile
              thinning in the direction of glacier flow, and having a maximum rate of
              thinning or thickening.  Errors can be determined for the resulting ice-sheet
              prediction.  A recently implemented method uses "a priori" estimates of the
              most likely ice-sheet thickness history to "guide" the inversion process. 
              Results are required to fit the deformatioin data using least squares criteria
              while the predicted ice-sheet thicknesses are still as close as possible to the
              a priori model.  Prescribed errors of the a priori model control how strongly
              the predicted ice sheet is co nstrained by the a priori model, although the
              errors may be exceeded if the deformation data warrant it.  This approach
              allows considerable spatial resolution in the inversion for ice-sheet history
              because the inverse problem is always overdetermined regardless of the number
              of unknown ice-sheet thicknesses.  The number of equations always exceeds the
              number of unknowns.  An additional benefit is that the procedure provides
              remarkable numerical stability in the determination of the matrix
              eigenstructure.  As the ice sheets retreated their meltwater filled the ocean
              basins resulting in a rise in sea-level which has been observed in the
              geological record and recently estimated through time.  This "eustatic"
              sealevel rise provides an important constraint upon the inversion process by
              indicating the volume change of the Earth's ice sheets during deglaciation
              while deformation data provide an estimate of the spatial distribution of this
              volume.  Meltwater loading of the ocean floor is an important factor
              contribution to variation in relative sea level curves at sites distant from
              ice sheets.  An important goal of the proposed work is to include this factor
              in the inverse procedure, together with the requirement that sea level remain
              on a gravitational equipotential surface.  Understanding of the dynamic nature
              of ice sheets and their impact upon the earth will be valuable in global
              climate studies (speed of ice-sheet advance and retreat), climate modeling
              (ice-sheet thickness estimates affecting global circulation patterns), and
              geodynamic studies (component of earth movement associated with glacio- and
              hydro-isostasy) as well as in glacial geology.
