Title       : A Theory of Alliances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1996     
File        : a9515169

Award Number: 9515169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emerson Niou niou@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515169  Niou    Alliances play a central role in international relations
              theory.  In the realist view, "the historically most important manifestation of
              the balance of power . . . is to be found . . .in the relations between one
              nation or alliance and another alliance." (Morgentahu, 1949)  Two lines of
              research have been developed:  the first emphasizes inter-allkiance
              competition, studying conditions under which an alliance system is stable,
              assuming that alliances are unitary actors and that cvollective action problems
              among allies do not arise; the second focuses on intr-alliance collective
              action problems, assuming that external threats do not exist or can be kept
              constant.  The study of inter-alliance competiion is not complete without the
              consideration of intra-alliance collective action problems, and the study of
              collective action problems within an alliance must also consider the severity
              of external threats.    The purpose of this project is to study alliance
              politics by developing a game theoretic framework that incorporates both
              inter-alliance competition and intra-alliance competition in the context of
              international relations.  This extension involves finding the core in which no
              alternative grouping of allies can do better.  Specifically, the researchers
              are interested in the following questions:  Are large countries exploited by
              small countries in both strong and weak alliances?  When the number of allies
              increases, does the level of provision of public goods within the alliance
              decrease?  If countries may choose which alliances to join, does a stable
              coalition structure exist?  Are countries more likely to balance or bandwagon? 
              Can grand coalitions ever be stable?    This study  will provide an opportunity
              to understand alliance politics from a different vantage point.  For example,
              the initial exploration of this period by the investigator several years ago
              sometimes helps him question the truthfulness of conventional wisdom.  An
              in-depth study of this period will allow the inv estigators to conduct a
              comparative study of the Chinese and European alliance.  ***
