Title       : Molecular Mechanism of Clathrin Coat Dissociation and its Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9515474

Award Number: 9515474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernst J. Ungewickell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              95-15474  Ungewickell    The vectorial transport of selected membrane proteins
              from the plasma membrane and the trans-Golgi network to the endosomal system
              involves clathrin coated vesicles. The clathrin coat is connected by
              hetero-tetrameric adaptor proteins to the underlying membrane and is removed
              enzymatically before fusion at the targeted membrane. Neuronal clathrin coated
              vesicles contain in addition to the adaptors the monomeric coat proteins AP180
              and auxilin. Results from in vitro reconstituted system imply that uncoating of
              clathrin requires the cognate form of the heat shock protein hsp70 (hsp70c) and
              a 100 KDa cofactor. This cofactor has been identified as auxilin. Auxilin was
              previously characterized as a clathrin assembly protein. The function of
              auxilin in the uncoating is reminiscent of DnaJ proteins that function together
              with hsp70 to constitute a chaperone system involved in prokaryotic and
              eukaryotic cells in numerous functions: protein folding, protein transport
              across membranes, and activation of DNA binding proteins. DnaJ-like proteins
              are presumed to target hsp70 to specific substrates. The objective of this
              proposal is to gain insights into the molecular mechanism of the uncoating
              reaction and to prove that auxilin or auxilin-like proteins function together
              with hsp70c to form a chaperone machine that specifically dissociate clathrin
              coat and regulate clathrin dynamics in vivo.   This will be acheived by
              investigating the domain structure of auxilin to determine which parts interact
              with assembled clathrin coat and with hsp70c as well as how these interactions
              are regulated. Truncated forms of auxilin will be expressed in bacteria,
              purified, and assayed in vitro to determine their ability to bind to clathrin,
              to recruit hsp70c to the clathrin coat, and to elicit uncoating of the clathrin
              coat. Chemical cross linking reagents will be used to identify novel uncoating
              intermediate that presumably contains auxilin, hsp70c, and clathrin. Mutated
              genes that encode auxilin that  are unable to recruit hsp70c to clathrin will
              be introduced by transfection into neuronal and non-neuronal cells to examine
              their effects on clathrin mediated membrane traffic. Auxilin homologues will be
              search for in non-neuronal cells using the in vitro functional assay with
              fractionated homogenates of various cells. cDNAs encoding possible homologues
              will be cloned and sequenced. Studies of the chaperone-mediated uncoating of
              clathrin coated vesicles are relevant not only to understanding clathrin
              dynamics, but also to understanding the molecular mechanism of a specific
              eukaryotic chaperone machine.  %%%   The vectorial transport of selected
              membrane proteins from the plasma membrane and the trans-Golgi network to the
              endosomal system involves clathrin coated vesicles. The clathrin coat is
              connected by hetero-tetrameric adaptor proteins to the underlying membrane and
              is removed enzymatically before fusion at the targeted membrane. Neuronal
              clathrin coated vesicles contain in addition to the adaptors the monomeric coat
              proteins AP180 and auxilin. Results from in vitro reconstituted system imply
              that uncoating of clathrin requires the cognate form of the heat shock protein
              hsp70 (hsp70c) and auxilin. Auxilin was previously characterized as a clathrin
              assembly protein. The objective of this proposal is to gain insights into the
              molecular mechanism of the uncoating reaction and to prove that auxilin or
              auxilin-like proteins function together with hsp70c to form a chaperone machine
              that specifically dissociate clathrin coat and regulate clathrin dynamics in
              vivo.   This will be acheived by investigating the domain structure of auxilin
              to determine which parts interact with assembled clathrin coat and with hsp70c
              as well as how these interactions are regulated. Studies of the
              chaperone-mediated uncoating of clathrin coated vesicles are relevant not only
              to understanding clathrin dynamics, but also to understanding the molecular
              mechanism of a specific eukaryotic chaperone machine.  ***
