Title       : The Fate of Abandoned Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9515424

Award Number: 9515424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154622             (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Kertzer David_Kertzer@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award to Brown University supports the research of an anthropologist on
              the historical demography of the European foundling system of the 19th century.
                Through analysis of records from a foundling home in Bologna, Italy, as well
              as records from nearby communities, the researchers will trace the course of
              the lives of children brought up in the home.  The purpose of the research is
              to describe the lives of the children who survived to adulthood, to provide
              insight into more general aspects of family and social life at the time, and to
              analyze differences by gender.  The preliminary data show that boys were more
              disadvantaged by foundling status than girls, since girls attempted to marry
              up` in status.  The foundling system was widespread and while foundling infant
              mortality was at least twice as high as the general population's rate, many
              thousands of foundlings survived and became productive members of society. 
              This research will trace the effects of foundling status on later life.    At
              the present time the nature and social health of the family is a matter of
              concern to society at large.  Many politicians, planners and commentators
              lament the `breakdown` of the family, and the impact this has on the behavior
              of children.  Non-family institutions such as orphanages have been considered
              as alternatives to dysfunctional family situations.  This project studies a
              comparable situation in the past, and will advance our understanding of the
              consequences of alternatives to traditional family upbringing.  This sort of
              research is important because it will bring the lessons of history to bear on
              these current questions as well as making a valuable data base available for
              comparative analysis.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
