Title       : Government Policies and International Asset Return Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9515416

Award Number: 9515416
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geert Bekaert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to examine the effect of various  government
              policies on international asset returns, including  exchange rates.  The first
              project analyizes whether problems  similar to what has occurred recently with
              the peso which arise  from monetary policy changes can explain anomalous
              behavior in  the interest rate term structure.  It is postulated that monetary 
              policy affects the stochastic process underlying interest rates  and exchange
              rates in such a way that it induces econometric  inference problems.     The
              second project  examines monetary policy in the U.S. and  Germany proposing
              non-linear policy rules for both countries.   The dynamic effects of policy
              shocks on real and nominal exchange  rates and interest rate differentials and
              their predictability  are examined both in the context of a non-linear vector 
              autoregressive setting and in the context of an equilibrium  model.  The third
              proposed project focuses on real exchange rates  in the context of a dynamic
              economy with non-traded goods, in  particular houses.  The main issue addressed
              is the relative  variability of real and nominal exchange rate changes versus 
              inflation rates.    A final issue to be examined is the effect of government
              policies  on the degree of integration of emerging equity markets with  global
              capital markets and on economic growth.  An empirical  methodology is developed
              to test whether financial market  integration and stock market development
              contribute to economic  growth.  This project also involves the development of
              new and  better indicators of financial market integration and stock  market
              development for a set of developing countries.
