Title       : Impact of Male Wage Labor Migration on Population in Haiti
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1996     
File        : a9515200

Award Number: 9515200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald F. Murray murray@nervm.nerdc.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
              the University of Florida.  The hypothesis to be tested is that male labor
              emigration from the Caribbean Island of Haiti leads to increased female
              fertility in the home communities, because the remittances available from males
              are important to poor women in raising their children.  Preliminary studies
              have shown this relationship in extensive survey data.  The student will study
              in two villages of Haiti, one in which there are many absent men working
              elsewhere and another with relatively few absent men.  Extensive surveys of
              individuals in households in the villages will provide economic, reproductive,
              nutritional and social data to test the hypothesis.    This research is
              important because the Caribbean has long been a reservoir of migrant labor for
              the countries of the Americas.  Haiti in particular has been the poorest
              country of the region, and has evidenced a pattern of male out migration for
              some time. The contribution of this case study will be to provide the
              fine-grained information about human behavior in context that ethnography
              excels in.  Improved understanding of the impact of migrant laborer remittances
              on the reproductive success of the women left behind will be valuable for
              development planners attempting to design programs to raise the living
              conditions of the Haitian people.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
