Title       : Demographic and Political Change in the Classic-Postclassic Transition in
               Pacific Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  1996     
File        : a9515367

Award Number: 9515367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick J. Bove fbove@ufm.edu.gt  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Bove and his colleagues will
              analyze archaeological materials which have been obtained through carefully
              controlled collection over a number of years in the western coastal region of
              Guatemala. The area contains numerous sites and materials which date from the
              Classic period of Mesoamerican prehistory as well as from the succeeding
              Postclassic period. Dr. Bove will focus on two subregions which are located on
              the western coast and which span this transitional period. Through analysis of
              stone tools, ceramics, architecture and the size and distribution of sites he
              hopes to answer a number of questions. First, he will employ the technique of
              obsidian hydration to assign absolute dates to archaeological occurrences and
              thus develop a chronology for both regions. Through analysis of ceramic remains
              he will determine, in each area, whether the same peoples were present through
              time or if population replacement occurred. Study of site numbers and extent
              will permit him to determine changes in population size over time. It will also
              be possible to examine many facets of social organization. One can determine
              the extent of social differentiation within a single area and on an inter-area
              basis how power relationships may have altered over time.  Many archaeologists
              have focused on the Classic-Postclassic transition in Mesoamerica because,
              according to traditional interpretations, it marks a major social collapse. It
              was during the Classic period that the largest and most impressive Mayan
              temples were constructed and Middle American culture reached a peak. At the end
              of this period many sites appear to be abandoned, monumental construction
              ceases and people appear to live in smaller less hierarchically organized
              groups. Archaeologists have postulated a number of reasons why such changes may
              have occurred and these range from increased warfare to ecological collapse
              induced by overexploitation of the environment. The western Guatemala area is
              interesting because it appears not to conform to this senario. Preliminary
              evidence indicates a high degree of continuity and numerous Postclassic sites
              are present. However it has not yet been possible to reconstruct changing
              population densities or to determine if social organization was altered. The
              goal of Dr. Bove's work is to address these immediate questions.  The
              underlying issue which Dr. Bove wishes to study is how and why societies
              change. He believes that recurring cycles may be involved and a region such as
              western Guatemala provides an excellent laboratory to address questions of this
              type.Its rich archaeological remains cover over a thousand year span and it is,
              therefore, possible to obtain a rich and long term data base.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
