Title       : Memory Characteristics of Elderly Eyewitnesses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9515231

Award Number: 9515231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172544             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Bartlett jbartlet@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Searcy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515231  Bartlett  As the elderly are disproportionately likely to be the
              victims of certain crimes, the legal system will have to rely more and more on
              elderly witnesses. There has as yet been little research with respect to the
              performance of the elderly in this role, and existing research has yielded few
              solid conclusions. The objective of this research is to examine systematically
              the performance of the elderly as witnesses. It will (1) investigate the
              conditions under which the elderly are likely to perform poorly and well; (2)
              test the rules and procedures within the legal system that may be manipulated
              to enhance the quality of information obtained from elderly witnesses, (3)
              evaluate the utility of psychometric measures for distinguishing accurate from
              inaccurate witnesses, and (4) explore the potential for using the relatively
              unimpaired "implicit memory" of the elderly to assess the accuracy of their
              memories or to elicit additional information. Experiments involving simulated
              crimes and other events will be used to compare the performance of young and
              elderly subjects in order to answer basic questions about age differences.
              Research has documented that jurors, attorneys, and others within the legal
              system tend to assume that the elderly witnesses have difficulty in performing
              accurately.  Our goal is to obtain solid information as to what, if anything,
              should be considered when dealing with seniors who are witnesses to crimes.  
              %%%%  As the elderly are disproportionately likely to be the victims of certain
              crimes, the legal system will have to rely more and more on elderly witnesses.
              There has as yet been little research with respect to the performance of the
              elderly in this role, and existing research has yielded few solid conclusions.
              The objective of this research is to examine systematically the performance of
              the elderly as witnesses. It will (1) investigate the conditions under which
              the elderly are likely to perform poorly and well; (2) test the rules and
              procedures within th e legal system that may be manipulated to enhance the
              quality of information obtained from elderly witnesses, (3) evaluate the
              utility of psychometric measures for distinguishing accurate from inaccurate
              witnesses, and (4) explore the potential for using the relatively unimpaired
              "implicit memory" of the elderly to assess the accuracy of their memories or to
              elicit additional information. Experiments involving simulated crimes and other
              events will be used to compare the performance of young and elderly subjects in
              order to answer basic questions about age differences. Research has documented
              that jurors, attorneys, and others within the legal system tend to assume that
              the elderly witnesses have difficulty in performing accurately.  Our goal is to
              obtain solid information as to what, if anything, should be considered when
              dealing with seniors who are witnesses to crimes.   ****
