Title       : Collaborative Research on Candidate Emergence in U.S. House Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1996   
File        : a9515350

Award Number: 9515350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80325              (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Stone stonew@sobek.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Stone  9515350    The nature and quality of the choice citizens are offered in
              congressional elections is central to the health of American democracy.  In the
              candidate-centered arena of electoral politics, a great deal depends upon the
              individual candidates who choose (or choose not ) to run.  Much of the problem
              reduces to a very significant incumbency advantage in U.S. House elections: 
              when the incumbent decides to run for reelection, he or she is perceived as
              very difficult to beat.  As a result, potentially strong candidates who might
              offer voters a significant alternative do not emerge to challenge the sitting
              member.  The average challenger, therefore, is underqualified, underfunded, and
              relatively invisible to voters in the district.  The result is that House
              elections often are not competitive, and the choice voters make is distorted to
              the significant advantage of incumbents.  The dramatic partisan change that
              resulted from the 1994 election probably did not disturb the long-term
              incumbency effect, although it may dramatically alter the contours of
              congressional-election choice in other ways.    In this investigation the
              researchers will examine candidate emergence by surveying a national sample of
              potential House candidates.  The researchers argue that there are two
              "decisions" relevant to entering a House race in any particular year:  a
              general commitment to run for a House seat and a specific decision to run in a
              given race.;  The investigators contend that the general commitment to run is a
              necessary condition for virtually all House candidates and results from a
              strong interest in public policy outcomes, a sense that the House is an
              attractive and desirable institution in which to serve, and an ambition to hold
              public office.  By and large, these variables are not "strategic" in nature. 
              In contrast, the investigators argue that the decision to run in a specific
              year is heavily influenced by the potential candidate's perceived chances of
              winning his or her party's nomination and,  if nominated, the general election.
               The researchers suggest an expected utility model that combines these
              strategic and longer-term consideration, along with the costs potential
              candidates must bear to make a run.    The investigators carry out a two-stage
              study building on an earlier pilot study.  The first stage involves a survey of
              informants in a national sample of U.S. districts.  Informants who are
              politically aware of local affairs.  They will provide information about the
              district, the incumbent, and  about potential candidates who might run for the
              U.S. House of Representatives.  The second stage involves surveying state
              legislators who districts overlap with the sample U.S House districts.  This is
              the first investigation to identify and study a sample of strong potential
              candidates for the U.S. House and will enhance substantially our understanding
              of the factors that influence candidate emergence in congressional elections. 
              ***ouse is an anttractive and die       H  Ho
