Title       : Jury Decision Making in Capital Cases: The Punishment Phase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9515451

Award Number: 9515451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234106             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Wiener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515451  Wiener  This project use social cognition theory to study the way in
              which eligible jurors understand and apply the law in capital murder trials to
              determine whether to sentence a defendant to life in prison or to death.
              Previous research has found that potential jurors do not reliably comprehend
              instructions which direct jurors to weigh aggravating and mitigating factors to
              determine a sentence.  The current project involves two separate studies of
              juror and jury decision that will attempt to determine whether cognitive
              prototypes that appear to be inconsistent with the law interfere with jurors'
              understanding of sentencing instructions. The first study involves structured
              interviews with 100 capital jury-eligible citizens to determine their beliefs
              about accused and convicted murderers, victims of murder, aggravating
              circumstances,  mitigating circumstances, and other elements of law. The second
              study is a mock jury study with video presentation of a re-enacted murder trial
              and jury deliberations. It will test the hypothesis that miscomprehension of
              sentencing instructions is produced not only by unclear language but also by
              the existence of l)incongruence between the jurors'  schemata of murder
              (measured in study 1) and the law outlined in the  instructions and 2) the lack
              of procedural knowledge concerning the cognitive steps that jurors must enact
              to follow the instructions. The overall goal of the research is to understand
              the types of cognitive errors that jurors  commit and the way in which these
              errors may influence deliberations and final sentences in first degree murder
              trials.  %%%%  This project use social cognition theory to study the way in
              which eligible jurors understand and apply the law in capital murder trials to
              determine whether to sentence a defendant to life in prison or to death.
              Previous research has found that potential jurors do not reliably comprehend
              instructions which direct jurors to weigh aggravating and mitigating factors to
              determine a sentence.  The c urrent project involves two separate studies of
              juror and jury decision that will attempt to determine whether cognitive
              prototypes that appear to be inconsistent with the law interfere with jurors'
              understanding of sentencing instructions. The first study involves structured
              interviews with 100 capital jury-eligible citizens to determine their beliefs
              about accused and convicted murderers, victims of murder, aggravating
              circumstances,  mitigating circumstances, and other elements of law. The second
              study is a mock jury study with video presentation of a re-enacted murder trial
              and jury deliberations. The overall goal of the research is to understand the
              types of cognitive errors that jurors  commit and the way in which these errors
              may influence deliberations and final sentences in first degree murder trials. 
              ****
