Title       : US-Indo Cooperative Research: Synthesis of Higher Alcohols from Synthesis Gas
               Through Modified Fischer-Tropsch Synthesis, Award in US and Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9515453

Award Number: 9515453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dady B. Dadyburjor dadyburjor@cemr.wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edwin L. Kugler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9515453  Dadyburjor   Description:  This proposal is for a US-Indo  research
              collaboration between materials  scientists Carlos Levi of the University of 
              California, Santa Barbara and Vikram Jayaram of  the Indian Institute of
              Science, Bangalore.   The project is entitled "Phase Selection in  Ceramic
              Oxides Under Non-Equilibrium  Conditions."  The investigators will study the 
              evolution of oxide microstructures in ceramic  oxides synthesized under
              conditions wherein  thermodynamic equilibrium is highly  constrained.  The  
              program will focus on relatively simple binary  and higher component systems
              using techniques  with proven potential to bring about  substantial
              metastability.  Compositions  produced in this manner will be heat treated to 
              study the hierarchy of states by which the non-  equilibrium structure evolves
              towards a more  stable one.  The primary objective is to  enhance the
              understanding of phase selection  processes, their relationship to fundamental 
              forms of metastability, as well as their impact  on microstructure evolution
              through subsequent  transformations.   Scope:  The PIs have extensive
              experience in  this area and have  collaborated productively  in the past.  The
              bulk of the experimental work  will be carried out at the Indian Institute of 
              Science.  The US collaborator will provide  guidance in the design of
              experiments and  analysis of results, as well as access to  atomization and
              characterization facilities at  the UC, Santa Barbara.  The research is 
              expected to generate a mutually beneficial  interaction with the ongoing
              research on the  synthesis of structural ceramics and functional  inorganic
              oxides at the NSF Materials Research  Laboratory at UC.  This project will
              provide a  unique international opportunity for a US  graduate student to
              participate in the  experimental research at the IISc, Bangalore.   ***        
                                                       This research will investigate small
              signal  stability of electric power systems as affected  by the ad dition of
              High Voltage DC (HVDC) lines  and control devices such as Static Var 
              Compensators (SVC), Power System Stabilizer  (PSS) and other Flexible AC
              Transmission System  (FACTS) devices.  The objective will be to  develop an
              overall linearized model to include  the above mentioned devices and to examine
               their relative influence on dynamic stability.   This research is important in
              determining the  causes of low frequency oscillations and  voltage collapse. 
              Both of these are operating  problems faced by utilities in both countries.  
              Prof. M.A. Pai, University of Illinois Urbana  will collaborate with Profs.
              D.P. Sen Gupta &  L.R. Padiyar, Indian Institute of Science,  Bangalore.  The
              research team is exceptional.   Prof. Pai is an internationally recognized 
              leader in the use of direct methods for power  system stability, Sen Gupta and
              Padiyar have  done state-of-the-art system studies involving  FACTS and
              adaptive PSS.    Scope:  This research will address a problem in  the area of
              power systems that is of importance  in the U.S. and India.  While there is
              much  accumulated experience in the U.S., the Indian  academic institutions are
              very good at keeping  up with state-of-the-art, and the power  industry there
              quite mature in terms of their  absorption of technology.  The results expected
               from this collaboration include research  papers, course development at the
              University of  Illinois, and an advanced level monograph  emanating from the
              research.     ***
