Title       : Local Realities and Social Psychological Perspectives: Interdependent Systems of
               Racial and Ethnic Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  1996  
File        : a9515187

Award Number: 9515187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marylee C. Taylor MCT@PSUVM.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This project examines how the character of local white and minority communities
              shapes white Americans' attitudes and beliefs about racial and ethnic
              minorities, and how locality characteristics affect black Americans' views of
              their own lives.  It will develop a database that brings census and crime
              statistics about localities together with individual-level survey responses of
              residents to the 1990 General Social Survey.  The unique data set will then be
              employed in a series of four studies.  Study #1 will examine the reaction of
              whites' perspectives about blacks, Latinos and Asian Americans to changes in
              the size of local minority populations, in the overall community economic
              status, and in the relative economic positions of local majority and minority
              groups.  Study #2 will assess the relationship of race-specific crime rates to
              white respondents' fear of crime, support for more stringent law enforcement
              and criminal penalties, tolerance of police violence, gun ownership, and
              stereotypes about minority propensity to violence.  Study #3 will test the
              hypothesis that attributional patterns condition the relationship between
              minority need and white support for social safety net programs.  Study #4 will
              focus on the perspective of African Americans, examining the extent to which
              concentrated local poverty and high crime rates affect happiness, satisfaction,
              anomie, and faith in people.  %%%   This study will produce knowledge that will
              be of value for policy makers seeking to deal with the nation's persistent
              racial tensions.  In addition, it serves as a demonstration project weighing
              the scientific payoff from combining data from a major attitude survey with
              data from the census and the FBI crime reports.  If successful, therefore, the
              project will be a model for other research efforts in the future.
