Title       : Democracy, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Economic Growth Among New
               World Economies: From Settlement to 1940
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9515222

Award Number: 9515222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228969             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth F. Sokoloff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Haber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Engerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kenneth L. Sokoloff  Stanley L. Engerman  Stephen H. Haber  National Bureau of
              Economic Research  SBR-9515222    The research will study how the relationships
              between political  economy, economic institutions, and growth evolved and were 
              manifested among the economies of the New World since settlement  by the
              Europeans.  Studies of modern expansion or economic growth  in western Europe
              and certain overseas offshoots have argued that  political democracy and
              economic growth tended to emerge  together.  This research will attempt to
              determine if this is  true in North and South America.  The economies of North
              and  South America followed very different paths of economic and  political
              development even though all enjoyed extraordinarily  favorable environments
              with respect to natural resources per  person, were established by the same
              small set of countries and  were peopled by individuals from the same economic
              classes of the  same populations.  Despite these similarities at the time of 
              settlement, they came to differ enormously with respect to the  degree of
              inequality in political power, human capital, and  wealth within their
              societies, the nature and structure of their  economic institutions, as well as
              their realization of growth.    Another reason why New World economies provide
              an attractive  natural laboratory for the study of democracy, institutions and 
              growth, is that they experienced a number of major alterations in  political
              regime, like the achievement of independence, with  associated changes (or
              failures to change) in economic  institutions.  This research will also examine
              in detail the  impacts of changes in institutions due to such events, with a 
              rigorous application of the comparative approach across  economies, to improve
              the understanding of the role of  institutions in economic growth.
