Title       : Three-Dimensional Reconstruction from Electron Micrographs of Randomly Oriented
               Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9515518

Award Number: 9515518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $443900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Lawrence lawrence@wadsworth.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,BIOT,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Three-dimensional Reconstruction from Electron Micrographs of  Randomly
              Oriented Macromolecules.    Knowledge of the structure of macromolecules is
              essential to an  understanding of their functions in biological systems. Many 
              large macromolecules can only be analyzed by threedimensional  electron
              microscopy. For single asymmetrical particles, in  contrast to crystalline
              objects, resolutions achieved in three  dimensions have been limited to 2-3 nm.
              The techniques proposed  here will contribute to a fuller usage of information
              contained  in a micrograph and are an important step toward achieving higher 
              resolution and thus a better understanding of biological  function.    A method
              is proposed for three-dimensional reconstruction from  electron micrographs of
              randomly oriented single macromolecules.  Biological particles are radiation
              sensitive, and imaging must be  done under low-dose conditions. Only techniques
              that combine  information of many identical particles can overcome the limits 
              imposed by radiation sensitivity. One of the most successful  methods of this
              kind was SECReT (Single Exposure Conical  Reconstruction Technique), developed
              by the P.I.. Programs for  this method have been distributed to laboratories
              world wide and  have been used for the determination of more than 15 structures
               over the last seven years. However, SECReT requires that all  particles used
              in a reconstruction have the same orientation  within the plane of the
              specimen. Deviations from this preferred  orientation limit the resolution in
              three dimensions. Proposed  here is a new method for determining the
              orientation of particles  from their projections. This technique can be used
              for refining  the orientation of projections used for SECReT and for the 
              determination of projection angles of particles with unknown  orientations.
              Successful development of this technique will lead  to substantial reduction in
              experimental effort and increase the  resolution achievable in three
              dimensions.    The theory of Radon t ransforms is the basis for
              three-dimensional  reconstruction algorithms. Most research has focused on the 
              design of efficient inversion algorithms and only a few  applications have made
              use of their potential as image processing  tools. In this proposal Radon
              transforms are used as tools for  simultaneous translational and rotational
              alignment of  projections in three dimensions. Once the orientations of the 
              projections are known a threedimensional reconstruction can be  calculated. The
              alignment/reconstruction method will be combined  with a Gibbs sampling
              technique for overcoming noise limitations  and for image classification.
              Programs to assess the feasibility  of the proposed technique have been written
              and first results  have been published.    The new technique will be applied to
              two objects, the calcium  release channel from sarcoplasmic reticulum and the
              50S ribosomal  subunit from Escherichia coli. The two macromolecules were
              chosen  because they exhibit features that are advantageous for testing  the
              procedures, and because results at higher resolution will  contribute to a
              better understanding of their function. The  four-fold symmetry of the calcium
              release channel can be used to  increase the signal to noise ratio, whereas the
              50S ribosomal  subunit is a globular structure with few protuberances and ideal
               for testing the limits of the applicability of this method.
