Title       : Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers in Supercritical Fluids, U.S.-Turkey
               Cooperative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2000     
File        : a9515361

Award Number: 9515361
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19197              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin Chu bchu@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to support collaborative research by Dr. Ben Chu,
              Chemistry Department, State University of New York at Stony Brook and Dr. Burak
              Erman, Polymer Research Center, Bogazici University in Istanbul, Turkey.  In
              this research the two scientists will use a combination of modern analytical
              methods (e.g synchrotron ultrasmall angle x-ray scattering) and modern computer
              simulation techniques (e.g. molecular dynamics) to provide deeper understanding
              of the structure/property relationship for the self-assembly behavior of block
              copolymers in supercritical fluids.  It is proposed to use short-chain diblocks
              of F3C(CF2)m-(CH2)nCH3 in supercritical Carbon dioxide and to investigate the
              self-assembly behavior as a function of polymer concentration, total chain
              length, chain length ratio, temperature and CO2 pressure by means of computer
              simulations, experiment and modeling.  Scope: This award is to partially fund
              visits by the U.S. P.I. and a U.S. graduate student to Bogazici University, and
              the visit of the Turkish scientist to SUNY,Stony Brook.  Dr. Erman will be
              seeking funds from the Turkish Government to cover part of the costs in that
              country.  The project brings two very experienced scientists in the field of
              polymer chemistry to collaborate on understanding the process of
              polymerization.  The expected results could help improve the production of
              polymers without the use of organic sulfurs which are an environmental hazard. 
              The project also allows for the training of a U.S. graduate student in an
              international setting at one of Turkey's best technical universities.  The
              project fits well with the objectives of the Division of International
              Programs.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
