Title       : The Integrative Aspects of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1999   
File        : a9515450

Award Number: 9515450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eldon J. Braun   (Principal Investigator current)
              William H. Dantzler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9515450  Dantzler    In mammals the kidney is the sole organ responsible for
              regulating the water and salt content of the body and mammals have a urinary
              bladder in which to store the output of the kidneys (urine) until the bladder
              can be emptied at a convenient and safe time.  In birds on the other hand, the
              kidneys function together with the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract to
              regulate the salt and water content of the body.  This is because birds do not
              have a urinary bladder in which to store urine.  Instead, the urine enters the
              terminal portion of the GI tract, the cloaca.  The urine does not remain here
              to be excreted, but is moved into the GI tract ( the colon) by muscular
              contractions of the cloaca and colon.  In the colon, the composition of the
              urine can be modified by the cells that make up the lining of the colon.  Thus,
              the kidney must work together with the lower GI tract to maintain the fluid and
              salt balance.  How this integration of function is controlled is one of the
              major emphasis of the proposed research.  A better understanding of how birds
              regulate water and salt balance is of major importance to growers of birds for
              commercial purposes, especially the poultry industry where quite frequently
              disturbances of water and salt balance in flocks can have significant economic
              impact.  Another emphasis of the proposed work deals with how birds excrete the
              nitrogen that is formed as a by product of metabolism.  Mammals excrete
              nitrogen as urea which is quite soluble in water and seldom causes problems
              unless there has been major kidney damage.  Birds on the other hand excrete
              their excess nitrogen as uric acid, a compound that is virtually insoluble in
              water and tends to precipitate from solution and form large plate-like
              crystals.  However, when bird urine is examined no crystals of uric acid are
              found despite of very high concentrations of uric acid.  Instead of crystals
              the urine contains small spheres that are sufficiently small to pass along the
              kidney tubules without pl ugging the tubules.  We have already determined that
              these small spheres are up of uric acid and protein.  Very little is known by
              what mechanism and where in the kidney these spheres of uric acid form.  Birds
              do not often form kidney stones, and it is not understood why stones are not
              more prevalent with the large amount of uric acid in the urine.  However, out
              breaks of kidney stones do occur in commercial flocks with disastrous effects. 
              Understanding the basic process of how bird kidneys handle uric acid will help
              people to deal more efficiently with out breaks of kidney stones in commercial
              flocks and in the trade that deals with exotic birds.  In summary, the results
              of the studies should lead to a better understanding of kidney function in
              birds and how the kidneys function together with the lower GI tract to maintain
              whole animal water and salt balance.
