Title       : Ethnobiology of San Pedro Mixtepec, a Zapotec-Speaking Community of the Sierra
               de Miahuatlan, Oaxaca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1998      
File        : a9515395

Award Number: 9515395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene S. Hunn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Oaxaca, Mexico Zapotec Ethnobiology  This award to the University of Washington
              will support a linguistic anthropologist's documentation of the indigenous
              knowledge of plants and animals known in a traditional Zapotec-speaking
              community in Oaxaca, Mexico.  Using standard techniques of ethnography and
              ethnobotany the investigator will establish the precise correspondence of each
              local name to the names categories of Western scientific botanical and
              zoological taxonomies.  The similarities between local and Western scientific
              classifications provide evidence of universal mental processes by which humans
              comprehend the diversity of the natural world, while the differences reflect
              contrasts of cultural meaning between indigenous peasant and Western industrial
              societies.  The project will analyze the within-community distribution of
              knowledge by age, sex, schooling, and occupation in order to establish the
              cultural consensus of the local knowledge structure.  Focusing on local
              conceptions of forest management through fire, the project will analyze how
              local indigenous knowledge impacts on environmental change.  This research is
              important because traditional indigenous knowledge systems are fast
              disappearing.  Careful case studies such as this allow us to further our
              understanding of fundamental processes of human variation in cognitive
              structure.  The fine-grained analysis of local variation in knowledge will
              advance our understanding of how natural knowledge systems are instated and how
              they change.                                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                          
