Title       : Americas Program Planning Visit: Research Collaboration with Guatemalan Regional
               Project and Guatemalan Archeologists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1995   
File        : a9515495

Award Number: 9515495
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1995  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2291               (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Kosakowsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515495  Kosakowsky    This Americas Program award will fund a visit to
              Guatemala  by Dr. Laura Kosakowsky,  Boston University, to plan a  research
              project with the goal of identifying the  archeological sequence of the Santa
              Rosa region on the  Pacific Coast of Guatemala.  During this visit, Dr. 
              Kosakowsky, with the collaboration of  Dr. Francisco Estrada  Belli, director
              of the Santa Rosa Archeological Project,  will examine surface collections of
              ceramics from the region  in order to provide maximum information on the local
              ceramic  chronology.  The analysis of ceramics is a critical step in  the
              identification of chronological placement of  archaeological sites, and of
              regional and inter-regional  patterns of interaction.  The examination of the
              available  material  will  provide a realistic background for selecting  sites
              for excavation in the coming season.    The archeological sequence of the Santa
              Rosa area has been  poorly documented up to now, but there are indications that
               this region played a key role in networks of trade and  communication from as
              far away as Central Mexico, El  Salvador , the Guatemalan highlands, and the
              Maya lowlands.  Since the region is undergoing extensive modernization and 
              agricultural intensification, it is rapidly facing the loss  of archaeological
              resources.  It is critical that this type  of study be undertaken as soon as
              possible.  ***
