Title       : Analyticity: Carnap, Quine, and the Structure of Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9515398

Award Number: 9515398
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Creath creath@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Creationist science" is continually being raised by fundamentalists who claim
              that it should have standing beside Darwinian evolutionary theory in the
              teaching of biology in our schools.  In fact, in the recent elections in
              Virginia, attempts were made to elect a school board which would support the
              teaching of creationist science.  Yet for scientists, the very words
              "creationist science" is an oxymoron.  Creationism is based on revealed
              religion while science is empirically supported or justified.      But what
              does this mean, "empirically supported"?   How can we empirically confirm any
              theory unless we know what empirical confirmation is?   And on pain of
              circularity it appears that that theory of confirmation must itself be
              established independently of the empirical evidence.  Otherwise, we would be
              saying that we believe some theory of confirmation simply because that theory
              assures us that it itself is worth believing in the circumstances. 
              Furthermore, even the barest empiricist doctrine seems to presuppose something
              that cannot be tested empirically (or at least not noncircularly so), namely
              that observation is to be trusted.      The classical answer to support of
              beliefs is intuition.  Intuition, however, is an appeal to a direct
              metaphysical insight, a non-observational grasp of independent matters of fact.
               Such an answer, though, answer is appalling to anyone who takes science
              seriously or, for that matter, anyone who wants to distinguish "creationism"
              from science.      Under this grant, Professor Richard Creath is examining the
              competing answers to how science is justified which were given by two of the
              foremost leaders in the field of philosophy of science over the past fifty
              years:  Rudolf Carnap  W. V. O. Quine.  These two philosophers of science have
              shaped the views of succeeding generations on how we are to conceive of the
              process of justifying our scientific beliefs.  Using documents that have only
              recently become available, Professor Creath will articulate more fully than 
              has been possible heretofore Carnap's and Quine's alternative philosophies of
              science and the searching criticisms that each made of the other. He will then
              extend and develop these criticisms in turn so as to bring the arguments of the
              Carnap-Quine debate fully to bear on current issues in the philosophy of
              science.  This research thus promises to go a long way in clarifying the
              difference between a science that is based on empirical justification from a
              "science" that originates from divine or received sources.
