Title       : Alternative Evidence for Domestic Stock in Southern Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1995  
File        : a9515120

Award Number: 9515120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16344              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Bousman bbouseman@lonestar.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Goldberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Bousman and his
              collaborators will conduct archaeological field work at the site of
              Blydefontein Rockshelter which is located in the Karoo region of South Africa.
              They will also analyze the excavated finds. Blydefontein is interesting because
              its deposits span the last several thousand years and it was during this period
              that domestic livestock first appeared in Southern Africa. Although the site
              contains no skeletal remains of domesticates from this period, one layer is
              composed largely of animal dung which may have been deposited by sheep. The
              goal of this project is to collect and analyze this material by a variety of
              techniques. The results will be compared to controlled samples which derive
              from modern day sheep and from hyraxes - small guinea pig-like animals which
              also inhabit caves in Southern Africa. Dr Bousman and colleagues will conduct
              microstratigraphic analysis at the site. They will also study pollen and plant
              phytoliths which are incorporated into the deposit. Similar analyses will be
              undertaken with diatoms and calcite spherolites. Disaggregated sediment samples
              will be inspected in an attempt to identify hair or other materials which could
              help identify contributors.  This research is significant for several reasons.
              The first is methodological. Given the generally poor preservation of
              archaeological materials it is extremely difficult for archaeologists to
              reconstruct the past. Animal bones survive only very rarely and need very
              specific chemical and geological conditions to be preserved. The techniques
              that Dr. Bousman and his colleagues hope to perfect will be widely applicable
              in a large number of situations. Secondly, this research is important because
              of the new light it will provide on Southern Africa's past. Animals were not
              domesticated in this region of the world but rather were introduced from the
              outside. The adoption of sheep and goat and later cattle had an enormous impact
              of the way people lived. It is unclear when, how or by what means domesticates
              arrived in this region and Dr. Bousman's research will shed new light on the
              subject. Finally domestic animals have had major effect on environment and the
              planned research will increase our understanding of human-environment
              interactions.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
