Title       : Workshop on Sand Dune Accumulations and Ground-Water Basins in the Eastern
               Sahara, U.S.-Egypt Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1996     
File        : a9515374

Award Number: 9515374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44660              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farouk El-Baz paula@crsa.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted A. Maxwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5928,5940,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to provide partial support for a `Workshop on Sand
              Dune Accumulations and Groundwater Basins in the Eastern Sahara.`  It will be
              organized by Dr. El-Baz from the U.S. in cooperation with Dr. Ibrahim Himida,
              Deputy Director, Desert Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.  Participants will
              include 17 senior scientists, 3 post-doctoral fellows, and one graduate
              student.  Of the total, seven will be from the U.S. and five from developing
              countries in the region of the eastern Sahara.  The eastern Sahara is the
              driest place on earth.  Its sandsheets and dune fields, which are sculptured by
              aeolian activity, are largely enclosed in topographic depressions.  Cycles of
              pluvial periods that date back to 320,000 years ago appear to correspond to
              interglacial stages, which indicate major global climate changes and the
              resulting alternation of wet and dry episodes.  It is also thought that the
              rain and surface water seeped through the underlying rocks to be stored in
              porous layers and fracture zones.  Such water would have first accumulated in
              inland depression forming lakes.  The sediment that were carried by rivers and
              streams would have served as the source of the sand that accumulated into
              dunes.  The question to be answered by the workshop is: can sand dunes fields
              be considered indicators of the presence of groundwater below the surface?  The
              workshop will include collection of pertinent data as well as Landsat images,
              the preparation of country reports on research topics for Egypt and for the
              other countries included in that region.  Scope:  This award supports seven
              U.S. scientists, including two junior scientists and a graduate student, to
              work with scientists from Egypt, and other countries in the eastern Sahara, and
              with a number of European scientists in a workshop and a field study on an
              important study to determine the possible relationship between the observed
              sand dunes and the presence of ground water.  This project is likely to result
              in identification of possible joint research by U.S. scientists and scientists
              of the region, in addition to obtaining answers to the interesting scientific
              questions related to the formation of sand dunes.  This project is being
              supported by INT and EAR.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
