Title       : Provincial Urban Households in the Aztec Empire: Archaeology at Yautepec, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9515312

Award Number: 9515312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Smith mesmith@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 1993, with National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Smith and
              colleagues excavated a series of domestic residences at the Aztec site of
              Yautepec which is located in Mexico. A wealth of artifacts, including 1.2
              million ceramic fragments were recovered and these provide the first look at
              Aztec urban life. This current award provides three years of support to permit
              Dr. Smith and team to analyze the recovered materials and to reconstruct how
              large prehistoric Aztec cities functioned. The specific methods to be employed
              include: quantitative analysis of excavated deposits to determine formation
              processes; ceramic seriation; radiocarbon dating; quantitative typological and
              attribute analyses of ceramics; ceramic petrography; neutron activation
              analyses of ceramics and obsidian to determine chemical composition; analysis
              of human skeletal remains; floral and faunal studies; statistical and spatial
              analyses of domestic artifact assemblages.  Cities are important components of
              nearly all state societies and archaeologists have long acknowledged the
              crucial role played by urban centers in the origin and operation of states.
              Many of the traits that distinguish states from simpler societies are also
              characteristics of cities and important political, economic and religious
              institutions are usually concentrated in urban centers. Therefore in order to
              document and explain the development and organization of ancient states,
              archaeologists need to map and excavate cities. The Aztecs constructed one of
              the largest and most impressive prehistoric New World states. It was heavily
              urbanized yet very little, aside from Dr. Smith's recent work, is known about
              the nature of Aztec urbanism. Dr. Smith's project will help to solve this
              problem. His data have the potential to help resolve a number of issues
              involving urban structure, economic organization and the political processes
              which characterized Mexico at this time.  This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data of interest to a large number of
              archaeologists  and shed light on how complex societies - including our own -
              arise and are maintained. Because a number of students are included in the
              research, Dr. Smith's project has a strong educational component.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
