Title       : Democracy and Collective Action: Strategies, Heuristics and Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9515344

Award Number: 9515344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65789              (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Scholz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff T. Casey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles S. Taber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515344  Scholz    Why do citizens obey democratic laws?  Consider, for example
              tax  laws to collect money for desired public goods or environmental  laws to
              minimize widely-recognized public bads.  Obedience would  leave everyone better
              off, but the temptation to free ride and  shirk citizenship duties makes
              obedience an uncertain proposition.   Is Hobbesian deterrence essential to gain
              compliance, or can social  cooperation support compliance with laws designed to
              resolve  collective action problems?    Scholz's prior NSF research suggests
              that compliance behavior can  only partly be explained by deterrence, and that
              a theory of  cooperation in collective action situations is needed to
              understand  obedience with democratic laws.  His proposed "trust heuristic" 
              explains cooperation in terms of trust in government, trust in  other citizens,
              and other civic attitudes that reflect the positive  and negative experiences
              the citizen has with the cooperative.  Tm  the extent that the individual's
              likelihood of cooperation  increases as attitudes become more positive toward
              the collective,  these attitudinal heuristics replicate the "nice, retaliatory,
              yet  forgiving" characteristics associated with robust cooperative  strategies
              in prisoners dilemma games, and hence may provide the  basis for social
              cooperation.  The trust heuristic represents  "social capital" which
              dramatically increases the ability of weak  enforcement agencies to maintain
              compliance (cooperation) with laws  resolving collective action problems.    To
              further develop and test this hypothesis and also to provide a  more solid
              foundation for the theory of cooperation in large-scale  collective action
              settings, the current research:   1) extends existing results based on
              2-person, full information  prisoners dilemma games to investigate the generic
              properties of  robust strategies capable of supporting cooperative solutions to
              n-  person collective action problems.   2) utilizes laboratory experiments to
              test the correspondence  bet ween formal strategies and heuristics used by
              human subjects in  collective action settings.    The research integrates the
              diverse approaches of five productive  researchers essential for tackling the
              challenging problem of  cooperation in large-scale collective action settings. 
              The  combined methodology can be applied to numerous other collective  action
              problems and should be of great interest to a variety of  social science
              researchers.  ***
