Title       : Social Trust, Narrative and Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1998    
File        : a9515377

Award Number: 9515377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212743             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy C. Earle timearle@cc.wwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George T. Cvetkovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Washington Univ
	      516 High Street
	      Bellingham, WA  982255996    360/650-3000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              There is general agreement about the importance of social trust in improving
              risk management in this country.  However, until recently, little attention was
              paid to the development and testing of social trust theory.  These
              investigators have developed the beginnings of a useful social trust theory to
              guide research work.  The theory is based on the concept of cultural
              orientations or narratives:  cognitive representations stored in long-term
              memory.  Among their many functions, narratives guide the thought, affect and
              behavior of individuals.  This project is designed to investigate the
              narratives that individuals use in thinking about risk management issues and in
              making judgments of social trust.  The investigators are interested not only in
              the content of the narratives but also in how they are used.  Prior work
              indicates that different kinds of social trust may exacerbate or ameliorate
              inter-group conflict.  This project consists of two sets of interviews with
              experimental groups of subjects and one with a control group.  The studies are
              designed to identify and explore systematic conscious or unconscious variations
              in thinking and judgment that may accord with different value orientations and
              kinds of social trust.  Thinking about risk management and making judgments of
              social trust will be explored in two sets of interviews with professional and
              lay and student subjects.  Control group interviews will allow the
              investigators to test whether the experimental procedures themselves affected
              subjects' judgments.  Results will be published in journals and books.  The
              tasks described in this research are designed to deepen our understanding of
              how people think about risk management and social trust, a neglected area of
              risk management research.  Theory suggests, for example, that social trust
              narratives may frequently operate outside the awareness of individuals.  Should
              these studies provide support for this understanding of social trust, they
              would have basic implications for risk management and risk communication
              practice.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
