Title       : Collaborative Research: Fundamental Processes of Network Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9515434

Award Number: 9515434
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44914              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Skvoretz skvoretz-john@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Willer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515434  Skvoretz    The proposed research is a cooperative effort between
              researchers at the University of Carolina (John Skvoretz and David Willer) and
              the University of Iowa (Michael Lovaglia and Barry Markovsky).  This work
              extends a program of theory-based investigations on power and social exchange
              processes.  Network Exchange Theory (NET) is one of several theories that
              attempt to explain the development of power in networks of exchange relations. 
              While previous research has demonstrated that NET predictions are more accurate
              than its competitors, a problem recently surfaced in a fundamental part of the
              theory that classifies networks as strong or weak power, the Graph-theoretical
              Power Index (GPI).  In solving this problem, two independent methods of
              predicting power relations in exchange networks were developed by the
              investigators.  This set the stage for a dramatic improvement in the sped and
              quality of exchange research.  By developing integrated computer programs, the
              investigators proposed to automate the systematic construction, comparison and
              classification of exchange networks. Networks for which the two methods
              disagree can be culled from further analysis from thousands of potential test
              networks.  This will then enable the PIs to make exact predictions for resource
              distribution in these networks and compare them to computer simulations.  The
              entire process of discovering problematic test networks and preparing them for
              experimental test can be accomplished in a matter of hours, whereas previously,
              suitable test networks were discovered largely by chance and the process could
              take years.  Then the PIs propose to improve experimental methods and
              statistical techniques to investigate a number of networks that were crucial in
              the solution to the classification problem.  These advances will bring us a
              step closer to modeling exchange processes in complex networks commonly found
              in society.  ***
