Title       : Agenda Setting in the Supreme Court of Canada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1996      
File        : a9515025

Award Number: 9515025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153608             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy B. Flemming roy@polisci.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515025  Flemming  Control over agendas, deciding what to decide, is a
              significant exercise of power.  Courts with discretion to select appeals they
              want to hear can move legal policies and constitutional law in particular
              directions by choosing some cases and by ignoring others.  The literature on
              the United States Supreme Court suggests that: (1) the Court's decisions
              reflect jurisprudential criteria and concerns; (2) the agenda setting process
              is influenced by litigant resources; and (3) justices on the Court vote
              strategically in accordance with their policy goals and expectations of
              success. Very little comparative research has been done in other developed
              democracies to test the generalizability of the American literature. Here
              comparative research that replicates the methods and findings in the United
              States will be conducted on the Supreme Court of Canada. There are significant
              institutional and procedural differences between the U.S. and Canadian court
              that make the latter an important case testing and identifying the conditions
              for the U.S.-derived hypotheses. This study employs a triangulated research to
              generate the quantitative, qualitative, and archival data to develop a
              comprehensive explanation of how the Supreme Court of Canada decides to decide
              and how it differs from the United States.  %%%%  Control over agendas,
              deciding what to decide, is a significant exercise of power.  Courts with
              discretion to select appeals they want to hear can move legal policies and
              constitutional law in particular directions by choosing some cases and by
              ignoring others.  The literature on the United States Supreme Court suggests
              that: (1) the Court's decisions reflect jurisprudential criteria and concerns;
              (2) the agenda setting process is influenced by litigant resources; and (3)
              justices on the Court vote strategically in accordance with their policy goals
              and expectations of success. Very little comparative research has been done in
              other developed democracies to test the generalizability of th e American
              literature. Here comparative research that replicates the methods and findings
              in the United States will be conducted on the Supreme Court of Canada. There
              are significant institutional and procedural differences between the U.S. and
              Canadian court that make the latter an important case testing and identifying
              the conditions for the U.S.-derived hypotheses. This study employs a
              triangulated research to generate the quantitative, qualitative, and archival
              data to develop a comprehensive explanation of how the Supreme Court of Canada
              decides to decide and how it differs from the United States.  ****
