Title       : Excavation of Ziyadeh, Syria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9515394

Award Number: 9515394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Hole Frank.Hole@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Frank Hole and his colleagues will
              conduct two seasons of field research and a follow-up season of analysis at the
              archaeological site of Ziyadeh. Located on the Khabur River in northeastern
              Syria, the site has four major periods of occupation which span the period from
              the sixth through the third millennium BC. The site itself consists of a mound
              and Dr. Hole and his team will excavate through it to reveal the entire
              occupational sequence and to collect cultural materials such as ceramics,
              lithics, possible metal and fauna. They also shall conduct fine sieving
              operations to recover botanical remains. On this basis it will be possible to
              reconstruct environmental change and human response through time. The sequence
              of cultures will also be defined and it will be possible to determine whether
              the area exhibits population continuity or rather was occupied by successive
              waves of immigrants.  Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led
              to the rise of complex societies and northern Syria and adjacent regions are
              extremely important because it was here that many plants and animals were first
              domesticated and both complex societies and later civilizations arose. While
              much work has been done in the Near East, very few sites cover such a long
              expanse of time and contain such rich environmental information. The processes
              which led to the observed cultural phenomenon are not yet clear and in recent
              years increasing attention has focused on the role of environmental change as a
              causal factor. This region in Northern Syria is semi-desert and therefore can
              exhibit marked change in response to relatively small changes in rainfall. It
              provides an excellent situation to examine the relationship between
              environmental and cultural change.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide information of interest to many archaeologists. In
              1998 the region will be flooded as part of a development project and the work
              must be done now. The project will also shed new light on the processes which
              led to the development of civilization and complex societies.                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
