Title       : Participation and Influence in Gender-Homogeneous and Mixed-Gender Task-Oriented
               Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9515250

Award Number: 9515250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94675              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Balkwell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of participation and influence in groups, exploring both status
              expectations and the contextual constraint of gender composition.  This
              investigation develops a theoretical framework combining expectation-states
              theory and contextual elements, involving both inducements and restrictions. 
              In previous expectation-states conceptions, a group permits its members to
              participate and to prevail in disagreements according to their perceived
              abilities, the governing principle being that their primary motivation is to
              succeed at their collective task.  When we add the situational constraints
              arising from gender composition to this model, the implications for observable
              interaction patterns change.  This research project will investigate hypotheses
              about the differences, focusing on five-person problem-solving groups,
              employing 42 mock juries ranging in gender composition from all male to all
              female, with seven replications of each possible composition.   %%%   This
              research differs from prior studies in three significant ways.  First, it
              exploits enormous improvements in audio-visual technology, producing a much
              fuller audiotape and videotape record of the experimental sessions.  Second,
              drawing on this fuller information, it will produce a coding of the who-to-whom
              flows of interaction using a more discerning set of content categories, derived
              from the Bales IPA system and the Oregon MICS system.  Third, using
              mathematical modeling and associated data analytic procedures, it will confirm
              or disconfirm the expectation-states hypothesis and contextual hypotheses at
              issue, which in previous research either have not been jointly examined or have
              been confounded.  %%%   The anticipated result of this research is a better
              understanding of how external status and diffuse status-based constraints
              combine to shape participation and influence in task-oriented groups.  The
              tradition of research to which this study belongs has contributed significantly
              to improvement of group processes in commerce,  industry, education and
              government.  The findings from this particular study potentially will
              generalize to all kinds of decision-making groups.  Given that American
              decision-making groups are increasingly gender-diverse, this research will be
              of significant practical importance at the same time that it tests competing
              scientific theories.
