Title       : A Geometric Approach to Two Dimensional Measurement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9515038

Award Number: 9515038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael V. Levine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop a theory for nonparametric,
              multidimensional, item-level measurement.  The investigator's approach to
              multidimensional modeling relies on two recent advances in measurement:  the
              submodel theorem and ForScore.  The submodel theorem asserts that smooth
              multidimensional measurement models have equivalent unidimensional submodels. 
              ForScore, a suite of unidimensional model fitting programs, provides means for
              fitting various unidimensional models that are equivalent to the smooth
              multidimensional models.  The project will result in a set of computer programs
              for implementing the theory and a demonstration application of the theory in
              counseling psychology.  Latent variable models are used in physical,
              biological, and social sciences.  Multivariate latent variable modeling is less
              well developed than univariate modeling.  If the project is successful, more
              complex and accurate applications of latent variable models will quickly become
              possible because researchers will be able to reduce problems involving many
              variables to univariate problems.  For example, consider the analysis of gender
              differences.  Men and women on average respond differently to questions of
              vocational choices.  This research will allow the application of powerful
              unidimensional differential item functioning measures to be used in the
              two-dimensional domain of vocational choice.  The analysis will increase our
              understanding of the etiology of gender differences in vocational choice and
              assist in the design of instruments that will be more useful to women.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
