Title       : The Career Implications of Life Course Opportunities and Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1996     
File        : a9515404

Award Number: 9515404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis P. Hogan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a project to study career advancement over the life course of men and
              women, testing the relative efficacy of human capital and social capital. 
              Human capital is defined as the acquisition of cognitive competence and the
              ability to signal that cognitive competence has been achieved.  Social capital
              is defined as social resources acquired from social background and network
              contacts that aid in the acquisition of favorable adult roles.  In particular,
              this study examines how career advancement and mid-life success are determined
              by: 1) human and social capital among adolescents and young adults, 2) the
              opportunity structure surrounding adult roles, and 3) life course planning. 
              Data are from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey, a representative sample of
              10,317 men and women first interviewed in 1957 in their senior year in high
              school, with subsequent data collection representing their experiences in early
              adulthood and mid-life.  The project integrates recently developed
              methodologies for the measurement of human and social capital, occupational
              career lines, and occupational success.  The models developed for the study
              will be applied to data on men and women who were high school students 15 years
              later to determine the extent to which the findings of the 1957 cohort of high
              school seniors hold true under much less favorable economic circumstances and
              following marked changes in gender roles.  The research also examines the
              extent and dimensions of inequality between men and women, to determine whether
              social capital is more critical for women because it may overcome blocked
              opportunities, or conversely whether the stronger career performance of men is
              accounted for by social capital.  %%%   This research will test fundamental
              scientific theories about the factors that govern an individual's career, thus
              contributing to an understanding of the stratification system of industrial
              society, which is an issue of great importance for sociology.  The knowledge
              gained also can contribute to gre ater efficiency and justice in the American
              economy, because factors that prevent people from gaining the jobs for which
              they best suited are both inefficient and unjust.  Increased understanding of
              how information and planning can contribute to good career choices will also
              result from this research.
