Title       : Entrepreneurship in Hong Kong
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1999      
File        : a9515114

Award Number: 9515114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112266             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond S. Wong wong@alishaw.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of entrepreneurship in Hong Kong, administering a survey to a
              sample of 600 entrepreneurs.  It has three chief aims.  First, it seeks to
              provide empirical knowledge about who the entrepreneurs are in terms of social
              origins and demographics, what kinds of business activities they engage in, and
              how and why they engage in such activities.  Second, it will investigate how
              gender, ethnicity, and immigration status may affect entrepreneurial
              activities.  Third, it will inquire into the nature of business organization in
              Chinese family firms, especially those issues regarding management and
              ownership control, training and compensations, as well as to explore possible
              sources of variation across firms, in particular, whether firm size, ownership
              pattern, duration of operation, industrial sector, technological
              sophistication, and the persons in charge of operation (the original founders
              or their descendants) have any influence in organizational structures.  The
              collected data will allow systematic investigation of the differences and
              similarities among Hong Kong, China, and the United States in the social
              composition of entrepreneurs, factors that hinder or contribute to
              entrepreneurial activities, and types of entry strategies.  In addition, this
              survey will provide data to compare the organizational structures of Chinese
              family business firms with those found in the United States, utilizing data
              assembled in the National Organizations Survey.  %%%   This study will be done
              at a crucial time in the economic and social history of Hong Kong, immediately
              before custody of it is regained by the People's Republic of China.  Thus, the
              research will provide baseline data for understanding changes that may take
              place under a new and potentially different political and economic system. 
              Comparison of the results with those from existing studies of entrepreneurs in
              China and the United States will provide insights into the social sources of
              growth throughout the rapidly developing Pacific Rim.
