Title       : Linking Domestic and International Sources of Alliance Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9515149

Award Number: 9515149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gilligan   (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Ben Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9515149  Gilligan    The dominant theory used to explain international relations
              (neo-realism) finds the primary source of national security decisions in the
              dog-eat-dog world of the international system.  At the core of this theory is
              the belief that the international behavior of states is driven by the dictates
              of national self-preservation within an anarchic system.  In studies of
              domestic politics, however, the dominant approach is to think of political
              decisions as driven by politicians' desire to stay in power.    This
              investigation combines these insights by modeling the international behavior of
              the state in terms of the political survival of the politicians who make
              national policy.  This model incorporates both realist and domestic concerns,
              as politicians must worry about foreign military threats to their regime's
              survival as well as internal threats from domestic rivals for power.  The
              researchers argue that the constraints of regime preservation are much more
              binding than the constraints of international anarchy alone, and that such a
              combined perspective explains the behaviors accounted for by a systemic
              approach as well as those cases neo-realism can not explain.    The formal
              model generates specific and falsifiable claims regarding many aspects of
              international behavior, but the investigators intend to focus on a central
              behavior for most neo-realist models - - security alliance formation.  By
              compiling existing data on the economic, military, and political
              characteristics of nations considering joining an alliance, as well as
              gathering new information on parameters such as perceived domestic and
              international threat, the investigators evaluate the strength of a model of
              regime preservation in explaining patterns of alliance formation.  ***
