Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Information and Leadership in a Laboratory
               Setting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1996   
File        : a9618721

Award Number: 9618721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7925               (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Clifton Morgan morgan@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                How do leaders lead?  Why do followers follow?  Why are some leaders
              successful in some situations but unsuccessful in others?  Although scholars
              have long recognized the importance of leadership in social interaction, a
              solid conceptual hold on these basic and important questions has proven
              elusive.  This weakness has not precluded, however, a renewed scholarly
              interest in leadership.  Leaders are central to many current  and prominent
              accounts of economic firms, social and political groups, policy outputs, and
              political institutions, yet our understanding of the dynamics of the
              leader-follower relationship remains incomplete.  This Doctoral Dissertation
              research will addresses a basic question>  how and when can leaders
              strategically employ information to induce a Pareto-enhancing norm among a set
              of rational followers?  Specifically, it develops and tests a series of models
              that explicitly map leadership signals onto follower strategies, and examines
              how this mapping changes as one systematically alter the environmental context
              in which leaders and followers interact.  The research consists of two
              components.  In the first, a series of simple game-theoretic models are
              developed of leaders, followers, and the leadership process. These  models
              offer a distinct conceptualization of leadership:  Leaders `lead` because they
              are able and motivated to disseminate information that affects the strategy
              selection of followers. Leadership, then, is the act and process by which
              leaders disseminate information in order to crate a series of socially
              beneficial norms.  From these models, hypotheses are derived to address how and
              when leaders will successfully employ information to affect outcomes.  The
              models highlight both the strategic context in which leader sand followers
              interact as well as the informational conditions surrounding their interaction.
               The second component consists of testing these models under laboratory
              conditions.  Game-theoretic models, critically dependent on such concepts as
              `beliefs` and `information,` are extraordinarily difficult to test in the
              natural world.  Experimental designs, through their tremendous levels of
              control, offer the potential of a direct test with a high level of internal
              validity.  This investigation promises to provide insight into the nature of
              leadership in social and political interaction.  It will shed light on the
              circumstances under which leaders can productively employ information as a tool
              of their trade, and will increase our understanding of why individuals follow
              some leaders but not others.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
