Title       : Representation and Realism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9618586

Award Number: 9618586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75601              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald N. Giere   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the current disagreement about representation and realism
              in science  between many philosophers of science, scientists, and the general
              public and, on the other side,  many scholars in the humanities, social
              sciences, and science studies.  Call the former group  `scientific realists`
              and the latter `humanistic relativists.`  Scientific realists insist that  the
              pursuit of science has taught us much about the natural world.  We have learned
              that the  earth revolves around the sun, that continents move, that DNA has two
              intertwined strands.  These  things are now known, and are not merely socially
              acceptable to believe.  But humanistic  relativists reject such claims as
              absurdly naive.  They argue that there is no uniquely correct  interpretation
              of nature.  For them, the history of science tells how different scientists and
               different societies came to have the beliefs they in fact had.  It is
              emphatically not the story  of how various truths came to be discovered. 
              Stated in a realist vocabulary, both scientific realism and humanistic
              relativism, as typically  understood, are mistaken.  They both, however,
              express important truths about the  nature of science.  Or, stated in a
              relativist vocabulary, neither interpretation of the nature  of science is
              appropriate for our times.  A more appropriate framework (or a more
              satisfactory  synthesis) will incorporate some elements from both.  The purpose
              of this project is to develop  a framework and vocabulary for expressing a
              mediating point of view called perspectival realism.  At the heart of this
              mediating viewpoint is the notion of representation, and the strategy  that
              will be used to develop this notion is drawn from cartography.  Maps have many
              of the  representational features needed for understanding how scientists use
              models to represent the  world.  Maps are not universal, but embody a point of
              view, a purpose, and a projection.  Maps  vary in accuracy, scale, detail, yet
              they manage to correspond in various ways with the real  world.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
