Title       : Physical, Chemical and Electromagnetic Wave-induced Processes in Microdroplets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9618283

Award Number: 9618283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: M. C. Roco                              
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284443             (Estimated)
Investigator: Asit K. Ray akray@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1415      Particulate &Multiphase Procss
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS 96-18283    The objectives of the proposed research are to examine
              nucleation, photochemical and chemical reactions in homogeneous and layered
              microdroplets. Experiments will be conducted on single droplets suspended in an
              electrodynamic balance and on highly monodisperse droplets generated by a
              vibrating orifice aerosol generator.  Elastic and inelastic light scattering
              techniques, based on resonances (i.e., intensity peaks) observes in scattered
              light, will be used to determine size and refractive indices of homogeneous and
              layered droplets.  Liquid-solid phase separation processes (i.e., nucleation)
              in microdroplets will be examined to understand the mechanisms that control the
              structures of solid particles and the formation of layered droplets with
              microdroplets suggests that photochemical reaction rates in microdroplets under
              resonance conditions enhance significantly.  The results of the theoretical
              analysis will be tested with experimental data on photochemical reactions
              occurring in microdroplets illuminated by light whose wavelength corresponds to
              a resonance.  Prior experiments on oxidation of SO2 in aqueous solution
              droplets containing MnSO4 show that accurate data on reaction kinetics can be
              obtained.  In this project droplet-vapor reactions used for generation of solid
              particles will be examined to determine whether the selectivity of one of the
              products in a parallel-series reaction can be altered by the droplet phase
              reaction. Finally, reactions between core droplets coated with inert immiscible
              layers and gas phase reactants will be examined theoretically and
              experimentally to understand the effects of the gas-layer interfacial area and
              diffusional resistance of the layer on the overall reaction rate.
