Title       : Reproduction, Dispersal, and Recruitment of Hydrothermal Vent Crabs: A Tractable
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9618007

Award Number: 9618007
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169933             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Craig Cary caryc@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ana I. Dittel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Epifanio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1319,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                        Cary      9618007                  Almost 20 years ago researchers
              discovered unique communities of  organisms inhabiting deep-sea hydrothermal
              vents located along the Eastern  Pacific mid-ocean spreading centers. The
              question of how these species  disperse and maintain their populations in these
              patchy, ephemeral habitats  has remained one of the most interesting and
              unanswered problems in vent  ecology. This study will be part of the
              Larvae-at-Ridge-Vents Project  (LARVE), which is a component of the ongoing
              Ridge Inter-Disciplinary Global  Experiments (RIDGE) program.  Central to the
              success of LARVE is  understanding the way in which hydrothermal-vent species
              maintain  populations. Results of earlier work suggest that vent species
              produce  pelagic larvae that are responsible for colonization of new vent sites
              and  for maintaining populations at established sites. However, available 
              evidence is almost entirely circumstantial. The patchiness of vent fields  (in
              time and space) compounds the problem and demands innovative solutions  that
              use the most tractable species as models for dispersal and recruitment.  The
              focus of the research will be the vent crab, Bythograea thermydron. This  crab
              shares the life-history characteristics that have made decapod  crustaceans the
              taxon-ofchoice for a great many shallow-water studies of  dispersal and
              recruitment.      The central hypothesis of the study maintains that Bythograea
               thermydron disperses among vent sites via demersal larvae that take  advantage
              of both subtidal bottom currents and the well developed swimming  ability of
              the larvae.  Understanding the life histories and the biological  and physical
              constraints on dispersal of crabs from vents sites is critical  to establishing
              credible models of how these communities are established and  maintained along
              mid-ocean ridges.
