Title       : Empirical Studies of Regulated Industries-Accomplishment Based Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9618228

Award Number: 9618228
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Wolak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9278,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wolak, Frank  Abstract   Currently, network industries such as
              telecommunications, electricity, water delivery and postal delivery are being
              re-structured and privatized in countries all over the world.  Although the
              desire to improve the efficiency of operation of these industries is the common
              goal, many very different strategies are pursued in an attempt to achieve this
              common goal.  The lack of consensus about the optimal mechanism for
              privatization and re-structuring of  network industries is in part a result of
              the absence of a consensus within the economics profession about the structure
              of production and demand in network industries and the impact of the regulatory
              process on firm behavior.  The purpose of this research is to derive the
              necessary empirical methods and undertake the data analysis required to move to
              a consensus on the optimal process for privatizing and re-structuring these
              industries.   This research has to three major goals: (1) to expand the set of
              empirical methods available to analyze firm and consumer behavior in regulated
              industries; (2) to develop and implement empirical models of the impact of
              regulation on firm behavior; (3) to apply these and other methodologies to
              determine how restructuring should take place to achieve the maximum benefits
              to consumers.  This work will analyze the operation of the telecommunications,
              electricity, water delivery and postal delivery services industries using these
              new empirical methodologies.  The telecommunications research will focus on
              household-level demand for telecommunications services rather than aggregate
              demand; this analysis is important because the debate over optimal
              re-structuring often focuses on its impact on specific demographic groups such
              as the elderly and poor.  My  research will develop and implement applied
              econometric methodologies which expand the range of applicability of techniques
              for analyzing consumer demand with zero consumption of some goods.  Properly
              accounting for zero consumption in the demand for telecommunications services
              is necessary because many households do not consume any of a particular
              telecommunications service.  Examples include local and long-distance telephone
              service and cable television service.  Another common problem which arises in
              the analysis of household-level demand is the lack of information on the
              specific prices faced by an individual household.  Hence,  this work will also
              develop and implement techniques for incorporating estimated distributions of
              prices, conditional on household characteristics, into the household-level
              demand estimation.   This allows us to more accurately determine the
              consumption and consumer welfare implications of proposed telecommunications
              policy changes.  The research on the electricity industry will analyze the
              actual operation of several restructured electricity markets around the world
              to determine the impact of the design of a so-called `competitive` electricity
              market on prices.  The England and Wales electricity market and  Nord  Pool
              (the Nordic Power Market) are among the markets to be analyzed.  This research
              will formulate and estimate a structural econometric model of bidding behavior
              by the two large producers in the England and Wales market in order to recover
              estimates of each firm's underlying cost function.  These cost function
              estimates will then be used to determine the impact of alternative market rules
              and structures on the prices set by the market.  The postal delivery services
              research is concerned with the changing pattern of household-level demand due
              to changes in the relative price of this good and the increasing availability
              of substitute technologies.  The proposed work will break out the dimensions of
              the substitution away from postal delivery services due to the specific
              competing technologies, such as e-mail and FAX machines.  This work will also
              develop alternative econometric methods for analyzing the demand for
              infrequently purchased products.  The final aspects of this work will study how
              to recover the structure of production of postal delivery services and the rate
              of growth of USPS total factor productivity in a manner that accounts for the
              impact of the postal rate-setting process.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
