Title       : Residential Segregation: Beliefs and Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9618799

Award Number: 9618799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134074             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reynolds Farley renf@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria Krysan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Fielding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This is a study of residential segregation.  Convincing evidence from studies
              conducted throughout the last five decades demonstrates that residential
              segregation denies blacks many opportunities generally available to urban
              whites.  Massey and Denton argue that residential segregation created and now
              perpetuates an urban underclass in many large cities. Although there were
              modest declines in black-white segregation in the 1980s; the primary impression
              gained from examining recent investigations of population distribution based on
              census data is the persistence of segregation despite changes in federal laws
              and improvements in the social and economic status of African-Americans. 
              Analyses of the individual level factors acting to sustain this segregation are
              both rare and inconclusive. Many of these have focused on one metropolis,
              Detroit, and on the beliefs and preferences of whites only.  The present study
              engages the central theoretical issues with fresh data that largely overcome
              these limitations.      This project presents a conceptual model of the causes
              of continued segregation emanating from Myrdal's observation that informal
              social pressures are the primary forces sustaining the geographic isolation of
              blacks from whites.  The model posits that the beliefs individuals hold about
              their own group and about other racial groups influence their perceptions of
              which neighborhoods are attractive and which should be avoided. With an
              innovative data set, the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality (MCSUI), the
              research will test hypotheses about the beliefs and preferences of samples of
              blacks and whites in four sites (Atlanta, Boston, Detroit and Los Angeles),
              samples of Latinos in two (Boston and Los Angeles) and a sample of Asians in
              Los Angeles.       The abundance of relevant variables allows testing the model
              in two ways.  First, the research will examine how characteristics and beliefs
              influence respondents' preferences for living in hypothetical neighborhoods
              with varying racial compositi ons.  For example, are whites who hold
              stereotypical beliefs about blacks less likely to remain in their neighborhoods
              when blacks move in, and are they unwilling to move into already integrated
              neighborhoods?  Second, respondents were asked to evaluate the desirability of
              living in specific locations such as suburbs or well-known neighborhoods within
              the central city.  If blacks anticipate hostility from the residents of a
              particular suburb, do they also view it as an undesirable place to live despite
              the presence of affordable housing there?      By asking such questions this
              research will address how individuals' beliefs and preferences translate into
              the multitude of locational decisions that determine the residential
              distributions of blacks and whites. The unique structure of the MCSUI data set
              also allows the research to investigate whether similar dynamics are likely to
              affect the residential distributions of Hispanics and Asians who are now
              entering our increasingly diverse metropolises.
