Title       : Study of Structure and Dynamic Interactions in Dispersions of Particles in
               Liquid Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9618777

Award Number: 9618777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Davide A. Hill Davide.A.Hill.l@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                    ABSTRACT    Proposal No:    9618777  Proposal Type:                       
              Investigator Initiated  Principal Investigator             Davide A. Hill 
              Affiliation   University of Notre Dome      This grant is awarded through the
              Separations and Purification Program sub-element of the Interfacial, Transport
              and Separations Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.   The
              principal investigator is Davide A. Hill of the University of Notre Game.  The
              objective of the proposed research is to seek methods for improving the
              mechanical properties of liquid crystal polymer(LCPs) by inserting filler
              particles with tailored shape and surface morphology.  Despite their
              outstanding thermal, chemical and dielectric properties, liquid crystal
              polymers have found limited application for production of three-dimensional
              structures.  A severe drawback of these materials is the ease of fracture along
              surfaces of strong molecular alignment.  Liquid crystal polymers have high
              tensile strength in the spinning direction but extremely weak lateral cohesion.
               The introduction of filler material serves to anchor the chains and nucleate
              desirable orientation patterns in a liquid crystal polymer matrix.  Particle
              characteristics will be selected to engineer materials with controlled
              microstructures.    The importance of the research is its potential to
              influence the processing of liquid crystal polymers by improving the mechanical
              properties of these useful materials.  Such improvement in mechanical
              properties may open up new areas of applications, including use as separations
              media.  From a fundamental viewpoint, the research will advance the
              understanding of dynamic interactions and structure development in liquid
              crystal polymers.
