Title       : Development of New Cascade Sequences for the Construction of Novel Chemical
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9618676

Award Number: 9618676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kung K. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The Organic Synthesis Program supports Professor Kung Wang's studies at   the
              University of West Virginia of new cascade reaction sequences leading   to the
              construction of novel chemical structures.  Reaction sequences   based on the
              cycloaromatization of enediynes and enyne-allenes, including  
              (Z)-3-hexene-1,5-diynes and (Z)-1,2,4-heptatriene-6-ynes, lead to   polycyclic
              carbon frameworks, while analogous cyclizations of   enyne-ketenes,
              enyne-ketenimines, enyne-isocyanates, and   enyne-carbodiimides afford access
              to novel polycyclic heterocycles.    Cascade electrocyclizations of dienediynes
              provide reactive   benzocyclobutadienes, the unusual polycyclic dimers of which
              represent   synthetic entry to compounds containing multiple
              dibenzocyclooctatetraene   units.  Cyclizations of enediallenes lead to the
              formation of   o-quinodimethanes and to the potential discovery of novel
              synthetic   routes to estrone and tetracyclic structures forming the basis of a
                number of naturally-occurring diterpenes.  Many of Nature's biologically
              active compounds display complex molecular   structures, and the attempted
              synthesis of such compounds, whether for   purposes of structure elucidation,
              large-scale production of scarce   naturally occurring compounds, or
              preparation of next-generation   synthetic analogs, requires the continuing
              development of new strategies   to deal with their molecular complexity.  By
              exploiting unusual   cyclization reactions of electron-deficient precursor
              molecules,   Professor Wang develops facile synthetic routes to a wide variety
              of   polycyclic molecular structures containing all-carbon atoms as well as  
              compounds containing nitrogen and oxygen atoms within their cyclic  
              structures.  These cyclization reactions are significant in their own   right
              from a chemical perspective, addressing issues of fundamental   importance with
              regards to organic structure and reactivity.    Additionally, the reaction
              chemistry provides synthetic access to both   recognized and novel chemical
              structures, affording new synthetic routes   for the preparation of steroids
              such as estrone as well as other   tetracyclic structures characteristic of a
              class of naturally-occurring   compounds known as the diterpenes.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
