Title       : Planning Grant: Invigorating Approaches for Elementary School Mathematics: A
               Professional Development Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1996  
File        : a9618633

Award Number: 9618633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alverna M. Champion                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan D. Ratteray iie@novanet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst for Indep Educ Inc
	      1313 North Capitol Street, NE
	      Washington, DC  200023300    202/745-0500

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9618633  Ratteray    Invigorating Approaches for Elementary School Mathematics: 
                                  A Professional Development Model      The  Institute for
              Independent Education (IIE) seeks a planning grant from the National Science
              Foundation to develop a full-fledged proposal to strengthen the mathematics
              curriculum and to enhance mathematics teaching and learning at urban-based
              independent schools.  The participating schools are  committed to building a
              strong mathematics curriculum and are willing to collaborate on acquiring
              strategies for its effective teaching through intensive professional
              development work.    With the proposed planning grant, the Institute will
              develop a leadership team at a core group of schools primarily in Philadelphia
              and New York.  The team will examine several innovative NSF sponsored 5-8
              curriculum projects designed to enhance the teaching and learning of
              mathematics and will decide upon one curriculum to be implemented during the
              culminating project.    With the assistance of the leadership team, the
              Institute will sponsor a  regional conference to be attended by teachers,
              administrators, and, possibly, some parents from interested independent
              community-based schools in the area.  At that conference participants will have
              an opportunity to learn about the chosen curriculum by experiencing
              representative activities from it.  They will also have a chance to strengthen
              their commitment to collaborating on its implementation.    During the planning
              project, the Institute will develop a proposal for a professional development
              program that will help the independent community based-schools involved in
              implementing the chosen curriculum to strengthen their mathematics program and
              in incorporating effective mathematics teaching strategies.
