Title       : Anion and Cation Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9618904

Award Number: 9618904
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348800             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Simons simons@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program is funding Prof.    J.Simons
              at the University of Utah.  Over the next three years work in   his group will
              focus on the dynamics of energy transfer and chemical   reactions involving
              anion species.  Specifically, for anions in which the   extra electron is very
              weakly bound, the binding energy can be similar to   the rotational energy
              level spacings of the underlying molecule.  So, as   the molecule rotates
              faster and faster, its rotational period approaches   the orbiting period of
              motion of the electron, energy can be efficiently   transferred and electron
              ejection can occur.  Over the past several   years, excellent experimental work
              in other groups has examined the rates   of auto-detachment of electrons from
              such anions to study the coupling   between rotation and electronic motions. 
              In the present work, the theory   of these events as well as their
              computational simulations will be   undertaken.   The chemist's ability to
              create new molecules and new materials relies   heavily on understanding the
              electronic motions in atoms and molecules.    As the science of chemistry
              enters the 21st century, it is focusing much   of its efforts along two fronts:
              the interface between chemical science   and life science- biological
              chemistry, and the design and synthesis of   new materials with unusual
              properties.   In the latter area, it is   especially important for theoretical
              chemists to consider and to predict   the electronic and chemical (e.g.,
              stability and energy content)   properties of molecules that have not yet been
              synthesized or even   observed.  An integral part of the theorists' ability to
              contribute to   this effort lies in knowledge of how electronic energy,
              momentum, and   angular momentum can be converted to energy, momentum, and
              angular   momentum of the atoms and molecular fragments, within a molecule. 
              The   efforts being funded in this program are directed toward providing a  
              basic theoretical framework for understanding and predicting such   properties.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
