Title       : Collaborative Research: The Economics of Expertise
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9618726

Award Number: 9618726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126323             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay Krishna vkrishna@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The diverse range of problems faced by decision makers almost precludes the
              possibility of their possessing the expertise needed to make informed
              judgements in all areas.  As a result, the power to make decisions is often
              divorced from the relevant specialized knowledge.  It is the `division of
              labor` between decision makers and experts that is the focus of this research. 
              Specifically, its goal is to analyze the strategic interplay between a single
              decision maker and a number of experts from whom he might choose to seek
              advice.  Employing tools from the economics of information and game theory, the
              project will undertake a theoretical analysis of a model broad enough to be
              consistent with a variety of institutional settings.  Of particular concern are
              situations in which the decision maker is able to consult multiple experts and,
              thus, is the recipient of multiple, sometimes conflicting, pieces of advice.
              Moreover, this advice is not given by completely disinterested parties: the
              experts may have interests which, even if not at odds with, are not coincident
              with those of the decision maker.  The latter's task is then to aggregate the
              information received in such an environment effectively.   Three broad sets of
              issues will be addressed.  The first  concerns the tradeoff between expertise
              and loyalty, the latter determining how closely an expert's interests are
              aligned with those of the decision maker.  Some questions addressed are:  How
              should a decision maker integrate the opinions of experts who are equally
              proficient but have differing loyalties?  Is it possible to get the experts to
              disclose more information by playing one off against the other?  Should the
              advice of `inferior` experts necessarily be ignored?  How many experts should
              be consulted?   The second  relates to the twin issues of compensation and
              delegation.  How should experts be compensated for their advice?  Can optimal
              compensation schemes lead to full disclosure?  When should a decision maker
              delegate the authority to make decisions to an expert?  The third part of the
              project will explore some wider implications of the research summarized above
              to the general question of information elicitation from imperfectly informed
              agents.  The fact that the decision maker cannot credibly commit to a course of
              action, a mechanism, distinguishes this problem from that traditionally
              considered in mechanism design theory.  In particular, contrary to the lessons
              of the traditional theory, achieving full-disclosure and first-best outcomes is
              difficult.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
