Title       : The Challenge Zone: Using the Internet to Support High Standards in Mathematics
               and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9618248

Award Number: 9618248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $694369             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Bransford john.bransford@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy J. Vye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Sherwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Pellegrino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bransford  9618248    Two challenges, based on the Jasper Woodbury, the
              Scientists in Action Series and Project SMART, support middle and high school
              students doing science and mathematics with understanding rather than just
              doing.  The challenges are featured on the Challenge Zone of the American
              Schools Directory on the Internet along with the resources specially designed
              to help students develop understanding of "big ideas" in science and
              mathematics emphasized in the standards documents. The science challenge
              provides activities to increase student understanding of river ecology.  The
              mathematics challenge is organized around a series of design tasks that invite
              students to invent mathematically based tools to solve important classes of
              problems. The resources include references to existing texts, software, video,
              Internet sites and suggestions to teachers about ways to use challenges to
              increase student achievement. Each challenge is divided into a series weekly of
              sub-challenges for groups of students who respond with the best solution of the
              class.  Other classes can review, comment on and use the solution of any other
              posted solution.  The sub-challenges lead toward a project of local
              significance that can be done by the class with the results posted on the Web
              site.  Feedback from users is used to refine challenges and resources. 
              Mechanisms are developed to assess to student learning and to evaluate the
              effects of feedback on the quality of the challenges.   A major focus is to
              determine unique contributions of the Web to classroom learning.
