Title       : Joint Evolution of Behavioral and Morphological Plasticity in Multiple Predation
               Regimes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9618702

Award Number: 9618702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Sih   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edmund D. Brodie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. DeWitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9618702   SIH  Predator-prey interactions play a central role in ecology and 
              evolution.  This proposal extends the existing understanding of  predator-prey
              interactions in two important ways:  1) Most studies of prey responses to
              predators focus on one of several types of prey responses - e.g., antipredator
              behavior, or morphological defenses against predators, or chemical defenses. 
              Prey, however, often show a suite of potentially inter-dependent antipredator
              responses. For example, prey that are well defended morphologically (e.g., that
              have a thick shell or spines) might show relatively little behavioral response
              to predators, while prey that are morphologically vulnerable might show a
              strong tendency to hide from predators.  That is, the optimal prey behavior
              might depend on prey morphology and the cost of having an ineffective prey
              morphology can be mediated by compensatory behavior.  Surprisingly few
              experiments have addressed the joint evolution of multiple prey responses to
              predators.  2) Similarly, most experimental studies of predator impacts on prey
              examine the effects of one predator on prey.  In nature, however, most prey
              face multiple predators.  The appropriate response to one predator might
              actually increase risk from another predator.  Surprisingly little is known
              about how prey balance the conflicting selection pressures generated by
              multiple predators.  This proposal will address the joint evolution of
              behavioral and  morphological responses to multiple predators.  The focal prey
              (a common, abundant  snail) is a model organism for this study because: 1) it
              is known to  show both behavioral and morphological responses to not just the 
              predators, but also to chemical cues from both predators, and 2) it  can be
              reared rapidly in huge numbers in the laboratory.
