Title       : MSTE: Integrating Mathematics, Science and Technology in the Elementary Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2001  
File        : a9618962

Award Number: 9618962
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel L. Householder                   
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4165323            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Liao Thomas.Liao@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl J. Swyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hacker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jacqueline G. Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      9618962  Liao    MSTE: INTEGRATING MATHEMATICS, SCIENCE, AND TECHNOLOGY
              IN THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS    The project, MSTE: Integrating Mathematics,
              Science, and Technology in the Elementary Schools, is a five-year effort based
              at The State University of New York at Stony Brook. This collaborative effort
              also involves the New York State Education Department, Hofstra University,
              Brookhaven National Laboratory, and 20 school districts in New York.    The
              goal of this project is to develop models for the infusion of technology
              education into the elementary schools. To accomplish this goal, activities
              focus upon the integration of experiences in technology with contemporary
              approaches in mathematics and science in the elementary schools. Participants
              utilize exemplary curriculum materials and activities in technology education
              to enrich the elementary school experiences in mathematics and science.  The
              project is organized to enhance teachers' pedagogical abilities; strengthen
              their content knowledge in mathematics, science, and technology; and provide
              leadership expertise among the 20 three-person teams, each representing one of
              the collaborating school districts. Each team is comprised of a content
              specialist in mathematics, science, or technology and two experienced teachers,
              one from grades K-3 and the other from grades 4-6. These teams will participate
              in two years of sustained enhancement activities at The University at Stony
              Brook, Hofstra University, and Brookhaven National Laboratory. The MSTE Project
              will prepare teachers in the use of exemplary curriculum materials to provide
              instruction that highlights the rich relationships among the disciplines.   
              During the third and fourth years of the project, each of the 20 MSTE teams
              will conduct regional summer enhancement workshops and academic year meetings
              for 30 elementary school teachers from their local geographic areas. An
              Implementation and Resource Guide is being developed for use by leadership
              teams in their summer workshops for te achers in their local regions.    The
              MSTE Project will devote its fifth year to a statewide leadership development
              effort, preparing teams of teachers and content specialists from across the
              State of New York to serve as leaders in subsequent teacher enhancement
              efforts.
