Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis of Cycloalkenones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  2002  
File        : a9618498

Award Number: 9618498
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Clapp   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas T. Shawe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With this Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) award, the Organic  
              Synthesis Program supports Professor Thomas Shawe's studies in the   Department
              of Chemistry at Bucknell University of the asymmetric   synthesis of
              cycloalkenones.  Alkylation of chiral enaminones followed by   Grignard reagent
              addition affords access to cycloalkenones with good   stereocontrol.  The role
              of chiral auxiliaries in the transfer of   chirality is assessed through
              modification of the chelate ring size and   number of chelate sites provided by
              the chiral auxiliary, alteration of   the nature of the chiral auxiliary, and
              examination of additive effects.    Addition of other organometallic
              nucleophiles in place of Grignard   reagents permits further synthetic
              generality, while the use of metal   hydrides offers promise for the formation
              of cycloalkenones unsubstituted   in the 3-position.  The products of these
              reactions are elaborated   synthetically, both to permit unambiguous assignment
              of stereochemistry   and to generate intermediates for further synthetic
              applications.  Preparation of molecules of demonstrated or potential biological
              activity   often requires control over the three-dimensional arrangement of
              atoms or   groups of atoms in the target molecules.  In particular, one often  
              desires a molecule which differs from another only in the manner by which   a
              right hand differs from a left hand, namely as non-superimposable   mirror
              images.  Professor Shawe develops new chemical approaches for the   selective
              synthesis of such molecules through the use of sequential   addition of
              reagents to precursor molecules bearing chemically-attached   `auxiliaries`
              which direct incoming reagents to the desired position for   reaction.  The
              resulting compounds offer promise as synthetic building   blocks for further
              elaboration into molecules displaying important   biological activity, such as
              the prostaglandins.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
