Title       : Organizational Characteristics Which Facilitate Major Discoveries in the
               Bio-Medical Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9618526

Award Number: 9618526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287802             (Estimated)
Investigator: J.Rogers Hollingsworth hollingsjr@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerald Hage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9123,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to explain how the characteristics of research
              organizations,  and their departments and laboratories, facilitate or hinder
              the making of major discoveries in  biomedical science.  The project focuses on
              four types of research organizations (universities,  free-standing research
              institutes, medical centers and industrial firms) in three countries (Britain, 
              France and Germany) during the past century.  Drawing on a four-year pilot
              study of U.S. research organizations, the investigators  propose that the
              following organizational characteristics are critical for making major 
              discoveries: diversity and depth of scientific expertise, quality of scientific
              personnel,  differentiation of research into separate departments, integration
              of scientific diversity,  hierarchical coordination, and leadership capacity
              for effecting the necessary integration.  The  central insight is that major
              discoveries tend to occur in organizations that facilitate intense and 
              frequent interaction across diverse fields of knowledge.  By extending the
              research to Europe, the investigators can test the validity of findings  from
              the U.S. pilot study in contexts that offer considerable variation along the
              major  dimensions of the proposed theory.  To test the theory the project will
              rely on Qualitative  Comparative Analysis, a method that systematically
              examines the logical interrelationships  among categorical variables.    The
              project addresses two central problems in the organization of science: how
              might  research organizations be structured to facilitate major discoveries and
              how can organizations  change to accommodate changes in scientific knowledge? 
              The project also builds intellectual  connections between the literature on
              organizations and research in the history and sociology of  science, suggesting
              new avenues for investigation.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
