Title       : Credit Constraints, Allocation Mechanisms and Human Capital Accumulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9618886

Award Number: 9618886
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raquel Fernandez Raquel.fernandez@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9618886  Fernandez    Imperfect capital markets have long been acknowledged to
              be an obstacle to human capital accumulation.  This project seeks to examine
              some of the consequences of different allocation mechanisms and various
              education finance systems given these constraints.  The first part examines how
              tournaments (which can be thought of as examinations) and markets compare as
              allocation mechanisms in the presence of borrowing constraints.  This is a
              novel line of research.  While there has been work that examines how credit
              constraints may affect capital accumulation, the literature has mainly focused
              on how efficiency improvements maybe obtained via interventions that remain
              within a market system such as credit subsidies.  The choice of an allocative
              mechanisms, however, is also an important dimension of policy intervention and
              work by the investigator under her previous NSF grant shows that in education
              markets can be dominated by other mechanisms.    More specifically, the project
              investigates the efficiency properties of educational tournaments
              (examinations) relative to markets and the dependence of these properties on
              the initial income distribution and on the signaling power of the tournament. 
              The political economy of the different allocation mechanisms are also explored.
               Endogenizing the supply side of the problem, establishing the
              micro-foundations for the credit constraints (and hence the interest rate), and
              studying the dynamic evolution of the system are all important directions in
              which this will be extended.  The project examines the mechanism design problem
              to see if there is some combination (perhaps income taxes and tournaments) that
              dominates both tournaments and markets.  The project also studies the effects
              on aggregate spending on public education and its distribution across districts
              of different financing systems.  Among the financing systems that will be
              examined are a foundation system, a power-equalizing system, a pure local
              system, and an equal-spending stat e financed system.  Each of these systems
              gives different incentives to redistribute income across communities and has
              different implications for total spending.  The model will be calibrated to
              some statistics generated by the experience of a state like California which
              went from a foundation system to an almost equal spending state financed
              system.
