Title       : Local Population Dynamics of Temperate and Tropical Reef Fishes at Multiple
               Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9618011

Award Number: 9618011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham E. Forrester   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                There is considerable debate regarding the major processes  that determine
              population sizes of organisms inhabiting  rocky and coral reefs. Most of these
              organisms have complex  life cycles that include widely dispersive propagules
              and  relatively sedentary juveniles and adults, such that the  `birth rate` at
              a particular reef is equivalent to the rate  of settlement of propagules. The
              controversy focuses on the  extent to which supply of propagules vs.
              post-settlement  processes determine local population size and dynamics. To 
              resolve this issue we must know whether, and how, the  demographic rates that
              determine population size at a  particular site (settlement, immigration,
              mortality, and  emigration) change with population density (i.e., are the 
              changes in these rates density-dependent).  Answering this  question is of more
              than academic interest because, first,  it provides the basis for understanding
              how local population  size is regulated naturally, which is essential for 
              effective management of fisheries and other natural  populations, and second,
              it has seldom been answered  adequately for any organism.      This
              collaborative research is designed to answer the  question of what drives local
              population dynamics in a  comprehensive manner for four species of marine fish 
              inhabiting two very different environments: temperate and  tropical reefs. This
              multi-species, multi-system approach  will provide some generality which can
              perhaps be applied to  other marine systems, including demersal and bottom 
              fisheries. Using well-proven methods, the combined  experimental and
              observational design of this study will  examine the roles of larval supply,
              settlement, recruitment,  immigration, emigration, competition, and especially 
              predation and its mechanisms, in driving local population  dynamics. Results of
              the field work will be incorporated  into mathematical models of population
              dynamics to provide  conceptual generality applicable to other similarly 
              organized systems.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
