Title       : STIMULATE: Gesture, Speech and Gaze in Discourse Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1999     
File        : a9618887

Award Number: 9618887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $748379             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis Quek   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rashid Ansari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  research in gesture, speech and gaze investigates automatic  discourse 
              segmentation  of multimodal communication  data.   The  goal  is  to  discern
              discourse structure from  video  and  voice  analysis  of  data that one can
              legitimately expect  from  common  video  and  its  audio  track.  The 
              research  will  address  the  interpretation  of  gesture,  speech,  and  gaze 
               in   discourse  management,  utilizing  psycholinguistic models  to  explain 
              how  these   modalities   combine  to  express  discourse   structure; 
              specifically,   by   developing   algorithms   for    recognizing  'catchments'
              as empirically grounded thematic segments  based  on  the  partial  recurrence
              of prosodic, gaze and  gesture  features  during natural discourse.  The
              research will be integrated into a  hierarchical   model  that  is  both 
              amenable  to  computational  implementation  and reflective of human
              communicative  realities.  The  approach  involves  experiments  designed  to 
              discover  and  quantify cues in the various modalities, and their relation 
              with  respect to discourse management; the development of computational 
              algorithms to detect and recognize such cues; and the integration  of  these 
              cues into a cogent discourse management  system.   The  team,  comprising 
              psycholinguistic, machine  vision  and  signal  processing researchers, gains
              strength from its interdisciplinary  scope.  Technology  developed will  have 
              significant  impact  on  natural  language understanding, human-computer
              interaction,  and  discourse and video databases.
