Title       : Collaborative Research: Weddell Sea Foraging: Behavior and Energetic Strategies
               for Hunting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9618384

Award Number: 9618384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrie M. Williams williams@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Davis  9614857  Fuiman  9708151  Williams  9618384  To forage efficiently
              beneath the extensive, unbroken fast  ice along the Antarctic coast, Weddell
              seals (Leptonychotes  weddellii)have adapted to an environment that is very 
              challenging for an air-breathing predator.  These  adaptations enable Weddell
              seals to hunt for prey at depth  while holding their breath for 20 minutes or
              longer.  This  is analogous to a lion or other large terrestrial predator 
              holding its breath while it locates, pursues and captures  prey.  In addition,
              Weddell seals must return to the same  hole at the end of a dive or know the
              location of other  breathing holes.  Failure to locate a breathing hole will 
              result in a seal's death by drowning.    This study will investigate the
              behavioral and energetic  adaptations that enable Weddell seals to forage in
              the  Antarctic fast-ice environment.  To achieve this goal,the  underwater
              behavior, locomotor performance (swimming  velocity, stroke frequency and
              amplitude, and three  dimensional movements)and energy metabolism of Weddell
              seals  will be measured during foraging dives. Hypotheses on  general foraging
              strategies, searching behavior, searching  mechanics, modes of swimming,
              metabolic costs of foraging  and foraging efficiency for different
              environmental  conditions and prey type will be tested. Until now, it has  not
              been possible to investigate the foraging behavior of  marine mammals in
              detail.    To accomplish this study, a small video system and data  logger will
              be attached to the seals' backs and oxygen  consumption will be measured during
              voluntary dives from an  isolated ice hole in McMurdo Sound, Antarctica. 
              Placing an  instrumented seal in an isolated ice hole is a standard  protocol
              for studying the diving behavior of Weddell seals.  The video system and data
              logger will record video images of  the seal's head and the immediate
              environment in front of  the animal.  In addition, the instrument will record
              time,  depth, swim speed, compass bearing, water tem perature,  stomach
              temperature and ambient sound.  Computer analysis of  data on depth, swim speed
              and bearing will enable  investigators to reconstruct the three-dimensional, 
              underwater path of seals'dives.  This new technology is  fully operational and
              has been used on other marine mammals.    Observing the foraging behavior and
              prey of marine mammals  has been and continues to be a major obstacle to the 
              advancement of studies on their foraging ecology.  The  Weddell seal may be the
              single best species in which to  study the foraging behavior and energetics of
              deep diving  pinnipeds because:  1) data is available on their diving  ability,
              2) the isolated-ice-hole protocol in McMurdo Sound  enables recorders to be
              attached and recovered reliably, and  3) they make daily foraging dives when
              placed in the  isolated ice hole.  The proposed study will investigate both 
              behavioral and energetic aspects of foraging to obtain a  better understanding
              of the special challenges of obtaining  food resources at depth while being
              constrained by limited  access to atmospheric oxygen.  In addition, this study
              will  greatly advance our understanding of the foraging ecology of  Weddell
              seals as large predators in the Antarctic fast-ice  environment.
