Title       : Partners in Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9618276

Award Number: 9618276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1581374            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Stayrook nick@northstar.k12.ak.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie S. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul B. Reichardt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Claude C. McMillan  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Fairbanks N Star Borough
	      PO Box 71250
	      Fairbanks, AK  997071250    907/452-2000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                9618276  Stayrook    A project to link K-12 students and teachers to
              practicing University, industry and agency scientists using networked
              technology, with the aim of increasing the practice of authentic, project-based
              math and science.    A significant portion of science and math teaching,
              inquiry, and application at the primary and secondary grade levels can be
              furthered by the virtually unlimited possibilities for infommation gathering
              and sharing via computer networking. Yet teachers and their students often do
              not take advantage of the facilities available, or do not have access to the
              technology that would make this possible. Alaska, with its far flung population
              and limited road system can especially benefit from networked technology. We
              should morph into the virtual classroom where students, teachers, and
              practicing scientists from throughout Alaska and the world engage in animated
              conversations, conduct experiments, and exchange information using infommation
              networking.  The proposed project will link practicing scientists from higher
              education, govemment, and industry with teachers and students, using the latest
              information networking technology. It will be instrumental in igniting a
              redefinition of technology's place in the science and math education process in
              the project school districts. Partners in Science is designed to serve both
              urban and isolated students in our state --students in rural districts and
              students being taught at home by their parents (homeschoolers).    The main
              goal of Partners in Science project is to further math and science learning in
              grades K-12 in the Fairbanks North Star Borough School District (FNSBSD), a
              rural Alaskan school district (Iditarod School District), and among isolated
              home-schoolers. In addition, the project will share its educational experiences
              and the new concepts developed on a statewide, national, and global level. To
              accomplish this, the proposed project has objectives for students, scientists,
              teachers and technology enhancement.     Key features of PartnersIn Science:   
              training teachers to use scientist mentors in the classroom  science study
              content relevant to community concerns/interest  establishment of "virtual math
              and science" classrooms and use of networked  technology in learning and
              instruction  inclusion of Native Alaska students/traditional Native knowledge 
              inclusion of homeschooled students  comprehensive scope of project (involves
              many people at many levels; major impact on  teaching, learning, classroom
              management, etc.)        implementing change and reform quickly       impact at
              the "floor" level --the classroom where learning and teaching takes place
              revisions in high school science and math teaching models, credit granting, and
              classroom organization  **
