Title       : Late Pleistocene Hunter-Gatherer Adaptations in the Inland Levant: The Wadi
               Al-Hasa Model (West-Central Jordan)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9618766

Award Number: 9618766
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116435             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy R. Coinman ncoinman@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah I. Olszewski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Nancy Coinman and Deborah
              Olszewski will conduct two seasons of archaeological research at a series of
              sites located in the upland region of western Jordan in the vicinity of  Wadi
              Al-Hasa. Although the area consists today of dissected floodplain, during the
              later part of the last ice age it contained a lake and extensive associated
              marshland which varied in size and configuration as climate changed. During
              their prior work in the area Drs. Coinman and Olszewski have located a large
              number of archaeological sites which span the time period between ca. 25,000 to
              12,000 years ago and these form the focus of their present project. With the
              assistance of students and a number of specialists the investigators will
              pursue several goals. They will collect data to reconstruct in detail the
              changes in paleoenvironment over time. Information on macro-climatic regimes,
              relative moisture regimes and spring and tufa formations will be sought.
              Varying lake levels and associated laucustrine features will be determined.
              Survey of archaeological sites will be continued and occurrences mapped to
              determine population distribution on the landscape at different periods of
              time. Several rockshelters located in past research will be tested to determine
              the extent and nature of archaeological deposits and excavation will be
              expanded at two sites where past work has confirmed the presence of deep
              stratified deposits with good overall preservation of faunal remains. On this
              basis it should be possible to reconstruct the human response to dramatically
              changing environmental conditions.  Archaeologists wish to understand how human
              societies at a technologically simple level adapt and map themselves onto a
              varied environment. Because of the long prehistoric record and its role as one
              cradle of civilization, many researchers have focused on the Near East and a
              number of models have been proposed. The Al-Hasa area is interesting not only
              because of its well preserved archaeological remains but also because
              preliminary data indicates that the settlement pattern fits no known Old World
              model. Coinman and Olszewski have devised another approach developed in an
              environmentally similar region in the Western United States and wish to
              determine how well this fits the Al-Hasa data. It is at the end of this period
              that domestic plants and animals appear in the Near East and the research may
              also shed light on this basic human transition to a settled way of life.  This
              research is important because it will increase our understanding of human
              adaptation. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist
              in the training of undergraduate students.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
