Title       : NSF/DARPA DDFRP: Distributed Design and Manufacturing Using Solid Freeform
               Fabrication: Computational and Design Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9618034

Award Number: 9618034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Crawford rhc@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Beaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1463,4730,9148,9159,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this proposal is to develop the underlying
              computational and design tools to take advantage of the confluence of current
              distributed computational resources and emerging rapid prototyping
              technologies.  Recent advances in physical prototyping allow the production of
              freeform solid objects directly from a computer model without part-specific
              tooling or human intervention. These technologies have been termed Solid
              Freeform Fabrication (SFF).  Benefits of this technology include greatly
              reduced fabrication time and cost, and the capability to achieve, in one
              operation, shapes that would otherwise require multiple operations or in some
              cases would be impossible to manufacture with standard techniques.  In
              addition, advances in high performance computational networks enable rapid
              dissemination of information related to the analysis and design of engineering
              components and systems.  Researchers and industrial manufacturers have noted
              similarities between the potential for layer-based SFF technologies in
              mechanical component manufacture and VLSI for microelectronic component
              manufacture.  For SFF to gain status as a viable manufacturing approach
              comparable to VLSI, several technological shortcomings must be addressed. 
              First, an appropriate method for transmitting design data must be developed, as
              current standards are inaccurate, incomplete, and unextendable.  Second,
              design/fabrication knowledge for assessing manufacturability of designs must be
              encoded for use by both designers and SFF fabricators.  This research project
              will develop and demonstrate the technology base needed to integrate advances
              in both SFF and distributed computation; specifically to: (1) develop and
              investigate a new data exchange standard for geometric data that incorporates
              three-dimensional part geometry, spatial material variations, and fabrication
              directives (e.g., tolerances); (2) develop a two-dimensional interface that can
              be used to transmit fabrication information generated from the 3D data; (3)
              encode and demonstrate design rules checking for the SLS process; and (4) test
              the exchange standards and design rules with design examples from industrial
              partners.  The focus of work will be the selective laser sintering process,
              particularly for tasks 2 and 3.  However, the work will be performed with an
              eye for generality for all layer-based SFF processes and for integration with
              the work of other research groups.  Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF)
              technologies offer the potential for significantly reducing product realization
              cycle times in many economic sectors, from electromechanical and consumer
              products to the automotive and aerospace industries.  SFF currently finds
              application mainly for prototype fabrication and limited production, but many
              researchers and commercial developers are intent upon developing these
              technologies into valid and viable manufacturing technologies.  This research
              focuses on two keys to realizing this goal:  (1) developing appropriate and
              robust data exchange standards for representing fabrication information; and
              (2) formalizing design-for-manufacture rules specific to SFF fabrication
              techniques. Similar challenges faced the microelectronics industry in its early
              days, and many researchers and practitioners have noted the similarities of
              integrated circuit fabrication and SFF manufacture.  Completion of this
              research will provide a foundation for the computational aspects needed for SFF
              to realize success similar to the microelectronics industry.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
