Title       : S-EPR: Biogeochemical Evolution in Intense Hydrothermal Plumes Emanating from a
               Superfast Spreading Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9618121

Award Number: 9618121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393559             (Estimated)
Investigator: James P. Cowen jcowen@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1315,1319,4444,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The section of the southern East Pacific Rise (S EPR) between the Garrett
              Transform and the Easter Microplate has one of the fastest spreading rates on
              the global ridge system and is the locus of the most intense hydrothermal
              activity, reflected in the density of venting sites and in the water column
              plumes, of all mid-ocean ridge (MOR) systems studied to date. Recent
              submersible and surface ship visits to this region by the French and
              Japanese/American (PMEL NOAA) have revealed that hydrothermal plumes overlay
              over 60% of the ridge crest between 14Ý50' and 18Ý40' S. Furthermore,
              dramatically variable vent fluid chemistries result in distinct, and unusual
              signatures in the plume waters. The intense, nearly continuous, and dynamic
              nature of the hydrothermal system over this section of the S EPR provides for
              the most focused impact anywhere of the global ridge system on the ocean
              geochemistry and biosphere.  Research efforts focused on the hydrothermal
              venting and plumes of this system will continue with two NSF funded
              collaborative projects. M. Lilley, K.Von Damm, and J. Lupton have been funded
              to perform a 25 dive submersible program on the S EPR, focusing on the
              collection of vent fluds from several regions of documented venting south of
              17ÝS. R. Collier has been funded to extend the submersible observations of the
              hydrothermal vent characteristics to the water column hydrothermal plume at the
              local (vent field) to segment scale. In addition, the Japanese/PMEL NOAA are
              continuing their joint, interdisciplinary investigation of the distribution and
              composition of hydrothermal venting/plumes along the EPR axis south of the
              Garrett.  A study of the geomicrobiology of the intense S EPR hydrothermal
              plumes will be made in collaboration with the above funded programs. The goals
              of the  present proposal are highly complementary to and will extend the
              primary goals of the funded Lilley/Collier programs; these  studies will assess
              the rate of change of microbial populations and biogeochemical processes in an
              evolving plume. Collaboration with the Japanese/PMEL- NOAA (RIDGE Flux) S EPR
              project will allow the determination of representative  hydrothermal mineral
              and organic C vertical fluxes at some of the same sites and to relate these
              fluxes to biogeochemical transformation rates of hydrothermal constituents and
              metalliferous sediment distributions and accumulation rates. Analyses and
              interpretation of transformation processes and flux rates will be completed in
              close collaboration with  M. Lilley (UW) (and K.Von Damm and J. Lupton), R.
              Collier (OSU), Japanese (T.Urabe, J. Ishibashi, H. Kawahata, K. Marumo, A.
              Marnyarna, and colleagues) and PMEL  /NOAA (E. Baker, R. Feely, G. Massoth, D.
              Butterfield and colleagues) scientists.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
