Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Context of Bronze Use at Thanh Den, Vietnam
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1997    
File        : a9618609

Award Number: 9618609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10450              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. C. Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. K.C. Chang, MS Tracy Hoffman will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological excavation at the
              site of Thanh Den which dates to the early Bronze Age (1500-1100 BC) and is
              located 40 km west of Hanoi. A small portion of the site was excavated in the
              early 1980s and this revealed the presence of a village settlement based on
              rice agriculture and metallurgical remains including molds for casting
              implements such as axes and spear points. It is one of a handful of sites in
              northern Vietnam which has yielded metallurgical remains. In collaboration with
              regional archaeologists, MS. Hoffman will expand research at Thanh Den. She
              will excavate an area of ca. 100 sq. meters which should be sufficient to
              determine the major activities that took place as well as to assess the amount
              of variability in cultural remains across the site. MS Hoffman will examine: 1.
              The extent and nature of bronze working at the site. This will include
              assessing whether bronze was imported in finished form or was locally produced;
              2. The abundance and types of bronze as compared to other artifacts and whether
              bronze is restricted in spatial distribution across the site; 3. The presence
              and distribution of other types of `exotic` items which may indicate the
              existence of large scale trade networks. Research will be conducted in two
              phases. Six weeks will be spent excavating at Thanh Den in conjunction with
              field conservation and initial recording. This will be followed by two months
              of conservation and analysis in Hanoi.       Southeast Asia is an unusual area
              of the world in terms of the development of complex society. By the mid-second
              millennium BC, communities in Southeast Asia were practicing cereal cultivation
              (rice) and the production of copper and bronze. Despite the fact that these two
              conditions have been demonstrated to be important in the development of
              complexity in other parts of the world, in Southeast Asia it is only a thousand
              years later that the beginnings of social stratification and political
              centralization can be detected. Thus Southeast Asia may present an opportunity
              to develop new theories and models for the rise of complexity.       This
              research will produce widely used information on a region which, from an
              archaeological perspective, is poorly known; the results therefore will be of
              wide interest. The project will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
