Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Preventive Law Through Plain Language: Testing a
               Pyscholegal Audience Based Evaluation of Contract Perception and Comprehension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9618365

Award Number: 9618365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5465               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Penrod   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Penrod  9618365  Standardized form contracts are used in the majority of
              modern contractual transactions and have become an indispensable part of
              contemporary commerce.  Many times the meaning of these contracts is unclear to
              the public because they are written in arcane language that is difficult for
              lawyers and non-lawyers to decipher. This research uses a two-stage empirical
              process to study plain language provisions .Both qualitative and quantitative
              methods are used.  The first stage explores contract schema of both lawyers and
              laypersons elicited via focus group methods.  Using the schema elicited in the
              first stage, questions will be developed to measure the effects of provisions
              of plain language statutes on comprehension, perceptions of enforceability and
              fairness, and attributions toward the drafting parties.   A true experiment
              will test these effects with a sample of 232 adults.  This research will inform
              schema theory and extend the existing research on clarity of judicial
              instruction to the domain of contracts.    %%%  Standardized form contracts are
              used in the majority of modern contractual transactions and have become an
              indispensable part of contemporary commerce.  Many times the meaning of these
              contracts is unclear to the public because they are written in arcane language
              that is difficult for lawyers and non-lawyers to decipher. This research uses a
              two-stage empirical process to study plain language provisions .Both
              qualitative and quantitative methods are used.  The first stage explores
              contract schema of both lawyers and laypersons elicited via focus group
              methods.  Using the schema elicited in the first stage, questions will be
              developed to measure the effects of provisions of plain language statutes on
              comprehension, perceptions of enforceability and fairness, and attributions
              toward the drafting parties.   A true experiment will test these effects with a
              sample of 232 adults.  This research will inform schema theory and extend the
              existing research on clarity of judi cial instruction to the domain of
              contracts.    ***
