Title       : Topics in Empirical Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9618103

Award Number: 9618103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108084             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee E. Ohanian   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves research on two topics.  The first project is an applied
              analysis of a theory of the growing wage premium between skilled and unskilled
              workers, with a focus on the interaction of the relative price of unskilled
              labor and the relative price of capital equipment.  The basic theme in this
              project is that unskilled workers and capital equipment are good substitutes,
              and that capital equipment and skilled workers are relatively complementary. 
              This theory suggests that declines in the price of unskilled labor will be tied
              to declines in the relative price of capital.  A production function that
              explicitly distinguishes between capital structures and equipment, and between
              skilled and unskilled labor is developed, and the parameters of the production
              function are estimated using annual data from the CPS.  The production function
              is then used to evaluate the extent to which the theory is consistent with
              historical variations in the wage premium.  Preliminary results suggest that
              the rapid decline in the price of equipment, coupled with strong growth in the
              stock of capital, has been an important factor in growing wage inequality
              between skilled and unskilled labor over the past 30 years.  The second topic
              is the development of a framework for evaluating dynamic equilibrium models,
              and the application of this framework to the analysis of recent models in
              macroeconomics and international economics. It is shown that the framework is a
              flexible and very useful tool for analyzing dynamic general equilibrium
              economies, as it is based on the realistic assumption that all models are
              misspecified. In addition, the framework is graphical, allowing the user to
              assess visually and quickly the dimensions on which the model performs well, it
              provides a common set of tools that can be used by researchers with different
              objectives and interests, and it develops new procedures for conducting
              inference in small samples.  Extensions of the methodology, and applications to
              substantive economic models are also undertaken.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
