Title       : Social Insurance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a9618698

Award Number: 9618698
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229497             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Diamond pdiamond@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9618698  Diamond    This project consists of theoretical and empirical research
              on the social security system.  The theoretical work examines the tradeoffs
              among labor market disincentives, provision of insurance, and redistribution. 
              Some workers lose their economic opportunities at younger ages than other
              workers.  By having a social security system that varies retirement benefits
              with the age of retirement the government can provide insurance against this
              risk.  However, any such insurance involves a labor market disincentive.  Thus
              one needs a way to evaluate the balance between providing insurance for those
              in need and creating distortions in the labor market.  The theoretical work
              continues research that has been done by the investigator in evaluating and
              optimizing this tradeoff.  Previous work considered a setting where individual
              workers are the same except for the actual realization of their earnings
              opportunities.  However, people differ significantly in their life expectancies
              and in their utilities from working.  Thus this project extends the previous
              work to examine the tradeoff between incentives for retirement and the
              provision of insurance in a setting where there is also redistribution because
              different people have different life expectancies.  In addition, there will be
              a new modeling of the gains and costs of redistribution using social security. 
              The empirical part of the project is based on calculating more thoroughly than
              before the financial incentives for retirement generated by social security. 
              This will go beyond previous work in recognizing differences in ages between
              husband and wife and in recognizing variation in life expectancy at retirement
              age.  The calculation of financial incentives when both husband and wife have
              worked under Social Security is complex.  Simulation of such incentives and the
              use of the simulations in estimation of the responses of retirement decisions
              will be a major part of the work.  In addition, the work will recognize the use
              of calendar -year earnings in calculating benefits, a use that has implications
              for the timing of retirement within the year.       ??
