Title       : Local Interactions in General Equilibrium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9618230

Award Number: 9618230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Maria Bell ann.m.bell@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This is a Research Planning Grant for Women in Science and Engineering.  The
              standard framework for competitive general equilibrium in markets relies on a
              centralized auctioneer to establish prices and execute trades. In contrast, the
              majority of actual transactions in the economy are decentralized bilateral
              trades between individuals. The modeling and analysis of bilateral trading
              mechanisms with local interactions both complements the existing
              general-equilibrium theoretical framework and provides an understanding of the
              characteristics of many existing markets.   The key assumption in the project
              is that trade may occur only between agents who are adjacent to one another on
              a network. Such a fixed spatial structure of local interactions may arise from
              geographic obstacles or from institutional restrictions on trade such as the
              United States' embargo of Cuba.   Other markets, such as those for
              over-the-counter stocks and bonds, have evolved and maintained a decentralized
              structure even in the absence of restrictions on trade. Understanding the
              properties of network-based bilateral trading may help to explain the existence
              and importance of these market structures. A trading mechanism based on local
              interactions also addresses an important criticism of existing research on
              decentralized trade, namely, that the number of potential trading pairs and the
              corresponding information requirements increase dramatically with the number of
              agents.  With the introduction of spatial relationships, the same results can
              be achieved with far fewer direct interactions between agents.  Although all
              gains from trade eventually will be exhausted, the longer it takes for the
              economy to converge to a common trading price, the larger the `cost` of purely
              local trading. Preliminary computer simulations comparing a variety of network
              structures confirm the importance of this issue. Not only does the speed of
              convergence vary greatly for different spatial structures, the process of
              convergence generates interesting dynamics such as the persistence of spatial
              correlations, or neighborhood effects, in the prices of goods over time. The
              assumption that agents are perfectly myopic, and hence unwilling to engage in
              trades which lower their current utility, plays a crucial role in existing
              results. Because agents do not anticipate the final equilibrium price, trades
              occur at prices other than those that will ultimately prevail economy-wide so
              long as those trades are utility improving. The project also investigates the
              changes in the equilibrium distribution of wealth induced by local trading and
              examine how the process of trading can generate path-dependent outcomes.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
