Title       : High Performance Interactive Solvers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1997   
File        : a9618827

Award Number: 9618827
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yousef Saad saad@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop high performance iterative  techniques
              for solving general sparse linear systems of  equations.  Here,
              high-performance is meant in the double sense  of (1) intrinsically efficient
              and (2) designed for high-  performance platforms.  This research is motivated
              mainly by the  belief that parallel iterative methods will be fully accepted in
               the applications world only if they are robust as well as  efficient for
              solving linear systems arising from typical  applications, such as
              Computational Fluid Dynamics.  For this  reason preconditioning techniques that
              utilize a high order of  accuracy will be emphasized.  These include the high
              level of  fill in complete factorizations such as ILUT and ILU(k).  The  most
              general framework of irregularly structured sparse linear  systems will be
              considered.  These matrices are partitioned and  mapped into a distributed
              memory multiprocessor system and the  systems are then solved with a
              preconditioned Krylov subspace  technique -- using a message passing library
              such as MPI for  communicating between processors.  There are three major
              issues  to be considered with care.  First, preconditioning techniques 
              developed specifically for distributed sparse matrices will be  investigated. 
              Second, techniques to reduce the impact of inner  products in Krylov subspace
              accelerators will be considered.  These inner products cause the parallel
              implementations to become  inefficient as the number of processors increases. 
              Finally,  independent of consideration of parallelism, robust iterative 
              solvers will be sought with the ultimate goal of improving the  current
              state-of-the-art.    On the preconditioners side, the methods to be developed
              are of  three types: (1) derived from a Domain Decomposition viewpoint  but
              adapted to general sparse matrices, (2) ILU with multi-  elimination (ILUM) and
              related techniques, and (3) Hybrid methods  derived from approximate inverse
              techniques. On the accelerators  side, hybrid techniques that lowe r the impact
              of inner-product  computations, as well as block Krylov methods will be 
              investigated.  ***
