Title       : Elemental and Isotopic Composition of Trapped Gases in the Huascaran and Sajama
               Ice Cores from South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9618067

Award Number: 9618067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven M. Colman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd A. Sowers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9618067  Sowers, Todd  Pennsylvania State University  Title:
              Element and Isotopic Composition of Trapped Gases in the  Huascaran and Sajama
              Ice Cores from South America    A set of very exciting climate records
              extending into the last  glacial period have been developed from the Huascaran
              ice core from  the Peruvian Cordillera.  The isotopic temperature record from
              this  core demonstrated that, during the last glacial period,  temperatures at
              Huascaran were colder than today, supporting  various other lines of evidence
              that the tropics were indeed colder  during the last glacial period.  These
              findings are consistent with  ice core records from Greenland and Antarctica
              which extend into  the last glacial period.  The high degree of covariation
              between  all these records during the Glacier termination argues that there 
              are strong teleconnections between these sites which are probably  responding
              to the same (or similar) forcing functions.  This award  supports measurements
              of the elements and isotopic composition of  the trapped gases in the Huascaran
              ice core.  These records will  provide definitive evidence for the existence of
              glacial-age ice at  Huascaran.  The gas records will refine the timescale for
              the  Huascaran core to within 500 years of that ascribed to the GISP II  ice
              core from central Greenland.  The gas records will also allow  the transfer of
              the Huascaran climate records into a "common  temporal framework."  In
              addition, leads and lags between all these  climate records and many other
              records covering the last  deglaciation can be investigated.  The ultimate goal
              in this  research is to gain insight into the mechanisms which caused the 
              Earth to move out of the last glacial period by establishing the  sequence of
              events which led to the deglaciation.  Placing the  tropical climate events
              from Huascaran in this sequence will help  decipher the nature of the forcing
              mechanisms responsible for the  last termination.
