Title       : Dissertation Research: Rural Household and Community Development in the
               Xunantunich Hinterland During the Late and Terminal Classic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1996  
File        : a9618540

Award Number: 9618540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Ashmore   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Wendy Ashmore, MS Cynthia Robin will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Building on prior research she will conduct an
              archaeological survey and excavation at the site of Xunantunich located in the
              Belize River Valley in a tropical lowland environment. Xunantunich is a Mayan
              site which was occupied during the Late to Terminal Classic periods (ca.
              600-1000 AD) and thus spans both the height and early decline of the Mayan
              civilization. The site is unusual because in relation to its estimated
              population size it contains a relatively small ceremonial center and a dearth
              of monumental architecture.  After the peak of Mayan development when most
              sites decline in size the opposite appears to have occurred at Xunantunich and
              the center grows larger rather than smaller. MS Robin wants to examine the
              relationship between `central` and `rural` areas and through this gain insight
              into how the polity was organized socially and politically and what forces held
              the entity together. While much work in the Mayan region has focused on site
              centers less is known about hinterland areas.  MS Robin shall continue her
              fieldwork to locate household areas since these can shed the most light on
              social and economic organization. Using a methodology developed in prior
              seasons she will extract soil cores spaced at regular intervals in areas of
              likely habitation and through analysis of cultural remains thus recovered
              locate homesteads for extensive horizontal excavation. She will also excavate
              in mounds which result from longer term occupation by larger social groups. The
              ceramics, lithics and other materials recovered will permit her to date
              individual sites and to examine questions such as craft specialization and
              degree of hierarchical differentiation.  While it is known that Mayan
              settlements at the height of the Classic period integrated large numbers of
              individuals into  centrally controlled social groupings the mechanisms used to
              accomplish this end are not well understood and archaeologists disagree on the
              nature and strength of these bonds. It is only through large scale excavation
              and survey that answers are likely to emerge and MS Robin's research is
              directed towards this end. The data she produces will be of interest to many
              archaeologists. The project will also assist in the training of a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
