Title       : Development of the Capability to Measure Proxies of Microbial Activity Within
               Oceanic Crust
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1999  
File        : a9618294

Award Number: 9618294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269799             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Paul Johnson johnson@ocean.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative technology development project will be   undertaken by
              investigators at the Universities of Hawaii,   Washington, and
              Illinois-Chicago.  Specialized seafloor   instrumentation will be developed to
              test for the presence   of a sub-seafloor biosphere hundreds of meters below
              the   water-rock interface, by detecting specific metabolic   products which
              accompany the hydrothermal fluids as they   vent from the crust into the
              overlying seawater. To test the   sub-surface biosphere hypothesis, an
              instrumented "bio-  blanket" will be built and deployed that isolates a small  
              area of surface rock from seawater, and focuses up-welling   fluid through
              scavenging columns that serve as traps for   metabolic (organic carbon)
              products which are associated   with these sub-surface microbial communities.
              These   diagnostic organic compounds should accompany the   hydrothermal fluid
              that is known to circulate within the   upper crustal rocks and eventually
              discharges into the   overlying seawater at diffuse vent sites in exposed rock 
               outcrops. The proposed instrumented blanket would also   measure up-welling
              temperatures and velocities as the fluid   vents into seawater. The development
              of the bio-blanket will   be in several graduated stages, with the initial
              deployments   being carried out at a ridge axis, where the fluid flux   levels
              are substantial, and the dissolved carbon metabolic   concentrations are
              relatively high. The direct detection of   a wide-spread biological community,
              living within the   sub-surface ocean floor would dramatically alter estimates 
               of biological productivity and the global carbon budgets,   and have a
              profound impact on our philosophical view of the   earth.
