Title       : EPWG: Science for All: Opening the Door for Rural Women
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9618855

Award Number: 9618855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $899412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adele S. Pittendrigh adlap@newton.math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Marley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon J. Hapner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia K. McClure  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9618855  Pittendrigh  Montana State University-Bozeman is developing a project
              which will increase the number of high school girls from rural schools and
              Indian reservations who either pursue science or engineering majors and
              careers, or, at the minimum, become more confident and involved with their
              science and/or engineering course work as non-majors.  The project includes:   
                1. Developing and teaching a week-long summer short course, "Montana Women in
              Science and Technology:  Improving Participation," for teams of middle and high
              school teachers, counselors from reservations and other Montana rural schools. 
                  2. Hosting a week-long faculty institute on "Gender and Science" to
              introduce MSU-Bozeman and tribal college faculty to national research on
              female-friendly pedagogy and content, thereby encouraging faculty involvement
              with the goals of this project.        3. Administering a mini-grant program
              for middle and high-school teachers/counselors, tribal college faculty and MSU
              faculty to develop, test and implement the ideas generated in the "Montana
              Women in the Sciences" short course and the "Gender and Science" faculty
              institute.      4. Developing and teaching a cross-disciplinary freshman
              seminar on science, technology and society to show that science is interesting
              and socially valuable, that it is relevant to women's lives, and that it is an
              enterprise where women and minorities can and do contribute.      5. Providing
              on-line counseling and mentoring for teachers, counselors and tribal faculty,
              mentoring for women students, and fellowships and scholarships to encourage and
              support women in science, and engineering.    The project will determine if
              early intervention at the middle and high school levels, coupled with on-line
              support to teachers and counselors, and faculty development at tribal colleges
              and at MSU-Bozeman, can make a difference in young women's expectations and
              preparation for college-level science and engineering and their retention rates
              once on campus.
