Title       : Toward Greater Understanding of Self-Esteem Instability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1997      
File        : a9618882

Award Number: 9618882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Kernis mkernis@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description. Considerable evidence indicates that (a) people vary in the
              extent to which they exhibit short-term fluctuations in feelings of self-worth,
              and that (b) these differences in self-esteem stability (or fragility) are
              implicated in a wide range of important psychological phenomena (e.g.,
              depression, anger and hostility proneness).  Not much is currently known,
              however, about why people vary in the extent to which their self-esteem is
              stable. The proposed research is therefore designed to examine both
              dispositional and situational factors that may underlie or promote unstable
              self-esteem. On the dispositional side, studies will test the hypotheses that,
              compared to people with stable self-esteem, people with unstable self-esteem
              will (a) have self-regulatory styles that are primarily introjected rather then
              integrated, (b) pay greater attention to potentially self-evaluative stimuli,
              (c) react more to feedback even when the task is poorly validated, and (d) have
              less well-developed self-concepts, as revealed through a variety of indices. On
              the environmental side, studies will examine how feedback importance and
              diagnosticity, and contextually heightened ego-involvement, affect individuals'
              sensitivity and reactivity to evaluative feedback. Finally, additional
              information will be obtained on the convergent and discriminant validity of
              self-esteem stability. In sum, the proposed studies will provide considerable
              insight into the nature of self-evaluative processes, the extent to which these
              processes vary across individuals, and how they are affected by various
              environmental conditions. In addition, the research will  contribute to greater
              understanding (and potential treatment) of a wide range of clinically relevant
              phenomena in which fragile self-esteem is implicated (e.g., depression, anger
              management).  %%%  Project Justification. Prior research indicates that people
              vary in how much their feelings of self-worth fluctuate from day to day, and
              that these individual differences in self-esteem stability (fragility) are
              implicated in a wide range of important psychological phenomena (e.g.,
              depression, anger and hostility proneness). Not much is currently known,
              however, about why people vary in the extent to which their self-esteem is
              stable. The proposed research is therefore designed to examine both
              `personality` and situational factors that may underlie or promote unstable
              self-esteem. The research is expected to provide considerable insight into the
              nature of self-evaluative processes, the extent to which these processes vary
              across individuals, and how they are affected by various environmental
              conditions. In addition, the research will contribute to greater understanding
              (and potential treatment) of a wide range of clinically relevant phenomena in
              which fragile self-esteem is implicated, including those related to depression
              and anger management.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
