Title       : Collaborative Research: The Europeanization of Movements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1996  
File        : a9618119

Award Number: 9618119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas R. Imig   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Is the process of European integration shifting the targets of social
              movements from their national political systems to the European Union? 
              Alternatively, does the EU remain isolated from the reach of national
              democratic politics?  Or is there a third possibility:  that social movements
              respond to the transnational issues posed by the European Union within the
              traditional pathways of nation-specific contentious politics?  The
              investigators employ an empirical examination of these questions, drawing on a
              cross-national, longitudinal, and computer-readable dataset containing reports
              of some 20,000 political events which occurred in EU member countries between
              1983 and 1995.  With these data, and with attendant case studies the
              investigators examine the changing patterns of Western European contentious
              political action over time.  In particular, they look for indicators of three
              facets of a possible Europeanization of protest:  1) an increasing magnitude of
              EU-related contentious action within twelve European nations that their
              research covers; 2) the issues which induce domestic social actors to undertake
              contentious activity aimed at or stimulated by the European Union; and, 3) the
              targets domestic social actors choose when their claims are responses to EU
              policy directives.  With the information that the researchers are collecting on
              these facets of Europeanization, they develop a model of the movement - - if
              there is one - - towards a transnational realm of contentious politics in
              Europe.  Looking beyond the European case, their investigation offers one of
              the first comparative assessments of the ways in which private social actors
              are seeking voice before transnational institutions.  Additionally, they
              explore the uses and the parameters for employing computer-readable coding
              programs for large on-line datasets in comparative politics as well - - a field
              which, with few exceptions, has been stubbornly resistant to systematic,
              cross-national event history analysis.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
