Title       : Topics in Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a9618303

Award Number: 9618303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Eichenbaum eich@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9618303  Eichenbaum    This research seeks to understand the extent to which
              fluctuations in output and inflation in post-war US data are due to the fact
              that monetary policy is conducted under discretion.  This issue is addressed by
              developing and analyzing a class of dynamic, quantitative, general equilibrium
              models in which monetary policy is made by policymakers seeking to achieve
              well-defined objectives.  These models are used to determine whether the
              conduct of monetary policy would have been better under alternative
              institutional arrangements.  This research is motivated by a variety of
              empirical and policy questions, some of which appear to be puzzling from the
              perspective of conventional theories.  Example of these questions are:   (1)
              Are Great Inflations like we saw in the 1980's an inevitable by-product of
              discretionary monetary policy?    (2)  Does discretion lead to excessive fine
              tuning, that is, too much "leaning against the wind?"  (3)  What are the
              welfare gains, if any from imposing limited forms of commitment on the monetary
              authority?   (4)  Does delegating authority to a central banker necessarily
              entail repeated and risky battles to reduce inflation?    (5)  Do theories
              based on delegation help account for the evidence of regime switches in postwar
              US monetary policy?      The persuasiveness of any analysis of monetary policy
              depends crucially on the plausibility of the model.  The project constructs,
              estimates and evaluates the empirical plausibility of alternative business
              cycle models.  The research is aimed at isolating frictions in agents'
              environments that help account quantitatively for the fact that contractionary
              shocks to monetary policy lead to small movements in the aggregate price level
              and real wages, svbustantial declines in output and profits, and a significant
              rise in short term interest rates.  The project evaluates the importance of
              asset market, good market and labor market frictions in the monetary
              transmission mechanism.  In related work, the projects  aims at understanding
              the cyclical behavior of capacity utilization rates.  This work is important
              because empirically plausible models of the monetary transmission mechanism
              must embody frictions that damp cyclical movements in the costs of production. 
              The project confronts microeconomic data with business cycle models that allow
              for nontrivial technological heterogeneity across firms.  Finally, the project
              aims at estimating the magnitude of returns to scale and externalities using
              microeconomic data.  This work is important because a broad class of theories
              relies on increasing returns to scale and/or externalities as a propagation
              mechanism or for self fulfilling expectations shocks to be an important source
              of impulses to the business cycle.      ??
