Title       : STIMULATE: Generating Coherent Summaries of On-Line Documents: Combining
               Statistical and Symbolic Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9618797

Award Number: 9618797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen R. McKeown Kathy@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Klavans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This  project  proposes  a multi-level process  of  summarization  featuring:
              (1) integration of knowledge about a document  derived  with  both  statistical
              and symbolic techniques; (2) the  use  of  language generation for
              reformulating this information into  both  indicative  and  informative
              summaries; (3) summarization  across  sets  of related articles; and (4)
              development of techniques  for  domain   independent   summarization.   The  
              proposed   research  comprises   both   document  analysis  and  summary  
              generation.  Document  analysis  involves segmenting a document  into  topics, 
              using statistical techniques to identify key content within  each  section, 
              and constructing a lexical semantic representation  for  use  by  the summary
              generator. Generation focuses on integration  of   relevant   information  from
               several   data   sources,   on  presentation of contrasting information from
              the input  articles,  and  on the use of planning operators to combine
              information from  the  separate  representations into a single  concise  text. 
              The  research  includes  evaluation  techniques  for  measuring   both 
              coverage  and robustness of the analyzer and generator, including  conceptual
              and linguistic knowledge.  Through collaboration  with  Columbia's  Center  for
               Research  on  Information  Access,   the  proposed    research    on  
              dynamically   generated,    coherent  summarization across domains will
              ultimately be part of a digital  library  interface that filters documents
              according to  a  user's  interests and needs.
