Title       : Synthesis of Existing High Resolution LTER/Icecolors Databases to Advance
               Physical Bio-Optical Modeling of Antarctic Primary Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9618383

Award Number: 9618383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen E. Hofmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9618383  Hofmann and Prezelin  While primary production of the Southern Ocean is
               significant to global ocean carbon flux, large scale  estimates of production
              for Antarctic waters are extremely  uncertain and knowledge of the magnitude of
              its variability  over a range of time and space scales is sparse.  Thus,  there
              is a need for high resolution databases for the  development of regional and
              seasonal primary production  models. This research will blend components of two
              existing  high-resolution physical, optical and primary production  datasets in
              a total model of nested bio-optical and physical  biological models with the
              aim of predicting patterns and  control of primary production in Antarctic
              coastal waters.  The extensive LTER/Icecolors primary production and physical 
              dynamics database covers 4 years of Antarctic research at  time-series stations
              in coastal waters and during several  process cruises at defined sites within a
              mesoscale grid of  the shelf/slope waters west of the Palmer Peninsula.  This 
              will allow testing of predictive hypotheses regarding  physical forcing of
              primary production in Antarctic coastal  waters and will advance bio-optical
              models linking spectral  light fields, changing UV climatology, phytoplankton 
              community dynamics and photosynthetic activity over a wide  range of time and
              space scales.  General objectives are to:    a)  Develop and test bio-optical
              models of PAR-based primary  production for Antarctic coastal waters, utilizing
              the LTER  mesoscale data bases collected for different seasons between 
              1990-1994.    b)  Blend the LTER Physical Field  Hofmann  and Primary 
              Production datasets  Prezelin  to define and quantify the  effect of
              mixed-layer dynamics on primary production and  phytoplankton community
              dynamics in the shelf/slope waters  west of the Palmer Peninsula.    c) 
              Utilize LTER primary production data to test the  applicability of a general
              hypothesis of bio-optical  modeling of global primary production to modeling
              large  scale primary prod uction in the Southern Ocean.            d)  Hindcast
              the impact of solar UV radiation on in situ  LTER primary production, utilizing
              measured UV climatology  data (Booth, NSF UV Monitoring Program, Palmer
              Station) and  modeled ozone-dependent UV climatology (Dr. Madronich's UV  CODE,
              version 3.2, NCAR) in combination with in situ  biological weighting functions
              (BWFs) and UV dose-response  curves derived from studies of diverse
              phytoplankton  communities acquired during Icecolors `90 r `93    Although
              GLOBEC/USJGOFS programs will largely focus on  oceanic waters of the Southern
              Ocean, a prompt synthesis of  the existing databases will provide insights and
              advances in  physical-bio-optical models useful to the planning and  execution
              of the other multidisciplinary programs.  Furthermore, important bases will be
              provided for comparison  and integration between programs as those projects are
               completed.  Cross-comparison of programs is possible since  core measurements
              are the same as those used in JGOFS, and  the goals of ascertaining the
              differences between short-term  variability and long-term trends in primary
              production in  diverse regions of the Southern Ocean are shared.
