Title       : US-Egypt Workshop on Manufacturing Technology Alexandria, Egypt, December 7-9,
               1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9618444

Award Number: 9618444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105459             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mansour H. Mohamed   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5944,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This award is to provide support for a `U.S.-Egypt Workshop on
              Manufacturing Technology` to be held in Alexandria, Egypt, December 7-9, 1996. 
              The U.S. organizer is Dr. Mansour Mohamed, Head, Department of Textile
              Engineering, Chemistry and Science at North Carolina State University in
              Raleigh, NC.  The Egyptian organizer is Dr. Nabiel A. Saleh, Vice President,
              the National Research Center, Cairo, Egypt.  Twenty scientists representing
              U.S. academic and industrial concerns will participate.  From Egypt,
              participants will include scientists from the NRC, academic institutions and
              public and private industrial research organizations.  The workshop will allow
              these scientists to discuss the scientific and technical questions that affect
              the manufacturing of products in four industries: textiles, paper and pulp,
              pesticides, and polymers, and to identify areas where joint U.S.-Egypt research
              can benefit industries in the two countries, and hopefully advance the state of
              the art in these areas.  The workshop plans envision exchange of state of the
              art papers, by the two side, few weeks in advance of the December meeting, in
              depth discussions of the information exchanged during the meeting and specific
              recommendations for viable cooperative research projects.  This project plan
              includes visits by separate groups of scientists to specific industries in the
              four areas, in Egypt before and following the three day meeting.  Scope:  This
              award supports U.S. scientists in a project that has high priority for the two
              countries.  There is an evident need in Egypt, and in a large number of other
              developing countries, to bring and adapt modern technologies and manufacturing
              procedures into its industrial infrastructure if she is to maintain stable and
              improving economic conditions.  The U.S. side has a chance to deal with nascent
              industries, or old industries that need to be revamped, and to gain valuable
              experiences in the process.  Some of the joint research projects that may
              result from this workshop could have technical benefits to U.S. industries and
              to machinery manufacturers, and instruments manufacturers in the U.S.  This
              project is endorsed by the Governments of the U.S. and Egypt.  They plan to
              consider support of the joint research within the scope of increasing the
              cooperation between the two countries in the science and technology area.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
