Title       : An Evaluation of Brown Algal Phlorotannin Synthesis, Turnover, and Fate: A
               Comparison of Ecological Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9618112

Award Number: 9618112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy M. Targett ntargett@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9117,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9618112  Targett    Brown algal polyphenolics are acetate-malonate derived
              phloroglucinol (1,3,5-  trihydroxybenzene) polymers with putative biological
              activity (herbivore  deterrents, digestion reducers, antibacterial agents) that
              attain  substantial concentrations in many brown algal species, and hence,
              represent  a significant investment of plant resources. Ecological theories,
              such as  optimal defense, resource availability, and growth differentiation
              balance,  have attempted to provide an inclusive theoretical framework that
              balances  improvements in plant fitness resulting from secondary metabolite
              production  with the metabolic costs of these compounds. However, experimental
              tests of  these theories have yielded mixed results.  Our understanding of
              factors  that control plant production of secondary metabolites is limited
              because  experiments to date have focused primarily on correlations between
              plant  stresses and plant secondary metabolite concentrations, rather than
              rates of  metabolite synthesis and turnover. Information regarding phlorotannin
               concentration levels as they correlate to various environmental factors has 
              been useful in establishing general trends, but increasingly, observations  of
              inter- and intraspecific variation in brown algal phlorotannin  concentrations
              are falling outside of the current theoretical framework. To  truly understand
              the observed patterns of plant phlorotannin concentrations,  it is essential to
              understand the effect that specific environmental factors  have on rates of
              phlorotannin production and turnover.         The goals of this project are: 1.
              To establish an accurate  understanding of brown algal phlorotannin synthesis,
              turnover, and exudation  rates, 2. To establish the magnitude of variation in
              these rates as a result  of changes in nutrient (nitrogen) concentration,
              irradiance bevels, and  grazing intensity, 3. To use the data as a framework
              for the evaluation of  the carbon-nutrient balance hypothesis (CNB) and the
              induction hypothesis  ( IND) in marine systems, 4. To quantitatively evaluate
              the cost of  phlorotannin synthesis and maintenance under varying nitrogen,
              irradiance  and herbivory regimes.  This research addresses several competing
              ideas that  attempt to account for variation in concentrations of carbon-based
              secondary  metabolites in plants. It does so with a direct experimental
              approach (lab  and field) to measurement of rates of phlorotannin synthesis,
              turnover and  fate in temperate and tropical brown algal species. Understanding
              these  mechanisms is central to understanding issues of resource allocation and
               cost of allelochemical production.
