Title       : Hazardous-Industry Restructuring to Avoid Liability for Accidents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9618133

Award Number: 9618133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon C. Rausser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Rausser  9618133    There is compelling evidence that indicates that
              when liability for accidents is imposed on hazardous industries, usually with
              the aim of inducing more responsible behavior on the part of its firms, those
              industries respond to the liability by restructuring.  Large firms that
              previously integrated hazardous processes with their other operations suddenly
              decide to segregate these processes into dedicated subsidiaries in order to
              shield their other assets from any liability in case of accidents.
              Alternatively, they may abandon the hazardous processes altogether and instead
              purchase required inputs from external suppliers.   Both the subsidiaries and
              outside suppliers are typically undercapitalized: they fully expect to go
              bankrupt if and when an accident occurs, but gamble on earning sufficient
              revenues until that time to make the operation profitable overall.  The
              existing literature on hazardous-industry restructuring to avoid liability for
              accidents treat as fixed many of the variables that informal discussion
              identifies as critical.  This research aims to build a rigorous economic model
              of a hazardous industry, taking  explicit account of firms' incentives to
              exploit means of avoiding liability through bankruptcy.  Key features of the
              model are tested using data on the trucking industry from the Motor Carrier
              Management and Information System database maintained by the Federal Highway
              Administration.  The model will also be used to evaluate alternative policy
              measures designed to force firms to take responsibility for the harm they
              generate and take appropriate precautionary measures.    ***
