Title       : Group Processes and Individual Differences in Standardized Test Scores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1997  
File        : a9618840

Award Number: 9618840
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lovaglia michael-lovaglia@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. Houser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Markovsky  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9618840  Lovaglia    The proposed research extends a theoretical research
              program, status characteristics and expectation theories, that has been
              fruitful in explaining status hierarchies and stratification processes in small
              groups.  In certain situations, individual performance on standardized tests of
              ability may be included within the scope of status characteristics theory.  New
              theoretical developments identify those situations in which status processes
              should affect individual performance.  The extended theory can then be applied
              to a fundamental problem in social theory:  the unequal performance of group
              members who share similar histories and cultural backgrounds.  Social theory
              now explains differences in performance among group members as stemming from
              individuals' backgrounds: being rasised in cultural enriched settings is
              associated with not only high education and socioeconomic status, but high
              performance as well.  The extended theory seeks to explain differences in
              performance among group members with similar educational, socioeconomic and
              cultural backgrounds.  Lacking such social theory allows the presumption that
              genetics determines the differences in performance among those of similar
              background (e.g., middle class African-American and European-American students
              who live in the same neighborhoods and attend the same schools).  Countering
              the genetic explanation, status processes that stratify groups may explain
              differences in performance among those of similar background.  High status may
              increase the rewards and decrease the costs of superior performance.  Thus
              individuals relegated to low status positions may perform poorly despite innate
              ability that is identical to high status individuals who perform better.  We
              propose to conduct a series of studies that will test this theory in a new
              experimental setting.  Computer programs will create  a group situation that
              models high status and low status group processes commonly found in school and
              work situations.  Subjects are the n assigned randomly to a high status or low
              status position.  These experiments will determine the effect of different
              group processes on individuals' scores on several standardized tests.  The
              randomized experimental design rules out the possibility that effects found
              could have genetic origins.  ***
