Title       : EPWG: Integrating Gender Equity Training and Teacher Retooling for the High
               School Computer Science Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9618865

Award Number: 9618865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $773769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan L. Fisher alf@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9618865  Fisher   In 1999, the Educational Testing Service will change the
              programming language used in its computer science advanced placement test, from
              Pascal to C++.  This presents a singular opportunity:  most of the
              approximately 1,500 teachers of advanced placement computer science (APCS)
              courses will need to seek training in C++ as well as in appropriate pedagogy
              for the new language and its object-oriented style of programming.  This
              project seeks to develop a summer program that combines this retooling with
              training in gender equity issues and practices that will enable teachers to
              recruit and retain female students in computer science.  It also provides them
              with the tools needed to disseminate this knowledge to their colleagues.  APCS
              courses represent a particularly salient opportunity to increase women's
              participation in computer science since girls tend to be well represented in
              early computing courses, but continue to advanced courses in far smaller
              numbers than boys.  By integrating gender equity activities with needed
              training offered by an internationally prominent computer science department
              with close ties to the Advanced Placement program, we expect to attract a
              substantial fraction (nearly 20 percent) of APCS teachers, who are key players
              in high school computing education nationwide.  By presenting gender equity
              practices in the specific context of the computer science classroom, we expect
              to make their transition to practice by program participants especially
              effective, as well as to attract male teachers in equal proportion with female
              teachers, a goal that is seldom achieved in training programs focused solely on
              gender issues.   A substantial and permanent increase in the number of high
              school girls who elect and pass the Advanced Placement Computer Science course
              at their schools is expected.  Since this course and its instructors tend to
              hold positions of prestige at their schools, we also expect a substantial
              secondary impact whereby the climate and pedagogy of all  computing courses in
              participant districts' high schools are improved.
