Title       : Patterns and Sources of Variability in Biological Weighting Functions for UVR
               Inhibition of Primary Production in California Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a9618390

Award Number: 9618390
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Prezelin barbara@icess.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Significant changes in UVR climatology have occurred all latitudes, except the
              tropics, during the last 20 years with potentially significant consequences for
              coastal oceanography. There is a pressing need to understand and be able to
              forecast UVR effects on coastal primary production; in part because of the
              central role carbon fixation plays in ecosystem dynamics, in part because of
              the various but untested scenarios suggesting changes in production patterns in
              response to changing UVR climatology, and in part out of concern for the
              potential impact these scenarios might have on coastal societies. With prior
              NSF funding, we have documented that inhibition of marine primary production by
              solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) is widespread in phytoplankton, macroalgae,
              epilithic microalgae and ice algae in the Southern Ocean. To advance the
              spectral modeling of solar UVR effects on primary production, we measured the
              first of several action spectra or biological weighting functions (BWFs)
              quantify the spectral sensitivity of primary production to UVR inhibition under
              natural field conditions. We documented, for the first time, the significant
              variability in these spectral algorithms and identified but have not tested
              potential experimental, analytical and natural sources of that variability.
              Such knowledge is required if the predictive linkages between optical models of
              UVR and UVR effects on primary production are to be known. Lack of
              consideration of UVR effects undermines the predictive accuracy of primary
              production models and overlooks the regulatory roles that UVR plays in
              modifying cell processes that define the photoecology of phytoplankton.  It is
              likely that the nature of the UVR challenges may differ in different ecosystems
              and the interactive effects on food webs may be balanced differently. A
              feasibility study of surface phytoplankton communities in the Santa Barbara
              Channel during 1995 indicate a potential for significant, but highly variable,
              UVR effects on surface primary production rates. Based on those findings and
              using proven techniques, we will  define the patterns and sources of
              variability in BWFs for UVR inhibition of primary production in highly diverse
              California coastal waters and, thereby, advance spectral modeling of UVR
              dependent primary production. The results of this research project will also
              help identify the mechanisms by which UVA and UVB regulate the polychromatic
              biology of phytoplankton and provide insights regarding potential consequences
              of changing global UVB climatology on phytoplankton ecology.                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
