Title       : Individual and Firm Heterogeneity in Labor Markets: Studies of Matched
               Employee-Employer Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9618111

Award Number: 9618111
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243361             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Abowd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator has developed statistical methods and data sources that permit
              investigation of the relative importance of individual and firm heterogeneity
              in observed labor market outcomes.  These methods do not assume, as virtually
              all previous research has, that the person effects and the firm effects are
              uncorrelated.  Using data from France in research supported collaboratively by
              NSF and the French National Statistical Institute, the investigator has shown
              that person effects are much more important in determining wage outcomes than
              are firm effects, but that these two effects are reasonably correlated.  The
              investigator has assembled American data from four sources that can now be used
              to estimate versions of the person-effect/firm-effect models applied to French
              data.  Because of the nature of the American data, the models must be somewhat
              modified but the essential character of the analysis-the possibility of
              correlation between separately identifiable person and firm effects-is
              preserved.   The investigator has also been sponsored by the Bureau of Labor
              Statistics (BLS ) and by funding under a previous NSF grant to create an
              employer-link file for the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth  (NLSY) 1979
              Cohort.  This employer-link file contains the identification numbers required
              to link external information about the employer to the basic NLSY 1979 data for
              the years 1986-1994.  The investigator has  access to these data as a part of a
              confidentiality agreement with the BLS, and other users of the NLSY will be
              able to obtain the data from the Bureau's Longitudinal Data Programs.  The
              investigator will extend and modify his basic statistical models that permit
              him to analyze wage, employment and other labor market outcomes measured on the
              NLSY using the employer link file and the associated information on the
              employer.  The other data sources available to the investigator include matched
              employer-employee managerial data developed by the Center for Advanced Human
              Resource Studies at Cornell University.  These data include wage outcomes,
              contingent pay and a large number of performance measures on the firms.  Data
              files developed from matched Current Population Surveys that include limited
              employer information and from the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database
              used in the investigator's current research will also be available.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
