Title       : NSF/DARPA DDFRP: A Rapid Tooling Testbed for Injection Molding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1999     
File        : a9618039

Award Number: 9618039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1349320            (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Rosen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Starr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Kurfess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan S. Colton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,4730,9146,9159,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  The problem to be addressed in this research is how to quickly produce
              injection molded prototype parts in polymer, ceramic, or metal materials, given
              that design and fabrication activities may be performed by distributed
              participants.  A Rapid Tooling TestBed will be developed to utilize solid
              freeform fabrication technologies (e.g., Stereolithography and Selective Laser
              Sintering) in converting a part's design representation into molded parts.  In
              support of this idea, the key question to be investigated is: How early in the
              product realization process, and under what conditions, can design be separated
              safely from manufacture?  This question will be investigated from the
              manufacturing viewpoint by developing a distributed testbed for rapid tooling
              (injection molds) and experimenting with different product realization
              processes for injection molds and molded components.  Four main research
              thrusts define the project's activities: Development of a Fabrication Process
              Compiler to translate product design descriptions into fabrication process
              plans; SFF Characterization to encode process characteristics for use in the
              Compiler; Injection Molding to provide polymer and powder (ceramics and metals)
              molding rules and facilities; and Distributed Computing to provide the
              computational environment for distributed design and fabrication.      If
              successful, the testbed will enable the fabrication of nearly
              production-representative components in a variety of polymer, ceramic, and
              metal materials within three days of submitting a product model.  This
              represents over a fifty percent time reduction from typical industry practice,
              along with a significant increase in the parts' mechanical and material
              properties.  This goal will be achieved through a reconceptualization of
              typical design-manufacturing processes that makes use of distributed
              participants.  The distributed computing technologies to be developed will
              enable separation of design and fabrication activities by embodying tested
              product realization practices that ensure smooth transitions between these
              activities.  Additionally, smooth technology transfer and dissemination will be
              achieved due to close collaborations with industry partners and active
              participation in education programs.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
