Title       : Quinones, Radicals and Redox-Active Amino Acids, Gordon Research Conference to
               be held on May 4th-9th at II Ciocco, Pisa, Italy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9618564

Award Number: 9618564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: P. C. Huang                             
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne Stubbe   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter F. Knowles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9618564   Stubbe  A Gordon Research Conference on "Quinones, Radicals and
              Redox-Active Amino Acids", will be held May 4th to 9th at Il Ciocco, Italy,
              under the auspices of this support.  This will be the fourth  international 
              conference on the subject and will emphasize recent advances in the study of
              radical and quinone derivatives generated during post-translational
              modification of amino acid residues by several classes of enzymes such as
              oxidases, dehydrogenases, reductases, oxygenases, pyroxidases and those
              involved in molecular rearrangements like pyruvate formate lyase and lysine
              2,3-aminomutase.  These radicals and quinones act as highly reactive cofactors
              for effecting difficult catalysis such as C-H bond cleavages.  The controlled
              use of radicals in such enzymes contrasts with the uncontrolled production of
              radicals which damage biological material.  The support is to be used to
              partially cover travel expenses of scientists attending the meeting, with due
              priority given to young  scientists and under-represented groups.  *** 
              Uncontrolled radicals produced in a cell elicit damage, but controlled use of
              radicals by certain enzymes can produce useful molecules.  Quinones and
              radicals produced by several classes of enzymes can act as cofactors in
              effective cleavage of chemical bonds that are otherwise  difficult to break. 
              Studies on these enzymes have attracted attention of  increasing  number of
              scientists, and a fourth international  conference on this subject will be held
              May 4th to 9th at Il Ciocco, Pisa, Italy.  The conference will organized by
              Professor Joanne Stubbe, M. I.T.; fifteen speakers from USA will join  a forum
              of others from England, Italy, Japan, Netherland, Sweden, and elsewhere.  Young
              scientists and under-represented groups will be subsidized by this support to
              participate in this conference, along  with scientists from USA and abroad.
