Title       : Transition Metal Metallacycles: Synthesis via Remote Intramolecular C-H Bond
               Activation and Utility in Main-GroupHeterocyclic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9618161

Award Number: 9618161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Tyler dtyler@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. David R. Tyler, Department of Chemistry, University of Oregon is   supported
              by the Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division for the
              development of metallacycles for the synthesis main   group heterocycles by
              remote intramolecular C-H bond activation. A series   of early transition metal
              vinyl complexes that present one or more sites   for intramolecular C-H
              activation and that always include at least one   site that is accessible for
              gamma-activation will be prepared. The chemo-   and regio- selectivity of the
              C-H  activation reactions by these   complexes will be determined. Through
              systematic variation in the   placement and nature of the substituents on the
              vinyl group and the   nature of the transition metal, an understanding of the
              steric and   electronic factors favoring remote activation will be developed.
              The   resulting information will be used to assist in the rational preparation 
               of metallacyclic complexes, particularly metallacyclobutenes bearing   
              substituent patterns unavailable through the use of existing synthetic  
              procedures. There metallacyclic complexes will be exploited, with primary  
              focus on the development of catalytic uses of the complexes in the   formation
              of heterocyclic compounds.   Transition metals are often used to effect the
              preparation of important   organic chemicals. This project aims at developing
              new methods to prepare   a variety of heretofore difficult to obtain species.
              These `heterocyclic`   compounds have great laboratory, industrial, and
              biological significance.   In addition, this project will explore the
              activation of carbon-hydrogen   bonds that are remote from a transition metal.
              This phase of the   investigation will provide fundamental information on how
              organic   compounds can be activated by transition metals.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
