Title       : Hybrid Magnetic Field Gradient Enhanced Colloidal Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9618635

Award Number: 9618635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Chapman                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arijit Bose bosea@egr.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                        Proposal No:                    CTS-9618635  Proposal Type:           
                   SGER  Principal Investigator:     Arijit Bose  Affiliation:               
                     University of Rhode Island       The investigator proposes to use
              magnetic fields to move functionalized magnetic particles through a novel
              affinity based separator.  The objective of the work is to allow these
              functionalized magnetic particles to contact target molecules (or cells)
              without the significant sustained.  The novelty of the research is the reactor
              design involving tunable magnetic fields allowing magnetic gradients in the
              radial and /or axial directions.     The use of functionalized
              magnetic/superparamagnetic particles to remove specific molecules/cells etc. is
              of vital importance.  For example, if cancerous cells can be removed from bone
              marrow, the patient's own bone marrow can be re-implanted (after chemotherpy)
              thereby eliminating the need for a transplant.  There are several small startup
              companies that have succeeded in making functionalized magnetic particles and
              the PI will use the particles from one of them (Bioquest).   But simply using
              mechanical agitation to contact cells with the functionalized particles leads
              to shear induced cell death.  Hence the problem the PI is attacking is an ideal
              case of applying chemical engineering fundamentals of diffusion and convective
              transport to a novel problem in separator design.   The novelty is the problem
              and the separator design .  If successful, this scheme could revolutionize the
              field of cell separations, by allowing greater throughput by using a continuous
              system, and  additionally sustaining cell viability.  This is truly a high
              payoff project.  What is also exciting is that the seperator prototype can be
              built with the minimal investment of the SGER.
