Title       : Determining the Reliability of Using Cosmogenic Nuclides to Date Arctic Beach
               Sediment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9618844

Award Number: 9618844
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88318              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Gosse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    This project is a one year pilot study of determine the reliability of
              using cosmogenic 10Be, 26Al, and other nuclides to date beach sediment.  The
              test site, Prescott Island, on eastern Prince of Wales Island, NWT, has
              sufficient datable rocks of different lithologies and clast sizes; persisted
              above 60o N geomagnetic latitude since emergence (the latitude at which the
              production rate for the nuclides has been approximately constant); and already
              has a well-defined emergence curve based on 46 driftwood radiocarbon dates.   
              Forty large samples representing beaches from <11 kyr to the modern shoreline
              were collected during a two week field season in 1995.  Support is requested
              for the physical and chemical preparation and analyses of these samples for
              10Be, 26Al, 36Cl, and 14C.    Raised shorelines, especially those with wide
              backshore zones that span a long time range and have numerous beach ridges, are
              used to construct relative sea level curves for coastal regions that have
              undergone tectonic uplift or isostatic compensation for deglacial unloading. 
              Shoreline emergence curves provide information on the style and rate of uplift,
              are useful for detecting local and regional tectonic anomalies, can help
              delimit the boundaries of crustal blocks and determine if they have tilted
              during the emergence period, provide constraints on paleo-ice mass and
              thickness, have been used to help infer deep mantle rheology parameters, and
              are useful in verifying existing isostatic adjustment models. Tight and
              reliable chronologies are required on suites of beaches to establish accurate
              emergence curves.  Where datable organic material is not available for
              radiocarbon dating, cosmogenic nuclide dating may provide a reliable
              alternative.    It is uncertain how reliable the cosmogenic nuclide methods can
              date individual beach ridges or define a relative sea level curve.  Total
              uncertainties for cosmogenic nuclide ages on single beach levels must be at
              least 6 or 7% to be useful.  Although this has been achiev ed on moraines,
              there are a number of different environmental factors which must be considered
              when dating beaches.  A test of the utility of terrestrial cosmogenic nuclides
              to date beaches has never been formally conducted.
