Title       : An In-Situ Study of Carbonate Mineral Solubility in the Upper Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1997   
File        : a9618327

Award Number: 9618327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan-Hui Li yli@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred T. Mackenzie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9618327  Li       For global climate models to accurately predict future 
              climate a detailed knowledge of carbon cycling through  through the oceans must
              be achieved.  This study will  investigate the causes for the elevated
              supersaturation of  the surface oceans with respect to carbonate minerals and 
              carbonate dissolution at shallow to mid-depths as a sink for  anthropogenic
              CO2.       The composition of a film which forms on calcite  samples in the
              surface oceans will be investigated.  This  film is believed to be responsible
              for the supersaturated  state of the surface ocean, however, its composition is
               still a matter of controversy.  In laboratory experiments,  carbonate surfaces
              will be scanned while submerged in  synthetic and natural seawater solutions of
              varying  composition, via atomic force microscopy (AFM), the  formation of
              films can be observed in quasi-real time.  The  acquired surface morphology of
              these samples can then be  compared to the acquired surface morphologies of
              samples  deployed in the upper ocean.  In order to determine acquired  surface
              composition, samples generated at sea and in the  laboratory will be subjected
              to X-ray Florescence  Spectroscopy (XFS) and include low grazing angles.      
              In the early stage of this project, abiotic aragonite,  Mg-calcite and calcite
              samples will be deployed in a depth  profile at station ALOHA in conjunction
              with the JGOFS  Hawaii Ocean Time-series project.  Also, natural assemblages 
              of coccolith tests, foram shells and pteropod shells will be  deployed in a
              depth profile at station ALOHA in conjunction  with the JGOFS Bermuda
              Biological Research station in the  North Atlantic.  Relevant parameters of the
              CO2  system are  measured as part of HOT and BAT with a great deal of 
              precision and accuracy.  This data will allow for the  evaluation of
              experimental measurements along side  thermodynamic predictions. Future
              projects will then take on  a global prospective with the aid of other JGOFS
              research  groups around the world.  A fter obtaining measurements in  all of
              the oceans an assessment of shallow carbonate  dissolution as a sink for
              atmospheric CO2 can be attempted.  ***
