Title       : STIMULATE: A Hierarchical Framework for Speech Recognition and Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9618731

Award Number: 9618731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $710543             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Glass glass@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Victor W. Zue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Seneff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The  majority of current computer speech recognition systems  model the speech
              signal with homogeneous observation frames,  represent words by a string of
              phonemes, and rely heavily on  statistical  word-based  language  models  to  
              decode   the  underlying  word sequence.  This project aims to investigate  an 
              alternative approach that incorporates many more  levels  of  linguistic
              information into a parsimonious  hierarchical  framework  for  speech
              recognition and understanding.   This  approach  will  provide  new
              perspectives  on  incorporating  constraints   from   the  distinctive  
              feature,   phonetic,  phonological,  syllabic, morphological, lexical, 
              syntactic,  and  semantic  levels  into  a probabilistic  framework  for 
              speech recognition and understanding.  Structure sharing  of  sub-word   levels
                across  words   will   allow   for   the  generalization   of  phonological 
              effects  across   similar  environments   and   increased   flexibility   for  
              dynamic  vocabularies and language models.  Structure sharing  should  also 
              produce a more efficient search with a smaller  number  of parameters.  The
              proposed hierarchical framework also has  the  potential of serving as a
              recognition kernel,  with the  speech  signal  as  input  and a set of 
              morpho-phonological  units  as  output. This kernel would have a finite
              inventory  of  units  for  a  given language, whose internals  will  be 
              vocabulary  and  task  independent.   To  ensure  that   the  proposed
              framework is language independent, its utility will  also be investigated for
              languages other than English.
