Title       : RUI: Observational Studies of Galactic and Extragalactic Supernova Remnants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a9618465

Award Number: 9618465
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177471             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Frank Winkler winkler@middlebury.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Middlebury College
	      Old Chapel Building
	      Middlebury, VT  05753    802/388-3711

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1215,9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Winkler    Supernovae are the cataclysmic events in which massive
              stars (more than  about 8 times the mass of our Sun) end their lives. They are
              the most  energetic localized events which now occur in the universe: a typical
               supernova explosion releases in a few seconds an energy of about 10 to  the
              44th Joules, comparable to what the Sun will expend throughout the  entire
              course of its 10 billion year lifetime.  Not surprisingly, such  a prodigious
              release of energy can have profound effects on the  dynamics of galaxies in
              which supernovae occur. The shock waves from  supernovae are believed to
              trigger episodes of star formation when they  encounter dense interstellar
              clouds. Furthermore, supernovae are  responsible for the production and
              distribution of most of the heavy  elements in the universe. Virtually all the
              elements from helium to  iron, on the periodic table, were created by
              nucleosynthesis in the  cores of massive stars, and these elements have been
              distributed around  the cosmos through the supernova explosions of the stars in
              which they  were originally formed.  By studying supernovae and the remnants
              they  leave behind, we can gain insight into the processes of  nucleosynthesis,
              the evolution of the universe's chemical composition,  and the effects of such
              prodigious energy release on the host galaxies  of supernovae.    Extragalactic
              samples of supernova remnants (SNRs) offer two  significant advantages over
              ones in our Galaxy: (I) the view toward  other galaxies is far less impeded by
              interstellar absorption than in  the Milky Way, where fewer than a third of all
              known remnants have been  detected at all by optical means, and (2) all the
              remnants in another  galaxy are at the same, known distance, making comparisons
              among them  much more meaningful and reliable.  Supernovae searches to be
              conducted  in the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds, nearest neighbors to our 
              Milky Way, and in M31, the largest galaxy in the Local Group, should  increase
              the samples of SNRs in t hese galaxies several-fold.  Wide-field digital
              imaging through the use of CCD cameras on small  Schmidt telescopes at Kitt
              Peak and Cerro Tololo observatories will be  used.  A technique which has
              already led to the identification of over  100 SNR candidates.  These
              supernovae candidates will be further  studied through spectroscopy and
              high-resolution imaging to confirm  whether they are, in fact, SNRs and then
              their properties will be  observed.  The expanded extragalactic SNR samples
              will be used to study  the local environments of supernovae, to probe elemental
              abundances and  abundance gradients in galaxies, to measure the energy of
              supernova  events, and to study the effects of supernovae on galactic
              structure.    Detailed attention will be focused on the handful of young SNRs
              where  uncontaminated ejecta from the supernova can be identified. In older 
              remnants, which are much more numerous, shocks driven through the  interstellar
              medium can probe the density, structure, and abundances of  the interstellar
              gas. Wide-field imaging techniques will be used to  study individual SNRs in
              our Galaxy in unprecedented detail. The  proposed optical investigations will
              be combined with new radio and  X-ray data to study the interstellar
              environments of supernovae and the  fundamental physics of shocks. These
              detailed studies of a few selected  objects will complement the broader
              extragalactic surveys.    Significant collaboration with undergraduate students
              is integral to  carrying out the research.
