Title       : Archaeological Investigation of Craft Production in Early Medieval Morocco
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9618369

Award Number: 9618369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131342             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Benco   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Nancy Benco will conduct
              archaeological excavation at the Moroccan site of al-Basra and also undertake a
              survey of the surrounding regions. Historical records indicate that al-Basra
              was established around 800 AD, possibly on the site of a Late Roman-Berber
              settlement. Built as part of the Islamic empire established by the Idrisid
              dynasty, it reached city size,  was destroyed ca 979 AD, was rebuilt in the
              late tenth century to serve as a commercial center and it maintained that role
              until about the twelfth century. Brief descriptions by Arab geographers
              indicate that the city produced large quantities of flax (and possibly linen
              cloth) which was transported across the Mediterranean.  Based on many seasons
              of fieldwork by Benco and others, extensive information on the spatial
              organization of al-Basra is available. In this current two-year research
              project Dr. Benco will focus on the production, distribution and consumption of
              crafted goods. Abundant historical and ethnographic information will be
              integrated with archaeological data. She will focus on open-area horizontal
              excavations in three functionally distinct parts of the city: an artisans' zone
              with known ceramic and metallurgical production facilities; a residential zone
              with early Islamic houses and interior courtyards; and an administrative area
              with elite residential structures and a possible mine. Topographic mapping and
              magnetometer survey work will be completed in the first season. A regional
              survey, which builds on a preliminary reconnaissance conducted in 1994 will
              entail a systematic investigation for sites. Test excavations will be conducted
              in a small number of these.  Archaeologists realize that control of craft
              production in early states served political as well as economic functions and
              worked to enhance elite power. However such great emphasis has been placed on
              this, it is often forgotten that much manufacturing took place in domestic
              contexts and cannot be understood from such a limited perspective. Dr. Benco
              will examine production and distribution to determine its broadest societal
              role. The site of al-Basra and its hinterland is well suited to this goal. The
              city served as an important administrative-commercial-manufacturing center
              where ceramic goods, metal objects and flax were produced. The archaeologically
              accessible 30 hectare site contains well-preserved architecture and abundant
              artifacts in two to three meters of well stratified deposits. This research is
              also important because North African Islamic sites are rarely examined from an
              anthropological perspective. Through her extensive interaction with Moroccan
              students and archaeologists Dr. Benco will help to introduce a powerful set of
              techniques and approaches.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                     
