Title       : Reputation and Perspective in Bargaining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9618620

Award Number: 9618620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379914             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Pearce   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dilip J. Abreu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract   Bargaining between two parties (a union and a firm, a buyer
              and a seller, or two governments, for example) is one of the most common
              economic occurrences, but economists are far from having a definitive
              understanding of how it works.  This project involves two innovations in the
              way bargaining can be studied.  The first is a model of bargaining that is more
              flexible than those analyzed in the past: it allows for a bargainer to engage
              in subtle `reputation-building` behavior, trying to convince her opponent that
              she is unlikely to make a concession in the near future.  Technically, the
              `endogenous perturbations` that are introduced result in substantial
              predictions that have a plausible flavor: Bargaining typically involves long
              periods of inactivity, followed by concessions of noticeable size that are
              often greeted by a degree of reciprocal compromise.   The second innovation
              recognizes that one difficulty in reaching agreement is that bargainers may
              genuinely differ in their perspectives on what a natural or fair agreement
              would be.  While the first party understands this, she has no way of knowing
              what the second party's actual perspective is.  This unfortunately gives the
              second party an incentive to convey the impression (through words and actions)
              of having a relatively severe, or self-serving, perspective.  The losses
              sustained by the bargainers in reaching an agreement sometimes lead them to
              cling to an agreement even when it is no longer very suitable (external
              circumstances having changed), for fear of the consequences of rocking the
              boat.  This could form the basis of a theory of inertia in dynamic models. 
              `Sticky prices` are of major importance for the central questions of
              macroeconomics; price inertia in oligopolistic markets is a leading application
              of the `perspective in bargaining` model to be studied.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
