Title       : The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference on Horizontal Gene Transfer Sept. 12-15, 1996,
               South Lake Tahoe, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9618669

Award Number: 9618669
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Syvanen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence I. Kado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Syvanen  9618669  The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference, initiated in 1985, is a
              bienneally held international meeting devoted to the molecular biology and
              genetics of microorganisms found in the environment.  Past meetings have
              emphasized bacteria that grow on plants and in the soil.  The 1996 conference
              will expand upon topics that have been previously covered to  multidisciplinary
              area of horizontal gene transfer.  The conference will therefore include  and
              area of high priority in the assessment of risk in the release of genetically
              engineered microoganisms as well as explore a subject with profound theoretical
              implications.  The Fallen Leaf Lake Conferences offer the special opportunity
              for participants to interact with experts in a variety of fields that touch
              upon horizontal gene transfer.  Only the latest unpublished information is
              exchanged and ample opportunity is provided during the course of the conference
              for informal exchanges between participants.  These conferences have an
              international complexion (for example, the typical conference has participants
              from Europe, Asis, Australia, South America, and the Middle East) and therefore
              the conference provides excellent opportunities for graduate students and
              postdoctoral to interact with internationally recognized experts.  The
              conference will bring together a variety of people who have thought about
              horizontal gene transfer problems but from different perspectives.  A
              multidisciplinary meeting will be needed to cover these different perspectives
              -- agricultural, medical and environmental microbiology, comparative
              systematics, virology, molecular evolution and even some paleontology.  This
              will cover, for example, work in controlled field experiments that have
              measured movement of altered genes in genetically engineered organisms to
              native species, epidemiological surveys of during resistant genes in human
              pathogens and phylogenetic analyses of extant organisms that show the role of
              horizontal gene transfer in their history.  In addition, a n umber of
              evolutionist will be invited to discuss evolutionary patterns and trends, with
              special emphasis on some problems in systematics and phylogenetics of plants.
