Title       : Minneapolis and St. Paul Area Merging to Achieve Standards Project (MASP)2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a9618741

Award Number: 9618741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2252118            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Post POSTXOO1@UMN.EDU  (Principal Investigator former)
              Anne Bartel  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Arnie Cutler  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              B.Ross Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Edwin D. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ESI 9618741  Thomas Post     Minneapolis and St. Paul Area Merging to Achieve
              Standards Project  (MASP)2  Twenty-four Minneapolis/St. Paul metropolitan area
              K-12 school districts, acting in a comprehensive collaboration, will
              participate in this project.  By the year 2002, five hundred teachers,
              representing all or nearly all grade 7-12 mathematics teachers in these
              districts, will be teaching a standards based curriculum to very diverse
              populations of students.  This project will create a critical mass and an
              infrastructure for the development of a systemic implementation in all schools
              by all teachers in the Greater Minneapolis/St. Paul area and beyond.    This
              project operationally defines "implementing a Standards Based Curriculum" as
              teaching one (or more) of the new NSF middle or high school curriculum projects
              or newer curricula packages which have direct and verifiable linkages to the
              National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Curriculum & Evaluation Standards
              for School Mathematics, Professional Standards for Teaching Mathematics,
              Assessment Standards for School Mathematics and other supporting documents.   
              The project will provide for a variety of ongoing teacher support structures,
              and, for multiple time-frames within which teacher teams can implement
              Standards Based Curricula.  Those who will, from the beginning, fully implement
              such a curriculum, will attend a two-week intensive summer workshop on both
              content and pedagogy related to the new curricula followed by academic year
              staff development and mentoring  at Saturday or after school workshops.  A
              reduced level of mentoring during the second year will complete the set of
              sponsored professional development activities.  A parallel set of workshops
              will prepare other teachers to select and implement portions of a Standards
              Based Curricula and prepare to move to the full implementation stage in
              succeeding years of (MASP)2.  Each teacher will receive at least 130 hours of
              professional development activity.    The project will work w ith districts to
              assist in the  identification and selection of curriculum materials and to
              train and support mentors through cognitive coaching and leadership workshops. 
              These mentor/leaders will be the core of the ongoing implementation of
              curricula in partner school districts.    A major goal of this project is to
              develop and implement a replicable model for large scale selection and
              implementation of major curriculum reform.  The model is based on long-term,
              purposeful and planned professional development for each 7-12 participating
              mathematics teacher, and on the development of long-range, skilled leadership
              teams in every school.
