Title       : Microbial Food Webs in Marine Sediments: Spatial Motives Link Bacterivory and
               Biogeochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a9618135

Award Number: 9618135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Slava S. Epstein s.epstein@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***        9618135        Epstein        This project addresses trophic
              relations between sediment micrograzers    and bacteria of particular
              biogeochemical importance. It is suggested    that proto- and micrometazoan
              grazers balance production of sediment    chemo- and photolithotrophs and thus
              become important players in the    dynamics of reduced and oxidized forms of
              sulfur, nitrogen, and carbon,    and possibly Mn and Fe.  This idea is
              supported by the results of    previously work, pilot data, and literature
              information. All these data    suggest the following ideas.  1. Major sediment
              microbacterivores    (flagellates, ciliates, nematodes, and others) are
              concentrated in a    specific sediment layer, at and immediately below
              oxic/anoxic interface.    2.  It is exactly in this sediment layer that most
              sulfide, ammonium,    and methane oxidizing chemolithotrophs, as well as
              anaerobic    photosynthesizers, are known to concentrate.  3. In this
              particular    layer, which exhibits increased grazing pressure over bacteria,  
               micrograzers appear to remove daily up to 50% of bacterial standing    stock. 
              Based on the above evidence, the following hypothesis is    advanced.   Proto-
              and micrometazoan grazing controls bacterial dynamics    in a specific sediment
              layer at and immediately below the oxic/anoxic    interface.        The
              hypothesis will be tested by comparing the rates of bacterivory by    sediment
              flagellates, ciliates, nematodes, and other micrograzers, with    bacterial
              standing stock and bacterial production in the identified    sediment layer.
              This will be done by a combination of classical, modern,    and novel
              approaches. Seasonality will be examined by conducting the    experiments in
              two different seasons, which were previously shown to    contrast with each
              other in the microbial food web structure. At each    seasonal time point,
              experiments will account for daily dynamics in    grazing activity and vertical
              migrations of prospective bacterivores.    Many key techniques to b e used here
              have been substantially improved,    and supporting evidence collected, under
              prior NSF support. The model    community (fine intertidal sands, Boston
              Harbor) has been under study    for several years and is uniquely suited for
              the planned research.  This    work is one of the first to introduce spatial
              motives into studies of    sediment microbial food webs. The target of this
              research are those    functional types of bacteria that are particularly
              important in sediment    biogeochemistry, nutrient recycling, and
              sediment-water exchange. The    significance of studying mechanisms governing
              these bacteria dynamics    goes therefore beyond its intrinsic value for
              detailing benthic    microbial food web structure, and is important in a much
              larger    ecological context.    ***
