Title       : Evaluating the Flux of Uranium Isotopes from River-Dominated Shelf Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1998     
File        : a9618533

Award Number: 9618533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent A. McKee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : LA Univs Marine Consortm
	      8124 Hwy 56
	      Chauvin, LA  70344    504/851-2800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9618533  MCKEE    ABSTRACT    A clear understanding of uranium geochemistry in
              marine environments is required to fully utilize U-Th. nuclides as
              radiochemical tools.  The uranium isotope signature of the ocean is greatly
              influenced by inputs from river-dominated shelf environments can have a
              dramatic impact on uranium concentrations in the ocean, and may have greatly
              influenced the uranium isotopic composition of the ocean during past
              glacial/interglacial cycles.  This is possible because:  (1) over 80% of the
              riverine uranium flux to ocean margins is in a particulate form which can
              potentially be transformed to a more soluble phase; (2) rivers discharge
              particulate uranium directly into shallow (<200 m) shelf environments where
              dynamic processes (deposition, diagenesis, mixing) can alter particulate
              materials before entering the ocean; and, (3) the possible influence of shelf
              environments on oceanic geochemistry varies greatly between glacial and
              interglacial periods (exposure and inundation); a point that has important
              implications for the maintenance of steady-state uranium isotope concentrations
              in the ocean during the past million years.      Project objectives are:  (1)
              To better quantify the net uranium flux associated with river-dominated shelf
              sediments; (2) To identify the processes controlling enrichment/depletion of
              interstitial uranium concentrations in river-dominated shelf sediments; (3) To
              define the active microorganisms present in river-dominated  shelf sediments
              and to gain some insight into the importance of biology vs. chemistry in the
              rapid Mn (IV) reduction and associated U enrichments observed in these
              environments and, (4( To identify the physical parameters that control net
              uranium fluxes from shelf sediments (e.g., particulate uranium carrier phases,
              rates of particulate deposition and burial, depth and frequency of sediment
              mixing).  To address objective one, riverine and shelf sediments from major
              river-dominated area (totaling -35% of world sediment discharge) will  be
              analyzed for uranium isotopes to ascertain the extent to which particulate U is
              transformed to a dissolved phase.  To address objectives two and three, a
              series of porewater and incubation studies are proposed using sediments from
              the Amazon and Mississippi Shelves.  To address the final objective, detailed
              interstitial chemistry (including U isotopes) will be examined at selected
              sites on each of the above shelves on time scales compatible to the
              characteristic patterns of riverine particulate supply and sediment mixing.
