Title       : MRI: The Political Economy of the Informal Sector in Latin America: A
               Comparative Study of Costa Rica, Mexico, and Nicaragua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9618123

Award Number: 9618123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin Aguilar eaguilar@polisci.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The informal sector of the economy is that which functions outside of the
              regulatory reach of the state, where similar activities are regulated.  For
              example, an individual who works as a self-employed jack of all trades, working
              solely for cash, and not reporting income or economic activities to the state
              would be classified as an informal sector worker.  By way of contrast, an
              individual who worked for a plumbing service that complied with state
              regulation, would be classified as a formal sector worker.  In this Minority
              Research Planning Grant the investigator undertakes a preliminary examination
              of the political attitudes and behavior of informal sector workers in Central
              America and Mexico, by focusing on three different countries in the region. 
              The countries are chosen in order to maximize differences in terms of regime
              type.  For purposes of this study, Costa Rica serves as a country with a
              stable, relatively long term democratic regime.  Nicaragua serves as a country
              that can be characterized as a newer, not yet fully consolidated democratic
              regime.  Finally, Mexico serves as a quasi-democratic regime,. which is slowly
              moving toward a more formal democratic system.  In the most general terms, it
              is hypothesized that political attitudes and behaviors differ significantly
              between informal sector workers in the three countries because of the different
              regime types.  As a result, the political goals and relevant strategies by
              which informal sector workers seek to influence their political world will vary
              from country to country.  Given the gap of knowledge that social scientists
              have regarding the political nature of informal sector workers in general, even
              a preliminary planning study serves  a valuable role for social scientists. 
              The investigator employs open-ended structured interviews in order to collect
              data and to pre-test survey instrument items to then be employed in a broader
              future study.  The research promises to fill a gap in the political science
              literature relating to the urban informal sector of Latin America.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
