Title       : Quantitative International Business Cycle Models with Friction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a9618304

Award Number: 9618304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Kehoe pkehoe@res.mpls.frb.fed.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The first generation of quantitative equilibrium models of international
              fluctuations document that the standard complete markets models with
              fluctuations driven solely by technology have a hard time accounting for many
              of the observed features of the data. This research consists of three projects
              which model specific fractions and assesses their ability to better account for
              the observations.   The first project introduces sticky prices and monopolists
              who price to market internationally. It is motivated by the early observations
              that nominal and real exchange rates are both highly volatile compared to
              domestic price indices and by the more recent work which documents large
              deviations from the law of one price for traded goods. The model blends
              together the real business cycle models in which all fluctuations are driven by
              real technology shocks with the sticky price literature in which fluctuations
              are driven primarily by monetary shocks.   The second project introduces a
              friction in international credit markets. The standard model has perfect
              international credit markets, and it generates cross country correlations of
              consumption that are much higher than in the data and cross correlations of
              output that are much lower than in the data together. This project introduces a
              friction in international credit markets and assess if it can quantitatively
              help to account for these anomalies.   The third project is motivated by the
              evidence that the movements in nominal exchange rates have been much larger
              than the movements in inflation, money growth, or interest rate differentials
              across countries. This project analyses the potential for a plausibly
              parameterized version of a model with segmented asset markets to produce these
              features of the data. The model is based on the idea that agents differ in the
              level of their participation in asset markets.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
