Title       : Synthetic, Mechanistic, and Catalytic f-Element Organometallic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9618589

Award Number: 9618589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $487000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tobin J. Marks t-marks@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Tobin J. Marks, Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, is  
              supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of   the
              Chemistry Division for a study of the organometallic chemistry of the  
              f-elements (actinides and lanthanides), and closely related early   transition
              metals. The goal of the project is to design, characterize,   and understand
              from a structural, mechanistic, and thermodynamic sense   novel stoichiometric
              and catalytic transformations involving f-element   organometallic molecules.
              The project consists of four closely   interconnected components:(1) Titration
              calorimetry will be utilized to   quantify the strengths of metal-ligand
              multiple bonds, of bonds involving   `zero-valent` f-element complexes, of
              bonds involving heavier groups   14-16 ligands, and to firmly `anchor` existing
              bond energy data   compilations on an absolute scale; (2)  The scope and
              mechanism of   organolanthanide/organoactinide-catalyzed reactions in which
              element-H   bonds are added to unsaturated carbon-carbon bonds will be
              determined,   with focus being concentrated on thermodynamic feasible
              hydroamination,   hydrophosphination, hydroboration, and hydrothiolation
              reactions; (3) The   properties of chiral lanthanide and actinide complexes
              having C1   symmetric ligation will be investigated with respect to structure, 
               stereochemical integrity, and efficacy in enantioselective catalytic  
              transformations of the types described in (2); and (4)  
              organolanthanide-catalyzed chain transfer reactions in which olefin  
              polymerization is coupled to element-H/metal-C transposition processes   will
              utilized to produce a series of heteroatom `end-capped` polyolefins,   and
              unusual polyolefins in which methylene units are directly appended to   polymer
              backbones.  Transformations involving organometallic compounds are of central  
              importance to numerous areas of U.S. industrial chemistry, including  
              catalytic processes for the production of fuels, polymeric materials,  
              pharmaceuticals, and other economically important chemicals. Developments   in
              this area are crucial to the development of ever more efficient,   selective,
              environmentally benign, and economically competitive process   technologies.
              This project focuses on the lanthanides and actinides. The   organometallic
              chemistry of these elements has until recently been   relatively unexplored,
              and there is growing interest in their application   in polymerization
              catalysis and organic synthesis. The goal of this   project is to effect,
              characterize, and understand unusual and   potentially useful transformations
              involving f-element organometallic   molecules.                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
