Title       : Schoolyard Ornithology Resource Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a9618945

Award Number: 9618945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Clark                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1235579            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Bonney reb5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judy Vesel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    9618945  Bonney    The Schoolyard Ornithology Resource Project (SORP), a
              collaboration  between the Cornell Lab of Ornithology (Lab), TERC, the Cornell
              University Department of Education, and the National Audubon Society, will
              design, field test, evaluate, and disseminate a resource package to help
              teachers implement national bird research projects in their classrooms.  Based
              on the National Science Standards, SORP will offer teachers ongoing
              opportunities to improve their science content knowledge and processes skills,
              as well as, their ability to bring scientific inquiry to their classroom.  SORP
              will also empower teachers to undertake other projects that rely on the
              collection and analysis of real data. Finally, through collaboration with the
              National Audubon Society, SORP will provide a mechanism for teachers to receive
              classroom-based mentorship from community members knowledgeable in ornithology,
              natural history, and Internet-based technology, and specially trained to work
              with elementary and middle school teachers.    SORP builds on several earlier
              NSF-supported projects:  Project FeederWatch; Project PigeonWatch; the Cornell
              Nest Box Network; and the new Classroom FeederWatch; in which thousands of
              participants, many of them students, send carefully gathered data to the Lab
              for analysis and publication.      SORP products will include:     * A Resource
              Manual with sample workshops that focus on improving teachers' content
              knowledge in 1) ornithology-bird identification; bird anatomy, physiology, and
              behavior; the complementary nature of structure and function; bird systems; the
              importance of birds and their role in environmental interactions; bird
              diversity and adaptation; and 2) science process skills-questioning; designing
              and conducting an investigation; collecting, recording, and analyzing data;
              communicating findings and explanations; asking new questions.     * Teacher
              assessments that use classroom outcomes to measure progress.     * A SORP Home
              Page and Practice Area that w ill include opportunities for exploring data
              entry and retrieval, e-mail communication, and data analysis both during and
              after workshops. It will also include resources, both original and hot-linked,
              on both science content and pedagogy, to help teachers extend their knowledge
              and skills.    Workshops will be held at the Lab and at training centers across
              the country, including National Audubon Society Centers, for teachers wishing
              to implement bird studies and other inquiry-based explorations into their
              classrooms.  Netcourses will be offered to help those teachers who are more
              isolated and want to include the use of scientific data gathering in their
              instruction.
