Title       : Putting Ethics at the Heart of Environmental Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9618851

Award Number: 9618851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Gorman meg3c@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Scherer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia H. Werhane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Ethics cases are of growing use in engineering courses.  Few include design and
              environmental issues.  Yet, all designs have ethical implications, and
              increasing concern for the environment will be one of the great challenges for
              future engineers.  This project will create and evaluate a collection of cases
              that focuses on ethical considerations in the early stages of the invention and
              design process, cases that encourage students to think imaginatively about
              design in light of environmental concerns.  Using the cases in engineering
              education may help to produce engineers better able to make ethical decisions
              about creating and marketing new technologies.  Two sets of cases are planned
              in order to illustrate (1) the need for moral imagination, and (2) the
              challenge of trying to meet standards calling for the elimination of
              environmental risk.  The first set considers companies who make sound design
              decisions but find themselves in trouble because they remained unaware of the
              ways in which other people frame their experience.  The second set will
              challenge students to design products that are both environmentally sustainable
              and viable, or avoid social and political risks inherent in any product design.
              The cases and teaching notes will be tested in the classroom.  Results should
              appeal to a variety of disciplines including engineering, technology,
              environmental studies and ethics.  They will be published in the Case
              Bibliography of the Darden Business School and appear on the World Wide Web and
              in articles and an eventual textbook.  The project also allows two graudate
              students to pursue a special course concentration combining systems engineering
              and ethics as they do research and help to write and evaluate the cases.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
