Title       : Science that Counts in the Workplace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9618149

Award Number: 9618149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1849248            (Estimated)
Investigator: June C. Foster June_Foster@TERC.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret H. Vickers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9618149  Vickers    Science that Counts in The Workplace is a physical science
              course embedded in workplace contexts that addresses the learning goals of the
              science standards and the goals of the school-to-career movement. The modular
              materials, emphasizing Industrial and Engineering Technologies, are
              particularly appropriate for career academies and high schools organized by
              career clusters.  The target audience is eleventh and twelfth grade students
              who have not tended to take a third year of science because they do not thrive
              on abstract science teaching.  The six modules can be used as a course or as
              drop-in units.  The contexts are taken from the design, manufacturing and
              maintenance of buildings, transportation systems and consumer goods.  The
              emphasis is on teaching science in the context of work rather than on
              delivering occupationally-specific  training.  Each group of lessons within a
              module begins with a workplace issue and maps backwards to develop an
              understanding of the underlying science and mathematics.  All students
              participate in common workplace experiences that take the form of field trips
              to job sites that give students experiences exploring and/or applying the
              science concepts and skills learned in the classroom.  The materials provide a
              hands-on, inquiry-rich pedagogy, providing a meaningful context for science
              learning that helps students understand that science learning is key to a
              variety of careers.  The materials support employees in industry to contribute
              more confidently and effectively to the education of students, serve as a model
              for developing academic curriculum embedded in workplace contexts and support
              high school reorganization.
