Title       : Effective Collaborative Learning in Large Classrooms via Reconfigurable Virtual
               Dooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1996 
File        : a9618688

Award Number: 9618688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meera M. Blattner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The limited possibilities currently available for interaction with off-site
              students lead many faculty to view distance education as a complex and
              difficult barrier to overcome, and the off-site students often feel like
              academic second class citizens in the process. The steady advance of computer
              equipment into the traditional, physical classroom has likewise not yet lived
              up to its potential, because inadequate support is provided for the wide
              variety of interaction styles typically employed in the classroom by
              experienced and successful teachers. Our purpose in this proposal is to pursue
              our vision of education tomorrow centering around the virtual classroom, a
              hybrid physical and electronic space in which students and instructor(s) come
              together to learn. Some are in the same room, but many others are
              geographically remote. Class size is likely to be large, but students will
              still find this a friendly and comfortable place where they are part of small
              and cohesive learning teams rather than mere specks lost in an impersonal and
              frightening sea of unrecognized faces. We will accomplish this by developing a
              Design Conference Learning Environment (DCLE) that supports numerous
              interaction styles, in particular that in which the class is split into
              multiple problem-solving groups. The DCLE will allow us to investigate
              situations such as when a pair of courses are electronically tied together (in
              this case UC-Davis, and our collaborators at RPI) so that students in, say, a
              graduate course on distance learning can make use of and, in turn, influence
              work being done by students in an introductory programming course. Experiments
              in teaching actual courses at both the undergraduate and graduate level using
              the DCLE will enable us to derive conclusions regarding the optimal
              organization of tomorrow's learning environments. Team members expertise in
              bilingual education, in making systems accessible to students with a variety of
              disabilities (e.g., vision impairments), and in rigorously and formally evalu
              ating the efficacy of an environment, will ensure the broad and comprehensive
              applicability of the DCLE, whose software and tools will be distributed freely
              to institutions for use in their educational settings as a tangible benefit of
              the research.      It is important to note this project is a companion to
              another that is currently being funded by another division, under grant
              CDA-9634485.  This grant has been awarded to our companion team at RPI.
