Title       : The Math Forum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9618223

Award Number: 9618223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2922166            (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Klotz klotz@forum.swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen A. Weimar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              -      9618223  Klotz    The Intemet offers great opportunities for improving
              mathematics education. It addresses the need for education that will be
              responsive to individual needs and make accessible a wide range of resources
              and supporting relationships. Teachers seek access to a wealth of strategies,
              activities, and interesting mathematics, together with a community of peers,
              mentors and professionals. We expect students to find support for mastering
              fundamental mathematics and pursuing rich investigations through a network that
              reaches well beyond their local resources and experience.  In order to
              cultivate such opportunities the Math Forum will implement a full-scale version
              of our virtual center for mathematics education. Over the next three years we
              will concentrate our efforts on the application, scaling, and dissemination of
              what we're learning about the use of Internet communications to integrate three
              key activities: 1) community-building across the many groups involved in math
              education, 2) user construction, assessment, and organization of materials and
              projects, and 3) online educational mentoring and facilitation. The results of
              t,his project can serve as a template for other fields.  The strength of the
              Math Forum is its focus on using Internet tools to create an active community
              and a deep, well-organized resource center. Substantive materials are generated
              from the interactions of students, teachers, mathematicians, concerned parents,
              and teacher educators. The success of interactive projects such as Ask Dr. Math
              and the Geometry Problem of the Week has resulted in services that can be
              applied to other areas. Through our collaborations with teacher enhancement
              projects we have begun to develop processes for turning professional
              development experiences into online courses and training resources. Each week
              the Math Forum Web site is visited by thousands of teachers and students who
              want to integrate Internet math education materials into their teaching and
              study.  There are many  curriculum and teacher enhancement projects needing
              support for distributing their materials and innovations to teachers and
              students. These projects can benefit from our experience with Internet math
              education, our software tools, and our support in making the transition to the
              Internet. Through enhancements to the Forum Web site, users will benefit from
              the extensive contributions of materials and the new participants these
              projects will bring to the online community. Additionally, participants will
              have opportunities to shape and contribute to online programs.  We will focus
              our work on leveraging the activity of a carefully selected group of existing
              math education projects that wish to develop an Internet presence. In this way,
              we can work formally with a number of projects while maintaining the Forum's
              focus on technology transfer and consulting. Our partners have been carefully
              selected to represent the range of contexts necessary to explore the viability
              of the three above-named activities. They include curriculum and software
              publishers, summer mathematics programs, teacher assessment, systemic
              initiatives in networking and school reform, pre-service teacher education,
              interactive Internet services, teacher and student mentoring projects, and
              professional organizations covering all grade levels and encompassing many
              different socioeconomic and cultural communities.  Over the course of the three
              years we will build a consortium to assume management of the Forum upon
              completion of the grant. We have also incorporated mechanisms to shift
              responsibility for mature projects to existing institutions or self-sustaining,
              fee-based services. A careful and detailed evaluation process has been designed
              in keeping with the scale of this project. We will have a direct effect on
              thousands of educators and support millions of dollars in activity each year.
              The evaluation will provide information used to optimize the impact of this
              effort and to document transitions in user and institutional partner pa
              rticipation. We will learn much about tile viability of a virtual center as an
              agent of reform and a facilitator of community.  ***
