Title       : City Technology Curriculum Guides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a9618767

Award Number: 9618767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1209756            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Benenson benenson@me-mail.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Neujahr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9618767  Benenson    Technology is broadly defined to include the entire array
              of artifacts, systems and processes which constitute the designed - as opposed
              to the natural - world. Examples in the lives of students include the toys,
              appliances, utensils, furniture, clothing, timepieces and fastening devices of
              everyday life, the arrangements of furniture, the organization of the school
              day, and methods of facilitating smooth flow of traffic within the school.   
              City Technology Curriculum Guides provide ideas for helping children to analyze
              existing technologies and to develop, build, and test their own designs. Topics
              include Structures, Mapping, Mechanisms, Environmental Analysis and Design,
              Coding Information, Fixing and Fastening, Electrical Appliances and Toys, and
              Measuring Time. A parallel Workshop Leader's Guide is intended for teacher
              educators responsible for professional development workshops.    The
              development of the Guides is a collaborative effort of engineering and
              education faculty at CUNY City College and elementary and middle school
              teachers in New York. Summer workshops introduce the existing materials and the
              new topics to a group of experienced teachers. Each of the first two academic
              years, they will pilot test four Guides in their classrooms. During the third
              year of the project,  the new Guides will be field tested in two sites in the
              New York City area, two sites in the Northeast, and two sites in other
              locations across the nation. Upon completion of field testing and editing, the
              Guides will be available commercially.
