Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Percolative Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9618128

Award Number: 9618128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61855              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Zhang yzhang@math.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9618128  Zhang    The project concentrates on percolation theory, a 
              mathematical theory  used to   describe  transitions of physical systems.
              Percolation theory has a variety of applications to   solid physics, biology,
              computer science, and geology. A percolation process typically   depends on one
              or more parameters. A dramatic change in physical properties may occur   as a
              critical parameter value is passed. The research will focus on  the behavior of
                percolative models in the following three areas:  percolation near, above and
              below the   critical thresholds. In particular, the project will investigate
              mathematically rigorous exact   solutions for the percolative models. The
              research makes use of probability theory (the   moment estimations, the ergodic
              theory, correlation and martingale inequalities and   stochastic ordering),
              graph theory (duality, the fractal dimension), combinatorics (partition  
              lattices, distributive lattices), and function analysis (the real analyticity).
              The project will   use these mathematical tools to advance our rigorous
              understanding of critical   phenomena.   The project concentrates on
              percolation, a mathematical model used to describe   transitions of physical
              systems. Percolation theory has a variety of applications to solid   physics,
              biology, computer science, and geology. A percolation process typically depends
                on one or more parameters. A dramatic change in physical properties may occur
              as a   critical parameter value is passed. For example, suppose we immerse a
              large porous solid   in a bucket water. Clearly, how water penetrates the solid
              depends on the size of the pores    of the solid. A simple mathematical model
              of such a process is  defined by taking the pores   to be distributed in some
              regular manner, and to be open or closed with probabilities p or   1-p. There
              is a critical threshold, for the probability p at which the behavior changes  
              abruptly. For values of p below the critical value the water penetration is
              only superficial   and above  it the penetration is arbitrarily deep. The
              specific behavior near the critical   threshold is more complicated. One of the
              most challenging problems is to give a   mathematical description of deep
              penetration near the critical threshold. The research will   focus on three
              areas: the behaviors of percolation near the critical threshold, above the  
              critical threshold and below the critical threshold. In particular, the project
              will investigate   mathematically rigorous exact solutions for the percolation
              process. The research makes   use of probability theory, graph theory,
              combinatorics and function analysis. The project   will use these mathematical
              tools to advance our rigorous understanding of critical   phenomena.
