Title       : Redefining, Reforming, and Enriching Mathematics Instruction through Problem
               Solving, K-8
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9618957

Award Number: 9618957
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Monica B. Mitchell                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1997     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1144202            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan N. Friel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Claud E. McCary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Cullen  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Eliz Cty Pasquotank Cnty P
	      P O box 2247
	      Elizabeth City, NC  27909    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9618957  Friel    The Camden County, Edenton-Chowan, Elizabeth City-Pasquotank,
              Gates  County, and Hyde County public school systems in northeast North 
              Carolina collaborate with the University of North Carolina at  Chapel Hill,
              East Carolina University, and Elizabeth City State  University in a fifty-four
              month teacher enhancement project.  The  project targets all 378 K-8 teachers
              of mathematics in the  participating districts, each for 196 - 304 hours of
              professional  development in summer workshops and academic-year sessions,
              linked  with classroom implementation of exemplary instructional materials  in
              mathematics.  The effort is driven by student needs, national  standards, state
              standards and new requirements for graduation, and  North Carolina's new ABC's
              Program which places accountability for  student achievement at the building
              level, with incentives and  sanctions.    Submitted under the guidelines for
              Local Systemic Change through  Teacher Enhancement, Grades K-8, MIPS seeks to
              (1) implement  consistent and proven mathematics curricula that promote problem
               solving and inquiry in the teaching and learning of mathematics, K-  8; (2)
              implement instructional models that are student-centered and  focus on quality
              work; (3) promote and effect an articulated  mathematics curriculum that is
              well integrated with district  classroom instruction; and (4) develop
              sustainable interactions  among the collaborating districts, along with the
              necessary support  and teacher leaders to institutionalize the changes made in 
              mathematics instruction, K-8.    The districts will initially focus the
              elementary teacher  enhancement and curricular components on helping teachers
              learn and  teach statistics through the NSF-funded Teach-Stat.  Elementary 
              teachers then participate in further enhancement centered around  children's
              mathematical development, leadership, and implementation  of exemplary
              instructional materials, especially Investigations in  Number, Data, and Space
              and Everyday Mathematics.  Middle  grades  efforts center around implementation
              of the Connected Mathematics  Program.    Expected cost-sharing in the project,
              derived from the five  participating school districts, is approximately 127% of
              the NSF  request.
