Title       : A 'Scientific' Examination of the Admissibility of Scientific Expert Testimony
               Under Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9618580

Award Number: 9618580
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Penrod   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Penrod  9618580    On June 28, 1993 the Supreme Court ruled in the
              case of Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. creating a new standard
              for the admissibility of scientific evidence and displacing the traditional
              Frye test.  Since then, many legal commentators have debated the effects of the
              decision on trial court decisions concerning the admissibility of scientific
              testimony.  This research addresses empirically the admissibility question. 
              Specifically, the research will answer the following questions, among others: 
              Has Daubert generally lead to greater exclusion or admission of scientific
              evidence in general?  Are the courts applying Daubert to technical or
              specialized knowledge?  Is social science evidence more or less likely to be
              admitted under Daubert?  Is the review of scientific evidence more rigorous
              under Daubert?  Is the focus of scientific scrutiny methodology or results? Do
              the State courts apply Daubert differently from Federal courts? To study these
              issues, cases decided before and cases decided after Daubert are selected using
              a Westlaw search.  Data are coded on 58 variables assessing the criteria courts
              use to admit or not, expert evidence.  Changes before and after Daubert are
              compared.  The results of this research will inform legal scholars and social
              scientists as to the influence of this important Supreme Court decision on the
              use of science in the courtroom.    %%%    On June 28, 1993 the Supreme Court
              ruled in the case of Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc. creating a
              new standard for the admissibility of scientific evidence and displacing the
              traditional Frye test.  Since then, many legal commentators have debated the
              effects of the decision on trial court decisions concerning the admissibility
              of scientific testimony.  This research addresses empirically the admissibility
              question.  Specifically, the research will answer the following questions,
              among others:  Has Daubert generally lead to greater exclusion or admission of
              scientific evid ence in general?  Are the courts applying Daubert to technical
              or specialized knowledge?  Is social science evidence more or less likely to be
              admitted under Daubert?  Is the review of scientific evidence more rigorous
              under Daubert?  Is the focus of scientific scrutiny methodology or results? Do
              the State courts apply Daubert differently from Federal courts? To study these
              issues, cases are selected using a Westlaw search.  Data are coded on 58
              variables assessing the criteria courts use to admit or not, expert evidence. 
              The results of this research will inform legal scholars    ***
