Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Inference in Seismological Investigations of
               Subducted Lithosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1993  
File        : a9205103

Award Number: 9205103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Pulliam   (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip B. Stark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1574,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Inference in Seismological                       
              Investigations of Subducted Lithosphere                                        
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. R. Jay Pulliam of the University of California, Berkeley to             
              the University of Utrecht to work with Dr. Roel Snieder.  Their                
              proposed research is in two parts.  First, in the context of                   
              traditional "model-based"imaging techniques, they propose to                   
              incorporate the most accurate and extensive information that exists            
              in order to perform a joint 3-D nonlinear tomographic inversion for            
              the Tonga subduction zone.  They will use multiple P and S phases              
              to determine both P and S velocities beneath the Tonga subduction              
              zone in an effort to constrain the maximum depth to which velocity             
              anomolies associated with the subducted lithosphere extend into the            
              mantle.  The inversion algorithm and data coverage would be                    
              explored in conjunction with controlled inversions of synthetic data           
              produced with real ray coverage.                                               
                                                                                             
              However, "model-based" approaches to seismic imaging do not                    
              allow the rigorous testing of geophysical hypotheses.  Statistical             
              techniques  must be developed.  The second part of the research is             
              directed toward developing methods which will provide them with                
              uncertainty information about heterogeneities imaged by nonlinear              
              travel time tomography.  The results will allow them to make                   
              statistically-sound inferences about Earth structure and therefore to          
              address more rigorously important questions regarding the fate of              
              subducted lithosphere:  whether slabs commonly extend through the              
              670 km discontinuity, whether they become detached from slabs at               
              the surface and, ultimately, whether the upper and lower mantle are            
              mixed together.                                                                
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for twelve months.
