Title       : Infrastructure and Research Program for Signal Processing in Multimedia Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9205853

Award Number: 9205853
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1842730            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Schafer rws@eedsp.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              S. J. McGrath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Clements  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. McClellan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Barnwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell M. Mersereau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9194,9215,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to establish an infrastructure               
              for signal processing in multimedia systems.  Equipment will be                
              acquired, installed, and integrated into an existing research                  
              environment consisting of networked UNIX workstations and                      
              minicomputers.  This equipment will provide the capabilities to                
              acquire multimedia signals, including image, video, speech, audio,             
              text, and fax; store and access these signals on high-speed, high-             
              capacity disk storage subsystems; process them using custom high-              
              speed, real-time, DSP microcomputer-based processors, hosted by                
              UNIX workstations; communicate a variety of these signals between              
              workstations over a high-speed fiber network; and output the                   
              processed signals at their intended destinations.  Special-purpose             
              systems - an HDTV workstation, and a custom DSP multiprocessor -               
               will be integrated into the infrastructure to allow for real-time             
              processing of high-resolution video sequences and images.  The goal            
              of this infrastructure is to build an environment in which the DSP             
              algorithms, which will play a major role in the growth of                      
              multimedia technology, may be developed in such a fashion as to                
              lead directly to real-time implementations of those algorithms.                
                                                                                             
              The companion part to this infrastructure is a program of research             
              based on this environment, to be conducted in areas with immediate             
              and urgent application to the problems facing multimedia                       
              information systems.  This includes real-time video encoding,                  
              concentrating on the problems of inter- and intra-frame redundancy             
              elimination.  Advances in this area will lead to affordable                    
              applications in a host of areas such as video mail, video                      
              messaging, real-time video communications, and interactive learning            
              and presentations.
