Title       : Role of Titin in Nonmuscle Cytoskeletons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1993       
File        : a9205198

Award Number: 9205198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Keller tkeller@bio.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 The long-term objective of this research is to gain a greater               
              understanding of the structure and function of actin-based                     
              cytoskeletons.  This project is designed to investigate the roles              
              of T-protein, a huge protein that recently has been discovered as              
              a component of the extensively characterized intestinal epithelial             
              cell brush border cytoskeleton.  Based on polypeptide molecular                
              weight, molecular morphology, and immunocrossreactivity, brush                 
              border T-protein appears to be a nonmuscle isoform of the muscle               
              protein titin.  Muscle titin is a key structural component                     
              associated with the myosin thick filaments in sarcomeres.                      
              Likewise, T-protein is co-localized with myosin in brush borders,              
              and T-protein and brush border myosin assemble into supramolecular             
              structures in vitro.  The specific aims of this proposal are to: 1)            
              determine the existence and structural organization of T-protein in            
              different domains of the intestinal epithelial cell brush border               
              cytoskeleton and in cytoskeletal structures, including stress                  
              fibers, in other types of cells; 2) investigate the role of T-                 
              protein in organizing brush border cytoskeletal assembly during                
              embryonic development of intestinal epithelial cells; and 3)                   
              characterize interactions between T-protein and other cytoskeletal             
              components, including myosin.  Results of these studies should                 
              elucidate the importance of nonmuscle titin in governing the                   
              organization of cytoskeletons and their ability to produce force               
              for critical cellular processes.                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              The most obvious form of movement in biological systems is muscular            
              motility.  In muscle tissue, and particularly in skeletal muscle,              
              contractile behavior results in gross movements of organs, such as             
              the bending of an elbow or the turn of a head.  These gross                    
              movements are the composite result of intracellular movements of               
              protein complexes with respect to one another.  The major                      
              intracellular contractile proteins in muscle are actin and myosin,             
              which form oligomeric filaments that slide past each other in an               
              ATP-fueled controlled reaction that results in cellular shortening.            
              Whole muscles shorten (contract) as a composite result of the cells            
              within the muscle shortening.  However, cellular and intracellular             
              movement is not limited to muscle tissue; virtually all types of               
              eukaryotic cells display various actin / myosin based motility                 
              behaviors, ranging from cellular crawling to the separation of                 
              daughter cells after mitosis.  While the muscle system is quite                
              well understood in molecular detail, the extent to which these non-            
              muscle actin /myosin based motility systems resemble muscle, in                
              terms of molecular organization, is unclear.  The Principal                    
              Investigator has now identified a non-muscle version of a major                
              muscle protein which plays an important role in muscle actomyosin              
              based motility.  The experiments which will be performed in this               
              project will elucidate the role played by the T-protein in non-                
              muscle motility, and will thereby contribute greatly to our general            
              understanding of cellular movement.
