Title       : Biochemistry of Hemoglobins and Oxygen Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1994    
File        : a9205764

Award Number: 9205764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Austen F. Riggs riggs@uts.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A problem of major importance in biochemistry is the determination             
              of mechanisms by which different parts of proteins communicate with            
              one another.  The giant 200-subunit hemoglobin of the earthworm is             
              an important model system for such studies because ligand binding              
              is highly cooperative and subunit assembly is ligand-dependent and             
              is controlled by pH and calcium ions.  This laboratory has                     
              determined the amino acid sequences of chains a, b and c that form             
              a disulfide-linked trimer, which, together with a 4th heme-                    
              containing chain (sequenced by others) and non-heme linker chains,             
              associate to form the full-sized molecule.  The goal is to                     
              determine the subunit association equilibria, their calcium and pH             
              dependence and their linkage with oxygen binding.  These studies               
              will form the basis for understanding structure and function of the            
              intact molecule.  The hemoglobins from a wide range of                         
              invertebrates and vertebrates aggregate upon deoxygenation to form             
              complexes of lower affinity for oxygen than the separate                       
              components.  This is a control mechanism of considerable                       
              physiological and evolutionary importance.  A major long-term goal             
              is to determine the structures of the associated complexes and the             
              linkage between oxygen-binding and aggregation in amphibian, avian             
              and lamprey hemoglobins among vertebrates and echinoderm and                   
              molluscan hemoglobins among invertebrates.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Many proteins in nature are composed of smaller proteins which may             
              be are identical or different.  These subunits can sometimes affect            
              the structure of neighboring subunits and thus cooperatively                   
              "communicate" with one another.  The giant 200-subunit hemoglobin              
              of the earthworm is an important model system for such studies                 
              because when certain molecules bind to one subunit many subunits               
              change shape. The subunit shape is controlled by pH and calcium                
              ions.  The primary structure is known of subunits a, b and c that              
              form a complex which, together with a 4th heme-containing subunit,             
              associate to form the full-sized molecule.  The goal is to                     
              determine how tightly the subunits associate, and what effect                  
              calcium and pH have on this association and with oxygen binding.               
              These studies will form the basis for understanding structure and              
              function of the intact molecule.  The hemoglobins from a wide range            
              of invertebrates and vertebrates aggregate upon deoxygenation to               
              form complexes of lower affinity for oxygen than the separate                  
              components.  This is a control mechanism of considerable                       
              physiological and evolutionary importance.
