Title       : U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Parallel Numeri- cal Methods for
               Transient Solutions of Markov Chains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9205155

Award Number: 9205155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42250              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Stewart billy@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5514,5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France (INRIA) cooperative                 
              research in parallel computational methods in Markov Chains.                   
              William Stewart of North Carolina State University and Bernard                 
              Phillipe of INRIA in Rennes, France are the U.S. and French                    
              coordinators.  The project involves additional U.S. and French                 
              researchers in parallel computing, computer performance                        
              evaluation, parallel algorithms and numerical methods.  The                    
              investigators propose to examine new methods for finding                       
              equilibrium solutions of large, sparse Markov Chains using parallel            
              computers.  They propose  new techniques for computing special                 
              cases of stochastic matrices and small matrices  and to examine a              
              variety of computer architectures using vector processors, shared              
              memory multiprocessors, distributed memory multiprocessors and                 
              massively parallel architectures.  The project will benefit from               
              complementary expertise and sharing of essential equipment.  The               
              U.S. and French investigators bring to this collaboration expertise            
              in computer science and applied mathematics.  The essential                    
              equipment for doing parallel processing architectures are available            
              at participating U.S. institutions and at INRIA, the French national           
              research institute for information science and automation.  INRIA              
              is a world class institute in computer and information science and             
              leads a European consortium of research organizations in these                 
              fields.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              Markov Chains are useful mathematical devices for describing real              
              systems and queuing networks.  The proposed research will be very              
              important in telecommunications, computer performance and                      
              manufacturing systems modeling.  Advances in this area will have               
              far-reaching effects since Markov Chains are models used in other              
              areas of science and engineering.
