Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis of Constitutive Relations and Transport
               Properties for Composites with Applications toProblems of Optimal Structural
               Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1992      
File        : a9205158

Award Number: 9205158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Lipton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will focus on the analysis of transport                      
              properties and constitutive relations of composite materials and               
              their application to problems of optimal structural design.                    
              Improved bounds and self consistent estimates will be developed                
              for composite systems.  The types of composites considered are                 
              two phase elastic composites with symmetry, partially debonded                 
              two phase elastic composites, two phase thermal conducting media               
              with surface resistance between phases, and random emulsions of                
              two Stokes fluids incorporating surface tension effects.  New                  
              mathematical techniques involving new applications of null                     
              lagrangians, weakly lower semicontinuous functionals, and dual                 
              variational principles will be employed.  These anticipated                    
              results as well as the existing theory will be applied to the                  
              numerical solution of optimal structural design problems.  The                 
              optimal design problem considered here is the previously                       
              untreated problem of maximum strength design of composite systems              
              subject to an ensemble of random static loads.                                 
                   Many modern optimal structural designs incorporate the use                
              of composite materials.  The goal of the proposed research is to               
              utilize the most recent advances in the characterization of                    
              composite systems to facilitate solution of problems of optimal                
              structural design.  Anticipated applications include design of                 
              offshore oil platforms, large structures subjected to wind loads,              
              and large space structures.
