Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Lifting Properties of Hankel Forms and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1994     
File        : a9205926

Award Number: 9205926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cora Sadosky cs@scs.howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research focusing on the              
              properties and applications of what is generally referred to as                
              'lifting.'  By this one understands a framework in which a                     
              mathematical operation, applied to a certain set, can be shown to              
              be the restriction of another mathematical operation applied to a              
              larger set.  In many important cases, the lifting clarifies                    
              properties of the original operation and allows one to predict                 
              other characteristics which were not evident in the restricted                 
              environment.  Lifting can also show how disparate theories are                 
              parts of a larger whole.                                                       
                   Work on this project concerns lifting properties of bilinear              
              forms known as Hankel forms.  Recent work established links                    
              between Krein's method of eigenfunction expansions in the                      
              integral representations of lifted forms to the Sz.Nagy-Foias                  
              lifting theory of positive operators.  The approach to the                     
              research brings together the Lebesgue spaces in which the Hilbert              
              transform acts continuously and dilation and lifting properties                
              associated with scattering theory.  A fundamental result                       
              motivating this investigation is the n-conditional lifting                     
              theorem which leads to an opportunity to attack the classical                  
              interpolation problems in product spaces, where the main tools of              
              the theory of bounded analytic functions in one variable are just              
              not available.  A second group of problems centers on the band                 
              extension problem for matrices and related problems in control.                
              This work seeks to extend the one-dimensional results of Gohberg               
              which tell when bounded functions with prescribed negative                     
              Fourier coefficients exist.  The question addressed in this work               
              will be the multiparametric case, which can be phrased entirely                
              as a problem in lifting theory.  Other applications will be made               
              to Hankel operators and the Hilbert transform on the n-torus, on               
              the symplectic space, on the Heisenberg group and to the theory                
              of non-stationary stochastic processes.
