Title       : RUI: Structure and Catalytic Mechanism of Plant Carbonic Anhydrase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9205892

Award Number: 9205892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Rowlett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Rowlett will isolate and purify carbonic anhydrase, an enzyme              
              thought to be important species such as corn.  Once isolated in                
              pure form, he will examine the structure of the enzyme and several             
              laboratory-modified derivatives using UV-visible spectroscopy, and             
              powerful X-ray absorption techniques.  Dr.  Rowlett also proposed              
              to investigate the catalytic role of plant carbonic anhydrase in               
              detail using nuclear magnetic resonance and stopped-flow                       
              spectroscopy methods which are capable of picking apart individual             
              chemical steps in their mechanism of action.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Although carbonic anhydrases of animal origin are well-known, plant            
              carbonic anhydrases are poorly understood, and what little is known            
              indicates that the plant enzyme is evolutionarily distinct from                
              carbonic anhydrases of animal origin.  Thus, the characterization              
              of plant carbonic anhydrases is highly significant, for two                    
              reasons.  First, plant and animal carbonic anhydrase may represent             
              one of a few pairs of enzymes in nature which have evolved from                
              different origins to arrive at an identical function (convergent               
              evolution).  By comparing the structures of such convergently                  
              evolved enzymes, it will likely be possible to distinguish the                 
              essential and nonessential features of protein structure                       
              responsible for chemical catalysis.  Second, the study of the                  
              catalytic ability of plant carbonic anhydrase may help resolve the             
              exact function of plant carbonic anhydrase in photosynthesis, a                
              function that is currently unknown, primarily because of a lack of             
              fundamental information about the catalytic ability of the enzymes.
