Title       : The Limits to Copepod Growth: Resolving the Malthusian Dilemma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1992      
File        : a9205935

Award Number: 9205935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90042              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Landry landry@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  Zooplankton are the major pathway for carbon transfer to                  
              higher trophic levels, and to deeper water and the sediments.                  
              Estimates of zooplankton production are critical in understanding              
              how short and long term variations in primary production affect                
              these rates of carbon transfer.  Drs. Landry, Huntley and Lopez                
              have hypothesized that copepod growth is predictable with                      
              first-orderprecision from habitat temperature alone.  If this                  
              relationship proves to be robust, we will have a powerful tool for             
              estimating zooplankton production.  However, the apparent                      
              simplicity of this relation raises major issues about plankton                 
              dynamics since it denies the usual assumption that zooplankton are             
              food-limited.  These investigators from the Universities of                    
              California and Hawaii will investigate the thesis that, at the                 
              population level, food limitation of copepods operates mainly                  
              through changes in mortality rate.  They suggest that there is                 
              strong evidence for this in fish populations where density                     
              dependence operates on the mortality of the early life stages.                 
              Thus, the general solution of the Malthusian dilemma for marine                
              populations is to die young rather than starve later.  They will               
              address these key questions in the following ways:                             
              -    (1) Direct measurements of the generation times of a variety              
              of warm-water copepod species, to fill a critical gap in the                   
              database;                                                                      
              -    (2) Experimental testing of the hypothesis that size-specific             
              predation pressure can compensate for the effects of food-limited              
              growth rate by increasing apparent development rate at the                     
              population level.
