Title       : Structure-Function Studies of Lipid Binding Proteins from Intestine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1996        
File        : a9205665

Award Number: 9205665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $458865             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Cistola cistola@biochem.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington U Sch of Med
	      
	      Saint Louis, MO  63130    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Unlike other tissues, the small intestine abundantly expresses more            
              than one (actually four) homologous lipid binding protein (LBP) in             
              the same cell type.  These proteins exhibit differences in lipid-              
              binding specificities and stoichiometries, regional expression, and            
              developmental regulation.  Because of these differences, the LBP               
              homologues represent excellent model systems for investigating                 
              structural differentiation within a gene family of lipid-transport             
              proteins.  The overall objective of the proposed research is to                
              determine and compare the structural and dynamic properties of                 
              three LBPs in solution using NMR and recombinant DNA techniques.               
              The specific aims are: (i) to purify large quantities of native and            
              isotope-enriched proteins from bacteria using suitably constructed             
              prokaryotic expression vectors, (ii) to establish sequence-specific            
              proton, carbon-13, and nitrogen-15 resonance assignments for each              
              protein using isotope-directed multidimensional NMR methods, and               
              (iii) to use the resulting assignments. for each protein to define             
              and compare their structures, dynamics and detailed interactions               
              with bound lipids.  A detailed comparison of the solution                      
              structures and lipid interactions with these transport proteins                
              will yield fundamental information regarding the molecular                     
              determinants of ligand specificity, stoichiometry, and affinity and            
              provide insights into their individual functions.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              This research involves the study and comparison of three similar               
              but distinct proteins found in the lining of the small intestine.              
              These three proteins are thought to play a role the absorption and             
              processing of fatty substances absorbed from the diet.  They are               
              not presently known to be linked to any disease state involving                
              cholesterol or fats.  However, the individual functions of these               
              proteins are not well understood.  The goal of this research is to             
              develop a complete picture of the molecular architecture of these              
              three proteins so that their individual molecular properties and               
              roles in fat metabolism and transport can be understood.  To do                
              this, we are taking advantage of state-of-the art magnetic                     
              resonance methods (NMR), combined with recombinant DNA procedures.             
              It is likely that the information obtained will provide insights               
              into how these and other similar proteins achieve specificity as               
              carriers of fatty substances.
