Title       : Analysis of DNA Sequence Recognition by Three Types of Sequence-Specific Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1995       
File        : a9205248

Award Number: 9205248
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Blumenthal rblumenthal@mco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3000 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436142598    419/381-4172

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The long-term goal of this project is to understand both how              
              proteins recognize specific DNA sequences, and how the recognition             
              mechanisms are varied to accommodate the functional requirements of            
              the protein.  To that end, a combination of mutant characterization            
              and protein biochemistry will be used to study three functionally              
              disparate DNA-binding proteins which all come from the Pvu II                  
              restriction-modification system.  The first of these proteins is               
              the Pvu II DNA methyltransferase, which binds S-adenosylmethionine             
              and the DNA duplex sequence CAGCTG and methylates the amino group              
              of the internal cytosine.  The second protein is the Pvu II                    
              restriction endonuclease, which binds the same DNA sequence and                
              Mg++ and catalyzes phosphodiester cleavage between the central two             
              bases.  The third protein is the Pvu II C protein, which appears to            
              have a more degenerate recognition specificity on the DNA and                  
              activates transcription of the endonuclease gene.  The immediate               
              goals are to identify the domains and amino acids that play key                
              roles in recognizing the substrate DNA sequence and the other                  
              substrates as well.  Understanding sequence-specific recognition of            
              DNA by proteins, particularly when a catalytic center must be                  
              brought into proximity with the DNA, is an important goal both for             
              a sophisticated understanding of gene expression and for the                   
              further development of biotechnology.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The two long-term goals of this project are to understand how                  
              proteins recognize specific DNA base sequences despite the large               
              excess of nonsubstrate DNA in the cell, and how these sequence                 
              recognition mechanisms vary to accommodate the other functional                
              requirements of the protein when a catalytic center must be brought            
              close to the DNA to carry out reactions.  Understanding sequence-              
              specific recognition of DNA by proteins is an important goal both              
              for fully understanding the control of gene expression, and for the            
              further development of biotechnology.  In this study, a combination            
              of mutagenesis and protein biochemistry will be used to study three            
              DNA-binding proteins which all come from the Pvu II restriction-               
              modification system but which each have very different fuctions.               
              The first of these proteins is the Pvu II DNA methlytransferase,               
              which binds S-adenosylmethionine and the DNA duplex sequence CAGCTG            
              and methylates the amino group of the internal cytosine.  The                  
              second protein is the Pvu II restriction endonuclease, which binds             
              the same DNA sequence an Mg++ and catalyzes phosphodiester cleavage            
              between the central two bases.  The third protein is the Pvu II C              
              protein, which appears to bind the Pvu II DNA and activate                     
              transcription of the endonuclease gene.  The immediate goals are to            
              identify the domains and amino acids of these three proteins that              
              play key roles in recognizing the substrate DNA sequence, in                   
              recognizing the other substrates, and in carrying out the chemical             
              reactions of methylation or cleavage.
