Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9205055

Award Number: 9205055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Paradise  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Rock weathering is an often underestimated yet ubiquitous                 
              force, sculpting and changing the landscape, predominantly                     
              influenced by rock composition and environmental factors.                      
              Previous research has recognized the importance of obtaining                   
              quantitative data on the weathering rates of rocks.  While                     
              research has shown that lichen overgrowth disrupts and erodes the              
              substrate, little quantitative data have been collected on this                
              weathering phenomenon.  Lichens represent the dominant biological              
              species on eight percent of the Earth's surface.  Their                        
              ubiquitousness may establish lichens as a greater pedogenetic                  
              factor than previously understood.  This project will investigate              
              the quantifiable effect of lichen overgrowth on substrate surface              
              weathering , removal, and potential pedogenesis.  Research will                
              be conducted in the Petra region of Jordan to determine lichen-                
              induced erosion in controlled circumstances from the late                      
              Pleistocene to the present.  Regression models will be developed               
              and tested to determine rates of weathering under differing                    
              conditions of time, exposure of the rock to sunlight, proximity                
              to surface, location of water flows, and other environmental                   
              variables.  Radiocarbon dating and timing of human carvings in                 
              sandstone will be used to establish when weathering took place.                
                   This study should fill several missing niches in the                      
              weathering literature by connecting the factors responsible for                
              lichen growth, by providing information on the process by which                
              lichen alters rock, and by estimating the quantity of weathered                
              by-products.  Knowledge of the quantity of substrate weathering                
              over time should inform archaeological research on lichen induced              
              alteration of petroglyphs and geoglyphs, pedological research on               
              substrate change into pedogenetic material, lichenology through                
              the development of a potential dryland lichenometric growth                    
              curve, and geography through an assessment of spatial variability              
              of weathering rates.
