Title       : The Role of Dehydration-Induced Proteins in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9205269

Award Number: 9205269
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Close timothy.close@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1145,9197,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Water is important to plants during all stages of development.  The            
              lack of sufficient water can place strains on plants, which may                
              result in decreased yields or increased susceptibility to disease.             
              Yet plants not only survive but proliferate on land, even in water-            
              limited environments such as semi-arid areas and deserts.  This                
              remarkable ability to tolerate seemingly inhospitable conditions               
              is due to the cumulative effects of nmerous adaptive properties                
              that exist within plants.  In seed-bearing plants the best example             
              of such adaptability is the seed itself, which often remains alive             
              in a relatively dry state for many years.  Studies over the last               
              decade have demonstrated that growing plants and the embryos (or               
              germ) within dry seeds have much in common at the cellular and                 
              biochemical level.  For example, certain proteins that accumulate              
              within the cells of growing plants during water-limitation are also            
              found in embryo cells during their normal maturation drying                    
              process.  Dehydrins are one such group of proteins and are the                 
              focus of this research project.  The basic question that will be               
              addressed by this rpoject is what role dehydrins play in adaptation            
              to cellular dehydration.  The location of dehydrins within plant               
              cells will be determined, and blochemical tests of function will               
              be carried out on dehydrin protein that has been extracted from                
              plant cells.  In addition, dehydrin genes will be examined in                  
              normal and mutant plants.  Through an understanding of the                     
              fundamental biochemical role and genetics of dehydrins, it may be              
              possible in the longer term to design new strategies for the                   
              development of plants with improved tolerance to environmental                 
              stress.
