Title       : Regulation and Function of the cut Locus in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9205250

Award Number: 9205250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Jack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sloan Kettering Canc Res
	      
	      New York, NY  10021    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The cut locus is a large Drosophila gene that controls                    
              differentiation of a variety of tissues.  Mutations of the gene                
              transform the external sensory organs into chordotonal organs and              
              prevent differentiation of particular wing margin bristles as well             
              as the insect kidneys.  Expression is also required in the head for            
              the occurrence of cuticle expansion, a programmed behavior.                    
              Mutations upstream of the transcribed portion of the gene interfere            
              with proper regulation.  Many of the upstream mutations are                    
              insertions of the retrotransposon gypsy, which may interrupt                   
              expression by acting as a barrier between the promoter and enhancer            
              elements.  The interactions of cut with other genes and gene                   
              products in the process of regulation that leads to differentiation            
              of cell type will be examined.  The cut regulatory elements will be            
              identified by their ability to regulate a reporter gene, and                   
              experiments will be carried out to test specific genes to discover             
              what genes are required for cut expression in particular tissues               
              and which ones encode proteins that bind directly to the cut                   
              regulatory elements.  The localization of the cut regulatory                   
              elements will also demonstrate clearly whether the gypsy                       
              transposable element acts as a barrier between enhancers and                   
              promoters.
