Title       : Regulation of Protozoan Myosin-I Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  1995    
File        : a9205344

Award Number: 9205344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry G. Zot   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 The goal of this proposal is to identify and characterize                   
              proteins that reguate the interaction of the membrane-bound motor              
              molecule, myosin-I, with phospholipid surfaces such as cell                    
              membranes.  Myosin-I is the only motor molecule known to use a                 
              lipid surface as a substrate for motility, and because cellular                
              movement is accompanied by motile events at the leading edge of the            
              cell where myosin-I is concentrated, myosin-I is a likely candidate            
              for driving cell movement.  To search for proteins that regulate               
              myosin-I, extracts from Acanthamoeba castellanii will be screened              
              with three in vitro assays that measure different activities of                
              myosin-I:  (1), a direct binding assay, to determine the effect of             
              regulatory proteins on myosin-I's association with membranes; (2),             
              ATPase activity to evaluate the effect of regulatory proteins on               
              myosin-I's enzyme activity; and (3), a motility assay to observe               
              the effect of regulatory proteins on myosin-I's ability to move                
              actin filaments.  After regulatory proteins have been identified in            
              these assays, specific proteins will be purified using standard                
              biochemical procedures and polyclonalantibodies to each of these               
              proteins will be produced.  These antibodies will be used in the               
              above assays to test their effect on regulatory protein activities             
              and in cells to localize the regulatory proteins by immunostaining.            
              These experiments will provide important information on how                    
              myosin-I is organized at the cell membrane and how myosin-I's                  
              activity is regulated.                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Cellular motility is fundamental to the life processes of                      
              unicellular organisms and essential to many physiological                      
              activities of higher organisms, such as development, neuronal                  
              growth, angiogenesis, defense mechanisms, wound healing, and                   
              organismal locomotion.  Cellular movement requires the coordination            
              of membrane and cytoskeletal systems.  As a result of its lipid-               
              binding properties, the cytoskeletal motor protein myosin-I has                
              been implicated in many membrane-mediated motile processes.                    
              However, unlike other motor proteins (e.g., myosin-II, kinesin, or             
              dynein) it has not been possible thus far to show that mysoin-I is             
              required for some generalized cellular process.  The problem of                
              what myosin-I does may not be easily solved solely by studying                 
              mysoin-I, since it appears likely that multiple genes encode a                 
              family of myosin-I molecules with overlapping functions.  The                  
              results of this study will contribute to the understanding of                  
              myosin-I's role in cell motility.
