Title       : Using Saccharomyces to Examine Models of Biparental Genomic Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9205092

Award Number: 9205092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Therese A. Markow                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher J. Wills cwills@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              theories of the evolution of sex can be divided into those                     
              concerned with the origin of the sexual process and those concerned            
              with its maintenance once it has arisen.  Here we propose an                   
              experimental test of both types of the theory.  Maintenance                    
              theories that assume a role for recombination in generating rare               
              useful genotypes will be tested by competing diploid yeast strains             
              with each other, strains that differ only in their ability to                  
              undergo recombination.  The experimental design will permit two                
              classes of these models to be examined, those that assume selection            
              coefficients are constant (the Fisher-Muller models of                         
              Felsenstein's classification (Felsenstein, 1988)) and those that               
              assume they are variable or cyclic (Felsenstein's Sturtevant-Mather            
              models).  Both processes are likely to be important; we will                   
              attempt to determine which is more powerful in our experimental                
              system.  Asexual strains will be competed directly with isogenic               
              sexual one, to determine the range of conditions under which                   
              strains what are capable of recombining sexually prevail.  The type            
              of genetic variability that accumulates under these conditions, and            
              the rate at which it accumulates, will also be measured.  The                  
              origin of sex theory that will be tested is the DNA repair                     
              hypothesis of Bernstein and Michod.  We will test to see whether               
              the ability to recombine meiotically confers a competitive                     
              advantage upon sexual strains to ionizing radiation, which induces             
              double strands and breaks.  Double stranded breaks are essential to            
              the DNA repair hypothesis, which postulates that in early biotic               
              environments, double stranded breaks imposed sever selection                   
              pressures upon organisms.  The only way to repair such breaks was              
              in certain lineages.  We will also examine whether, and how                    
              quickly, increased rates of recombination can be selected for in               
              heavily mutagenized populations that either do or do not exhibit an            
              alternation of generations, and whether this selection can affect              
              both mitotic and meiotic recombination.
