Title       : Regulation of Ribosomal Protein mRNA Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1992     
File        : a9205367

Award Number: 9205367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis H. Bowman bowman@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,
Abstract    :
              The synthesis of eukaryotic ribosomal proteins r-protein) is                   
              translationally regulated during the differentiation of mouse                  
              myoblasts into fibers and in a wide variety of other organisms                 
              and cell types.  Elucidation of the mechanisms controlling r-                  
              protein synthesis will greatly enhance our understanding of                    
              eukaryotic ribosome formation and add to our knowledge of                      
              eukaryotic translational control.   The translational                          
              regulation of r-protein synthesis is due to the interaction of                 
              factors with structural motifs within the 5'untranslated region                
              of r-protein nRNAs.  A major aim of this proposal is to                        
              determine the secondary structure of the 5'end of purified L32                 
              and S16 r-protein mRNAs and determine the structure of these                   
              same mRNAs when they are assembled into 45S subpolysomal mRNP                  
              or polysomes.  This will be accomplished using chemical and                    
              enzymic Probes specific to single or double stranded RNA and                   
              crosslinking agents.  If similar secondary structures are                      
              detected in L32 and S16 r-protein mRNA, their importance for                   
              translation will be evaluated by making compensating and                       
              noncompensating changes in the stem sequence and then assaying                 
              the effect of these changes on translation.  Another major aim                 
              is to identify and characterize the factors binding to the 5'                  
              end of r-protein mRNAs as these may regulate the translation of                
              r-protein mRNA.  It will be determined whether these factors                   
              are different from factors binding to the 5' end of efficiently                
              translated mRNAs and determine whether their activity changes                  
              during myoblast differentiation.   This will be addressed using                
              gel mobility shift and UV crosslinking techniques.  The last                   
              major aim is to isolate and characterize the S16 45S sub                       
              polysomal mRNP using centrifugation, gel electrophoresis and                   
              biotin-strepavidin chromatography, and to determine the RNA and                
              protein composition of this subpolysomal mRNP  Analysis of the                 
              structure of this mRNP should determine if the 45S subpolysomal                
              mRNP is a storage particle or an intermediate in the                           
              translation initiation pathway.                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              Ribosomes translate mRNA into protein and therefore play a                     
              central role in cellular metabolism.  The ribosome content of                  
              eukaryotic cells is therefore highly controlled to insure that                 
              cells have a sufficient number of ribosome to support growth                   
              and development.  The proposed experiments should enhance our                  
              understanding of eukaryotic ribosome formatioin and control of                 
              translation.
