Title       : Application of Latest Cretaceous-Paleogene Fossil Vertebrates from South-Central
               Wyoming to Study of Laramide Evolution of the Rocky Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1993      
File        : a9205567

Award Number: 9205567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne Bourgeois                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason A. Lillegraven   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Hanna and Carbon coal basins of south-central Wyoming                 
              became structurally defined during the Laramide Orogeny.  The Hanna            
              Basin is unique among depocenters of the Rocky Mountain foreland               
              (within the province of Laramide-style deformation) in its thick               
              sedimentary accumulation (Upper Cretaceous through lower Eocene,>              
              32,000 ft) relative to its to its short map dimensions (24x40 mi).             
              In comparison with other Wyoming foreland depressions, the Hanna               
              Basin provides an extreme case in terms of rates of basinal                    
              subsidence, adjacent contemporaneous uplift, syntectonic                       
              deposition, and intervening episodes of major basin-margin erosion.            
              However, temporal constraints on the depositional and structural               
              evolution of the Hanna/Carbon basins are rudimentary.  Use of                  
              vertebrate fossils linked to described sections of the Ferris and              
              Hanna formations will provide the first detailed determinations of             
              (1) relative age relationships within the thick sequence of                    
              uppermost Cretaceous through lower Eocene strata, (2) rates of                 
              deposition, and (3) timing and estimates of magnitude of basinal               
              and basin-margin reverse-faulting and adjacent uplift.  A                      
              temporally controlled series of interpretive geological                        
              cross-sections, extending southward into the Hanna Basin from its              
              northerly, adjacent ranges, will be developed following completion             
              of surifical geological description allied with analysis of cobble             
              provenance.  Additional important research components of the                   
              Hanna/Carbon basin project include (1) paleogeographic and                     
              biostratigraphic interpretations of ubiquitous shark teeth                     
              collected from Paleocene fluvial sections of the Hanna Formation,              
              and (2) description and interpretation of vertebrate faunal changes            
              across the Mesozoic-Cenozoic boundary.  Knowledge derived from                 
              various elements of the project will allow, for the first time,                
              quantitative comparisons of the greater Hanna Basin's evolution                
              with other, better understood, Rocky Mountain foreland basins.
