Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Controls on Sequence Geometry and Bounding Surfaces in
               Ramp Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1994 
File        : a9205623

Award Number: 9205623
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119298             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Steckler   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Christie-Blick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Clastic sediments delivered to the margins of many sedimentary            
              basins commonly form deltaic successions which forestep and                    
              backstep on evenly deepening ramps, rather than the more commonly              
              modeled shelf-slope-basin floor bathymetry.  The properties of                 
              sequence boundaries, and the geometry and stacking of sequence                 
              elements ("systems tracts") in such ramp settings are highly                   
              controversial and very few published examples are well constrained.            
              This project is an integrated study of sequence geometry in ramp               
              settings.  The project will consist of conceptual and numerical                
              modeling accompanied by rigorous field testing in one of the best              
              exposed successions of clastic ramp sequences in the world:  the               
              Upper Cretaceous marginal marine deposits of the San Juan basin,               
              New Mexico.  The primary objectives of this project are to (1)                 
              identify, evaluate and map stratigraphic surfaces, which meet such             
              objective criteria for a sequence boundary as downward shift in                
              onlap and subaerial exposure of older marine strata, (2) test the              
              concepts of instantaneous versus diachronous formation of sequence             
              boundaries, (3) document stacking patterns and volumetric                      
              partitioning of sediment between different elements (systems                   
              tracts) of the sequences, (4) forward model variations in sequence             
              geometry in response to different rates of tectonic subsidence,                
              rates and amplitudes of sea level change, and sediment supply.                 
              Two-dimensional, flexural backstripping will be applied to                     
              reconstruct the geometry of the depositional surfaces through time.            
              The modeling will be based on a combination of two numerical                   
              methods.  One is a kinematic model using preset depositional slopes            
              and sediment supply to generate the stratigraphic response to sea              
              level and tectonic fluctuations.  The second is a diffusion model              
              that simulates sediment transport in a "foreland" basin setting.               
              The overall goal of the project is to provide improved precision in            
              models predicting the spatial and temporal distribution of                     
              lithologic units in basins with ramp margins, and to enable the                
              extraction of more precise information about past sea level                    
              fluctuations from the stratigraphic record.
