Title       : Analysis of VirB Proteins Required for Agrobacterium Mediated DNA Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9205695

Award Number: 9205695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew N. Binns abinns@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Agrobacterium tumefaciens mediates the movement of DNA from the             
              Ti plasmid of the bacterium into plant cells, where the                        
              "transferred DNA" (T-DNA) is ultimately integrated into the host               
              genome and expressed.  Processes within the bacterium that result              
              in the formation of "transfer intermediates" have been well studied            
              and have led to the hypothesis that the DNA transfer process is                
              similar to bacterial conjugation.  The mechanism whereby the                   
              transfer intermediates (composed of protein and DNA) exit the                  
              bacterium and enter the plant cells is virtually uncharacterized.              
              The virB genes of the Ti plasmid encode proteins that are                      
              hypothesized to form a membrane localized "transfer apparatus"                 
              through which the transferred intermediates move from the bacterium            
              into the plant cell.  In this renewal project, studies will be                 
              undertaken to continue the genetic, molecular, and biochemical                 
              analysis of the putative virB-encoded transfer apparatus. The                  
              following specific aims will be pursued.  First, the genetic                   
              analysis of the virB operon will be continued, taking advantage of             
              a recently constructed transposon that will make possible the                  
              construction of non-polar mutations.  It should be possible to                 
              determine which of the virB genes are required for virulence, and              
              to carry out extensive point mutagenesis on individual virB genes.             
              These mutants will be used in conjunction with biochemical and                 
              molecular strategies to study VirB related activities.  Second, the            
              relationship between the putative virB encoded apparatus and the               
              transported substrates will be characterized.  Molecular genetic               
              approaches will be used to test the hypothesis that pJW323 produces            
              an intermediate in such abundance that it outcompetes the T-complex            
              for access to the transport pore.  The specificity of the virB                 
              encoded transfer apparatus for the various transferred molecules               
              will be characterized.  Further, it will be determined whether                 
              overexpression of other vir genes affects either the transfer of               
              PJW323 into plants or its ability to inhibit T-DNA transfer.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              This work focusses on basic issues concerning DNA transfer from                
              Agrobacterium to plant cells.  Historically, the field originated              
              with studies of how Agrobacterium caused Crown Gall Tumors in                  
              tobacco plants.  Today, the utilization of Agrobacterium as a                  
              vector to transfer DNA into plant cells, and, ultimately, the                  
              regeneration of transgenic plants from such cells, is a central                
              technology in both basic and applied plant science.  The advantages            
              of the technique are that Agrobacterium-mediated transformation is             
              technically simple to execute and, in many plants, occurs at                   
              remarkably high efficiency.  A major problem with the technique is             
              that, for many agriculturally important plants, it is either highly            
              inefficient or hasn't been shown to transform at all. Understanding            
              the cell biology involved in the efficient transformation of                   
              certain hosts may provide insight into means by which procedures               
              can be modified so as to transform hosts currently outside the                 
              useful host range of Agrobacterium.  This would be of major                    
              significance to agricultural research and new product development.
