Title       : Accretion and Core Formation in the Earth: Evidence from Siderophile and
               Chalcophile Trace Elements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1992      
File        : a9205731

Award Number: 9205731
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Snyder                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Horton E. Newsom newsom@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The abundances of siderophile and highly mobile elements will be               
              used to investigate the accretion of the Earth and the separation              
              of the Earth's core and crust from the Earth's mantle.  Well                   
              characterized samples from different geochemical reservoirs will               
              be analyzed by neutron activation analysis and inductively coupled             
              plasma mass spectrometry for the moderately siderophile and                    
              chalcophile trace elements Mo, W, As, Sb, and Pb and later for the             
              platinum group elements.  The formation of the continental crust,              
              involving the extra enrichment of highly mobile elements including             
              Pb, Cs, As, Sb, and W, will be extended by analysis of a large                 
              suite of the Earth's oldest known rocks from Canada.  Crust                    
              formation processes will be studied in suites of volcanic arc rocks            
              for which data on other highly mobile elements are available,                  
              especially  10Be.  The possible origin of hot spot plumes from near            
              the core-mantle boundary will be addressed by a study of the                   
              siderophile element content of samples from both ocean island hot              
              spots and continental flood basalts.  The abundances of the                    
              siderophile elements in different terrestrial reservoirs will be               
              used to determine the abundances in the bulk silicate Earth.  These            
              abundances provide clues to accretion and metal segregation in the             
              mantle, which will be evaluated in quantitative models.
