Title       : Incremental Retrodeformation of NE Utah Thrust Belt using Late
               Cretaceous-Paleocene Synorogenic Conglomerates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1992       
File        : a9205382

Award Number: 9205382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter G. DeCelles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is an investigation of the structural                        
              characteristics, provenance, and sedimentology of proximal                     
              synorogenic conglomerates of Late Cretaceous-Paleocene age in                  
              northeastern Utah.  Because these deposits contain progressive                 
              structures and well developed unroofing sequences of clast types,              
              they should be useful for incremental retrodeformation of the NE               
              Utah thrust belt.  The general questions to be addressed include:              
              (1) What are the structural characteristics of proximal,                       
              thrust-derived fans, and can these structures be used to                       
              retrodeform the conglomerates?  (2) What are the spatial                       
              relationships between angular unconformities and large-scale                   
              morphostratigraphic lithosomes in these proximal fans, and can                 
              these relationships shed new light on interpretations of tectonic              
              control on sediment distribution during thrust faulting?  (3) What             
              structures control the production and distribution of sediment in              
              thrust belts--large scale structural culminations or frontal tip               
              anticlines?  In addition to these general questions, the proposed              
              study will address several longstanding regional problems in the               
              NE Utah thrust belt, such as the location of the southern terminus             
              of the Crawford thrust and the former extent of the Wilard thrust              
              sheet.  This study will take an integral approach to working out               
              the complexities of the linking zone between the thrust belt-proper            
              and the adjacent basin.  The results of the proposed research will             
              be of use to structural geologists, foreland-basin stratigraphers              
              and sedimentologists, and basin modelers.
