Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9205549

Award Number: 9205549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9525               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl D. Lillquist  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Closed basin coastal landforms and sediments provide                      
              excellent opportunities to study past environments and processes.              
              This is often essential for more realistic regional-scale                      
              modelling of paleoclimates.  The Great Basin of the western                    
              United States comprises numerous closed basins separated by                    
              towering mountain ranges.  At present, most of the basins are dry              
              or contain only shallow ephemeral lakes.  During the late                      
              Pleistocene, deep lakes occupied many of these basins, and they                
              left abundant geomorphic  and stratigraphic evidence.  The                     
              subsequent arid environment of the Great Basin left well-                      
              preserved evidence unobscured by vegetation.  This paleolake                   
              evidence can provide excellent clues to the temporal and spatial               
              variability of coastal processes and landforms, lacustrine                     
              chronologies, and hydro-isostatic deflection of the basins.  This              
              project will study one such basin in Nevada.  It will be the                   
              first detailed analysis of lacustrine landforms and vectors of                 
              sediment erosion, transportation, and deposition, and it will                  
              reconstruct the lacustrine chronology for comparison with                      
              chronologies from Lake Bonneville.  Spatial aspects of the study               
              will rely upon topographic map, aerial photograph, and remotely                
              sensed imagery interpretation in addition to field study and                   
              geographic information system analysis.  The temporal framework                
              will be tested with radio carbon dating and amino acid analysis.               
              These methods should enable reconstruction of basin and shoreline              
              characteristics to fill out the chronological record.                          
                   This research will fill in an important chapter in the                    
              paleoclimate record of the intermediate region between Lake                    
              Bonneville and Lake Lahontan.  Research on such arid, closed-                  
              basin environments is not extensive; thus this project will                    
              support paleoclimatic modelling of the Great Basin, enhance                    
              ongoing archaeological studies in the Basin, and further                       
              elucidate the far field effects of Lake Bonneville's hydro-                    
              isostatic deflection.
