Title       : Sperm-Egg Interaction: Lysin Structure and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1994       
File        : a9205020

Award Number: 9205020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. D. Stout dave@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1119,9118,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The first objective is to solve the crystal structure of red                   
              abalone sperm lysin using multiple isomorphous replacement.  The               
              structure will then be refined at 1.9A resolution.  This                       
              structure will serve as a basis for homology modeling the                      
              structure of seven other abalone sperm lysins for which Dr. V.D.               
              Vacquier has the primary sequences.  The superposition of                      
              sequence and structural information will allow an understanding                
              of how the hypervariable regions of the molecule define species                
              specificity while the highly conserved regions confer common                   
              function to all lysins, which is dissolution of the vitelline                  
              envelope surrounding the egg.  At the same time, the modeling                  
              analysis will be used to design site-directed mutants, which can               
              be assayed for biological activity by V.D. Vacquier, to test the               
              structural hypothesis.  Crystallization experiments with the                   
              lysins from the other species, and the mutant lysins, will be                  
              carried out, in order to obtain additional crystal structures to               
              support or correct the structures observed by homology modeling.               
              %%%                                                                            
              The significance of this project pertains to the molecular events              
              which take place during fertilization.  The molecule being                     
              studied, sperm lysin, is responsible for dissolving a hole in the              
              membrane surrounding the egg so that the sperm can penetrate this              
              membrane.  The species being studied, abalone, offers                          
              experimental advantages in isolating the protein components for                
              both the sperm and egg.  By solving the three-dimensional                      
              structure of lysin, we can infer how the protein functions.  No                
              structure of a protein involved in fertilization has ever been                 
              solved.  V. D. Vacquier, who provides samples of lysin, has                    
              primary sequences for lysins from seven abalone species.  The                  
              sequences show regions of extreme variability and contrasting                  
              regions of absolute conservation.  Once we know the structure of               
              one lysin we can map the sequence data onto the structure.  The                
              variable regions are important for correct species discrimination              
              by abalone sperm and egg cells.  The conserved regions are                     
              important for function, which is membrane insertion and binding.               
              Both processes, species recognition and membrane insertion, are                
              phenomena of general biological significance.
