Title       : Peptide Receptors Regulating Intestinal Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9205617

Award Number: 9205617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Waldman Waldmans@jeflin.tju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Thomas Jefferson Univ
	      1020 Locust Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19107    215/503-6976

NSF Program : 1146      ANIMAL SYSTEMS PHYSIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Water is absolutely necessary for the intestine to absorb food and             
              dispose of wastes. The amount of water in the intestine is                     
              regulated by a small protein hormone produced in the wall of that              
              organ. Too little water results in the release of this hormone,                
              stimulating the cells lining the intestine to secrete water. Too               
              much water results in a decrease in the release of this hormone,               
              reducing water secretion into the intestine. However, it is unclear            
              how this hormone stimulates intestinal cells to secrete water. It              
              is known that the hormone binds to specific protein receptors on               
              the surface of intestinal cells to stimulate secretion.                        
              Interestingly, there appear to be several receptors for this                   
              hormone with different structures and functions. These receptors               
              appear to activate different signalling mechanisms in the cell.                
              Which signalling pathway is responsible for triggering secretion               
              is unknown. Also, which receptors are coupled to different                     
              signalling pathways has not been defined. Finally, the                         
              relationships between the different structures and functions of                
              these receptors have not been examined. Studies outlined in this               
              proposal involve the purification of these different receptors from            
              intestinal cells. The structure and function of these isolated                 
              receptors will be defined and compared, to establish their                     
              relationship. The coupling of these different purified receptors               
              to cellular signalling pathways will be established, to determine              
              which receptor and signal pathway is involved in regulating                    
              intestinal secretion. These studies are significant because they               
              will define basic mechanisms regulating a key intestinal function              
              at the molecular level. In addition, the fundamental mechanisms                
              coupling receptors and signalling pathways defined in these studies            
              are generally applicable to the regulation of other organs,                    
              including the kidney and blood vessels.
