Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9205522

Award Number: 9205522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8809               (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. Castille  (Student current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Most geographical studies of waterways and boundaries have                
              emphasized the boundary function of waterways, particularly                    
              between political entities.  Few studies have addressed the                    
              problems associated with state ownership of waterbottoms.  The                 
              important issue in determining ownership is navigability because               
              most states own the waterbottoms of all naturally formed                       
              navigable waterways.  In recent years, the problem of waterbottom              
              ownership determination has been magnified by accelerating rates               
              of land loss along coastal zones and channel filling within                    
              drainage basins.  In the state of Louisiana, both of these                     
              changes are due, in part, to cultural alterations of sediment-                 
              bearing channel flow.  This research project will examine the                  
              impact of waterway changes on ownership of waterbottoms within                 
              south Louisiana waterways.  It will test the hypothesis that the               
              state is losing ownership of property through accretion within                 
              areas of extensive deposition while it is gaining property                     
              through erosion within the coastal zone.  The Atchafalaya Basin                
              and the Bayou Lafourche will be compared as extremes of these two              
              processes.  Geological, historical, geographical and legal data                
              will be assembled in order to test the hypothesis.                             
                   This study is unique in that it addresses the ownership of a              
              particular type of property, the waterbottoms of inland and                    
              coastal waterways.  It blends geomorphological evidence with                   
              legal decisions to better understand the relationship between                  
              natural and cultural processes which modify waterway boundaries                
              and the legal framework for adjudicating disputes over                         
              boundaries.  It will have practical applications to boundary                   
              determination problems elsewhere, and it will further elucidate                
              the problems which occur when the legal and legislative systems                
              lag behind the actual physical changes to boundaries.
