Title       : Coal Petrologic Investigation of Tropical and Subtropical Peats
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9205670

Award Number: 9205670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur D. Cohen cohen@geol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The purpose of this research is to investigate the                        
              petrographic and palynologic characteristics, surficial processes              
              of formation, and early stages of coalification of several                     
              contrasting tropical and subtropical peat deposits located in the              
              Caribbean/S. Florida region.  This research represents a                       
              continuation of work previously supported by NSF, with emphasis on             
              new and/or follow-up studies of certain sites and on certain                   
              promising new analytical techniques developed during the course of             
              the previous work (such as, artificial coalification experiments).             
                   Three tropical and one subtropical coal-forming settings have             
              been selected for study :1) the Moin coastal, palm swamp of Costa              
              Rica; 2) the Changuinola swamp-marsh complex of Panama; 3) the                 
              Arecibo sawgrass-mangrove swamp of Puerto Rico; and 4) the                     
              Everglades-mangrove swamp-marsh complex of Florida.  Although all              
              of these settings have similarities, each exhibits one or more                 
              significant differences from the others and was selected because               
              it is expected to yield new and essential information with which               
              to interpret and predict the composition and geometry of the many              
              ancient coals that have been reported in the literature to have                
              formed in tropical shoreline-related settings.  Since the focus of             
              the previous grant was on the deposits in Panama and Costa Rica,               
              this proposal puts more emphasis on the Arecibo and Everglades                 
              deposits.                                                                      
                   The methodology to be employed in this study will include: 1)             
              field measurements of pH, salinity and other surface conditions;               
              2) field descriptions of peat sequences: 3) collection of surface              
              litter and surface samples; 4) collection of oriented piston cores;            
              5) transmitted, reflected, and fluorescent light microscopy from               
              microtome thin sections; 6) low temperature ashing and x-ray                   
              diffraction for assessment of mineralogic content; and 7) pollen               
              analysis of surface and subsurface samples combined with                       
              radiocarbon dating, for interpreting the paleoecological and                   
              developmental history of the deposits.
