Title       : Genetic Analysis of Complex Membrane Protein Insertion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1995      
File        : a9205572

Award Number: 9205572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin C. Manoil manoil@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of the research proposed are, a) to provide a better            
              understanding of the role that interactions between spanning                   
              segments of a membrane protein play in membrane insertion and                  
              folding, and b) to help characterize the cellular metabolism of                
              mutant membrane proteins.                                                      
              The studies will use Escherichia coli lac permease as a model to               
              analzye whether spanning segment interactions contribute to the                
              membrane translocation of two of the protein's periplasmic domains.            
              This analysis will include: a) developing an assay for the                     
              periplasmic localization of individual domains of unfused lac                  
              permease. b) the role of interactions in the folding of the                    
              topological structure (identifying missense changes in part of the             
              protein (tm9-tm12) that alter folding).                                        
              This research will also investigate two phenomena involving mutant             
              membrane proteins.  First, the production of altered membrane                  
              proteins is commonly toxic to cells, perhaps due to abnormal                   
              interaction with the membrane itself or the membrane insertion                 
              apparatus.  Isolating mutants reducing this toxicity will help                 
              identify its source.  Second, altered membrane proteins are often              
              rapidly degraded by cellular proteases; Mutant screens can identify            
              the protease or proteases responsible for this instability.                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Cells are surrounded by membranes which protect them from the                  
              outside environment while allowing inward passage of nutrients.                
              Membranes are composed mainly of a combination of lipid and protein            
              molecules.  The research proposed investigates the mechanisms used             
              by cells to assemble membranes by examining how proteins are                   
              inserted into them in the appropriate functional structures.  The              
              research will analyze mutant forms of one particular membrane                  
              protein (lactose permease of the bacterium Escherichia coli) which             
              should show aberrant insertion.  The patterns of altered insertion             
              should provide insights into the normal membrane assembly process.
