Title       : Shell and Ligament Microstructures: Significance for Polythetic Cladistic and
               Stratophenetic Studies of Bivalve (Molluscan) Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1994   
File        : a9205263

Award Number: 9205263
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94984              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Carter clams@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Shell microstructure and ligament structures have historically            
              been important components of research on phylogeny and taxonomy in             
              the Bivalvia.  However, ligament structures, as recently redefined             
              by Waller (1990) and Carter (1990a), remain poorly known for many              
              extinct as well as extant bivalves, and data of shell                          
              microstructure have lagged behind other aspects of comparative                 
              anatomy because of the persistence of an inadequate descriptive                
              nomenclature, a paucity of data for Paleozoic and Mesozoic                     
              families, and the lack of an accurate, comprehensive perspective               
              on evolutionary pathways and convergence.  Carter (1990a) recently             
              demonstrated that new data of subclasses Palaeotaxodonta,                      
              Pteriomorphia and Isofilibranchia can provide significant new                  
              insights into family and higher level evolutionary relationships.              
              The proposed research will extend this database to include the                 
              remaining bivalve subclasses Heteroconchia and Anomalodesmata, and             
              it will use the entire database for the Bivalvia in conjunction                
              with published and new data of shell morphology, hinge dentition,              
              shell musculature, gill, palp, pedal and stomach structure, and all            
              other pertinent aspects of hard and soft anatomy to provide the                
              first truly comprehensive, family-cladistic analysis of this entire            
              class.  The cladistic analyses will employ two alternative                     
              microcomputer programs with efficient routines for finding                     
              parsimonious cladograms, as well as a hybrid program, presently                
              under development by Fisher (1991), which will combine some of the             
              salient points of conventional cladistics and stratophenetics.                 
              Competing parsimonious cladograms will be evaluated from the                   
              perspective of traditional stratophenetics.                                    
                   In addition to providing new perspectives on evolutionary                 
              convergence in shell and ligament microstructure and ligament                  
              structure, this research is expected to resolve many important but             
              previously intractable questions of bivalve evolution, including               
              the early diversification of shell microstructure in the Bivalvia,             
              the origin of porcelaneous structures in the Veneroida, possible               
              diphyletic origins of the Crassatelloidea, the origin of the myoid             
              superfamilies, and the evolution of porcelaneous microstructures               
              and asymmetrical ligaments in the Anomalodesmata.  Additionally,               
              this research will provide a sound phylogenetic and taxonomic                  
              framework for future lower-level taxonomic studies, as well as a               
              basis for broader studies of evolutionary radiation and extinction.
