Title       : Mechanism of Beta-Glucan Biosynthesis in Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1995        
File        : a9205832

Award Number: 9205832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Wasserman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1148,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The biosynthesis of (1,3)-B-linked glucan in higher plants is                  
              catalyzed by the plasma membrane-bound enzyme callose synthase                 
              (UDP-Glc: (1,3)-B-glucan synthase).  Callose synthase activity is              
              ubiquitous in isolated membrane fractions from a wide variety of               
              plants, and has been hypothesized to be a deregulated form of                  
              cellulose synthase.  Therefore, to understand the biochemical basis            
              for the regulation of cell wall polysaccharide biogenesis and wound            
              healing, it is necesary to identify and characterize the                       
              polypeptide subunits of polysaccharide synthases such as calloses              
              synthase, and the genes which encode them.                                     
              Although callose synthase has proven to be a stubborn enzyme to                
              purify to homogeneity by standard protein fractionation techniques,            
              rapid progress has been made towards identifying the polypeptide               
              components of callose synthases from various sources.  Comparisons             
              of polypeptide profiles between our system, Beta vulgaris L., and              
              other plants show the emergence of common polypeptide profiles.                
              During the previous two years, through photoaffinity labeling,                 
              improved enrichment procedures and most recently polypeptide                   
              depletion, we have identified UDP-Glc-binding subunits of 57-,31-              
              and 29-kD, as well as a group of instrinsic hydrophobic                        
              polypeptides of 92, 83, 43 and 27 kD.  Our working hypothesis, upon            
              which the proposed experiments are predicated, is that the one or              
              more of these polypeptidesare part of a multi-subunit callose                  
              synthase complex.                                                              
              This project will proceed along two lines.  The first will be a                
              continuation of our efforts to unambiguously identify callose                  
              synthase subunits, and will consist of polypeptide-depletion                   
              experiments, topographic analysis using vesicles of defined                    
              sidedness, photolabeling studies using azido-probes and limited                
              proteolysis.  We will continue to raise antibodies against                     
              individual enzyme subunits.  Second, we plan to clone and sequence             
              a structural gene(s) encoding subunit shown to be required for                 
              enzyme activity.                                                               
              Identification and cloning of callose synthase subunits should pave            
              the way for resolving the longstanding question of whether (1,3)               
              and (1,4) B-linked glucans are biosynthesized by a single enzyme or            
              distinct enzymes where each produces a distinct linkage type.  The             
              availability of amino acid sequences and cDNA for callose synthase             
              subunits will reveal whether sequence homologies exist with known              
              bacterial cellulose synthase genes, and therefore define the extent            
              to which callose and cellulose synthases are structurally related.             
              This research will also help pave the way to study gene expression             
              during cell wall biogenesis.                                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              Cellulose (1,4-B-D-glucan) is the world's most abundant                        
              macromolecule, with an estimated 1011 tons biosynthesized per year.            
              It is a major component of plant cell walls providing structural               
              integrity and protection against invading plant pathogens.                     
              Callose, the (1,3)-B-linked counterpart of cellulose, is                       
              physiologically important since its synthesis is induced in                    
              response to wounding and infection.  Callose is also found in plant            
              structures such as pollen tubes, sieve plants and in the cell walls            
              of some monocots.  B-glucans from plants and yeast are are                     
              economically important due to their unique agrilcultural,                      
              physiological and nutritional properties.  Recent studies show that            
              B-Glucans of mixed linkage ((1,3),(1,4)-B-glucan) from oats and                
              (1,3)-B-glucan from yeast have the ability to lower cholesterol in             
              hypercholesteremic individuals when significant levels are                     
              incorporated into the diet.  The pharmaceutical industry is                    
              interested in fungal glucan synthases because they represent                   
              potential molecular targets for new drugs which are needed to treat            
              systemic fungal infections.                                                    
              Very little is known about the biochemical mechanism by which                  
              glucans are produced.  This project focuses on expanding our                   
              knowledge of the structure and function of (1,3)-B-glucan synthase,            
              commonly known as callose synthase, a cell wall biosynthetic enzyme            
              complex ubiquitous in higher plants.  In the near-term, one                    
              objective is continued application of basic protein chemistry to               
              make further progress towards the unambiguous identification of the            
              protein components of CS.  In addition, our knowledge of the CS                
              complex has reached the point where a molecular biology component              
              is warranted.  Thus, a second objective is to clone selected                   
              components of the CS complex in order to obtain deduced amino acid             
              sequences for CS polypeptides.  We will then determine whether                 
              similarities exist with known sequences of cellulose synthase from             
              cellulose-producing microorganisms.  This would indicate whether               
              cellulose and CSs are structurally related.  This research will                
              also help to gain an improved understanding of callose deposition              
              as part of the wound response.                                                 
              Research on the biosynthesis of plant-derived biopolymers has                  
              important scientific and economic implications.  It is critical for            
              U.S.-based labs to continue to play a significant role in these                
              efforts.
