Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1994  
File        : a9205571

Award Number: 9205571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9857               (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Agnew jagnew@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Holly M. Hapke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The development of world fisheries recently has been                      
              characterized by rapid expansion of total output and volume of                 
              trade.  This has encouraged coastal nations to expand the                      
              production capacity of their fisheries to service the                          
              international market for marine products.  This has led to an                  
              emphasis on growth oriented comparative advantage approaches                   
              involving large-scale projects, modern capital intensive                       
              technology, and heavy injections of foreign and national capital.              
              One result of this activity has been to transfer priority away                 
              from production for local markets to production for international              
              export.  This project examines how these global level economic                 
              processes have affected local fishing communities in coastal                   
              India.  Specifically, research will center on how the                          
              introduction of large-scale mechanization and shifts in local                  
              production and marketing priorities have affected petty traders                
              in terms of their ability to participate in the fish economy of                
              two local communities in Kerala state.  Data will be collected                 
              through interviews, observations of market transactions and                    
              activities, and from archival records.  These data will form the               
              basis of a comparative study of market arrangements in the two                 
              districts before and after the introduction of mechanized                      
              technology.                                                                    
                   The disruption of long established local economies through                
              their integration into the global economy has often had profound               
              effects on the livelihoods of local producers and traders.  This               
              research will highlight these impacts in a region which is being               
              rapidly influenced by forces of change in the global fishing                   
              industry.  It will merge social and economic processes with                    
              spatial factors into a single analytical framework for analysis                
              of local variation in economic development as a direct result of               
              changes in the world economy.
