Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Ethylene Insensitive Loci in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1994     
File        : a9205342

Award Number: 9205342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385713             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Ecker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The plant hormone ethylene plays an important role in plant                    
              development and is a major component of a plants response to                   
              physical and biological stress.  This simple hydrocarbon molecule              
              provides an effective stress signal; its gaseous nature allows for             
              rapid diffusion of the hormone signal to both local and distant                
              target sites where upon activation of stress and defense response              
              genes may aid in plant protection.  The ethylene-related mutants               
              of Arabidopsis thaliana are powerful tools for the genetic                     
              dissection of the ethylene signal transduction pathway.  Mutations             
              which affect hormone production, perception and signal transduction            
              will be examined.  The role of etheylene in plant stress and                   
              differential cell growth processes will be addressed using genetic,            
              molecular and biochemical approaches.  Our understanding of the                
              mechanisms of hormone signal transduction will be greatly aided by             
              analysis of the Arabidopsis ethylene-related genes.  The molecular             
              cloning and characterization of genes which are required for                   
              regulation of ethylene production, perception and signal                       
              transduction is a major focus of this proposal.  The effects of                
              ethylene-related mutations on hormone- and stress-regulated gene               
              expression will be examined using chimeric gene fusions and in situ            
              RNA hybridization.  The ability to resist bacterial pathogen attack            
              will also be investigated in these mutants.  Finally, to further               
              aid in the genetic dissection of the ethylene action pathway,                  
              pseudorevertant analysis will be initiated for genes which act at              
              different steps in the signal transduction process.  The                       
              characterization of interactions among ethylene receptors, effector            
              molecules and modulatory components at the genetic, molecular and              
              biochemical level should provide insight into the complex pathways             
              of hormone signal transduction.
