Title       : Chlamydomonas Telomere Function: A Telomere Binding Protein and its Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9205997

Award Number: 9205997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith G. Berman judith@biosci.cbs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1132,9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 Telomeres, the specialized structures at chromosome ends, are               
              essential for the replication and maintenance of chromosomes.                  
              Telomeres are composed of highly repetitive DNA and proteins that              
              interact with thtat DNA.  The Chlamydomonas reinhardtii telomere               
              repeat sequence, (T4AG3)n, conforms to the telomere repeat motif               
              (TnAG3) where n=2 in vertebrates, n=3 in plants, and n=4 in                    
              Chlamydomonas.  The telomere DNA from yeasts and ciliates has been             
              studied extensively; it is very G-rich and, in vitro, the G-strand             
              readily folds into G-G base paired DNA structures that are                     
              unusually stable.  The C. reinhardtii telomere DNA is not G-rich,              
              and, while the G-strand can fold into G-G base paired structures,              
              these structures are not stable.  Chlamydomonas is a unicellular               
              model organism that can be sstudied using classical and molecular              
              genetics and that has regular telomere repeat sequences.  A                    
              protein, Chhlamydomonas G-strand telomere binding protein (CGTBP),             
              that binds specifically to the C. reinhardtii G-strand telomere                
              repeat sequence T4AG3 has been identified and a gene that encodes              
              this activity has been cloned.  The CGTBP gene will be sequenced               
              and its deduced coding sequence will be compared to known protein              
              sequences. CGTBP will be analyzed biochemically and the protein                
              will be localized in the cell by immunomicroscopy.  Transcript                 
              and/or protein accumulation will be monitored thtrough the cell                
              cycle.  The phenotypes of cells that have altered levels of CGTBP              
              will be studied by transformation of Chlamydomonas cells with the              
              CGTBP gene in the sense or antisense orientation under the control             
              of regulated promoters.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              In eukaryotic cells, the genetic information is encoded by DNA,                
              which is packaged with associated proteins into structures called              
              chromosomes.  The chromosomes have highly specialized regions at               
              their linear ends, called telomeres, which are essential for DNA               
              replication, and may have additional functions in the cell cycle.              
              These regions contain characteristic tandemly repeated DNA                     
              sequences and proteins which interact with those repeated                      
              sequences.  Very little is known about these telomeric proteins.               
              This project will provide a great deal of structural information               
              about one such telomeric protein, and has the potential to provide             
              information about its function also.
