Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Proof Theory and Computational Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9205181

Award Number: 9205181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel R. Buss sbuss@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The research of Samuel Buss deals with formal systems of                  
              mathematical logic and with low-level complexity and the                       
              interrelationships between these subjects.  The logical systems to             
              be studied include fragments of arithmetic, especially bounded                 
              arithmetic, and pure first-order logic and propositional logic.                
              The low-level complexity classes to be studied include alternating             
              log time and the polynomial time hierarchy.  He is particularly                
              concerned with developing new and fruitful connections between                 
              computational complexity and the proof theory of formal systems.               
              Past research has already established intimate connections between             
              these areas.  This project concerns primarily (1) formal theories              
              with proof-theoretic strength closely related to various                       
              computational complexity classes and (2) the structure of first-               
              order and propositional proofs, especially, the lengths of proofs.             
                   Proof theory is concerned with such properties of proofs as               
              their length, correctness being understood and taken for granted.              
              Thus a typical result might assert that the proposition P is a                 
              deeper result than the proposition Q in the sense that any proof of            
              P (in a specific formal system) is longer than some known proof of             
              Q (in the same system).  A slightly more complicated type of result            
              considers a sequence of propositions  P1, P2, P3, ..., Pn, ..., all            
              provable both in the formal system F and in the formal system G.               
              If, for example, the lengths of the best proofs of these                       
              propositions in F grow in length as the square of n, while their               
              best proofs in G grow exponentially in n, then it would seem that              
              F is a more powerful system than G.  Buss has found ways to relate             
              questions of this nature to complexity classes of arithmetic                   
              functions that have already been studied by computer scientists.
