Title       : Small Sample Methods for Interrupted and Noninterrupted Time-series Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9205328

Award Number: 9205328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley E. Huitema huitema@gw.wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph W. McKean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The general objectives of this research are to describe the               
              small sample problems associated with several of the most                      
              frequently used time-series statistical procedures and to develop              
              improved alternative methods.  The plan is to provide researchers              
              and applied statisticians with information regarding the negative              
              consequences of employing conventional time-series methods with                
              small sample sizes and to provide more satisfactory procedures for             
              the small sample case.  More specifically,  the nature and                     
              magnitude of small sample bias will be evaluated in a wide variety             
              of descriptive and inferential statistics used in the analysis of              
              simple and complex intervention and non-intervention time-series               
              studies.                                                                       
                   The investigation will require computer simulations of the                
              sampling distributions of various autoregressive and white noise               
              processes.  The focus will be on simple univariate autoregressive              
              models because such models appear to characterize a large                      
              proportion of applications in the social sciences.  The early                  
              stages of the work are expected to specify clearly the weaknesses              
              of several conventional methods.  It is anticipated that new                   
              procedures developed in the last stage of the research will lead               
              to improved statistical and substantive conclusions in many areas              
              of science that now employ time-series methods.                                
                   The principal investigators are well qualified to carry out               
              this project.  They are expert in both time-series analysis and                
              robustness and they have many years of experience in their                     
              respective fields.
