Title       : Diversity of Terrestrial Locomotor Design: Mechanics and Energetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9205844

Award Number: 9205844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283521             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Full rjfull@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The general objective of the proposed research is to determine the             
              limits of performance during non-steady state, intermittent                    
              activity in order to reveal general principles of organismal                   
              design. Our objective will be accomplished by exploiting the                   
              enormous variation in the way animals are built for legged                     
              terrestrial locomotion. Energy, oxygen transport and musculo-                  
              skeletal systems have been well studied during steady-state,                   
              constant speed locomotion, but these systems must also function                
              under non-steady state, transient conditions. We propose to test               
              whether or not performance limits established under steady-state               
              exercise is conducted intermittently. We will determine the extent             
              to which endurance during intermittent locomotion in arthropods is             
              dependent on exercise period duration, pause period duration, the              
              ratio of exercise to pause duration, and the speed during the                  
              exercise period. We will also test whether or not the cost of                  
              intermittent locomotion, both per time and per distance, is more               
              expensive than continuous locomotion at the same average speed when            
              both aerobic and anaerobic sources are considered. Finally, we will            
              determine the physiological correlates of intermittent exercise                
              performance. We will both measure and model correlates of fatigue              
              causing agents  that accumulate during exercise periods, but are               
              removed, reduced or cleared during the pause periods and fatigue               
              causing agents that accumulate during the pause periods. The                   
              proposed research on intermittent locomotion attempts to advance               
              the previous paradigm based on steady-state locomotion and takes               
              the next step logical to the development of a general theory of                
              activity.
