Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Ordovician and Silurian Explosive Volcanism in the
               Iapetus Region: Tectonomagmatic, Tectonic,Event-Stratigraphic, and Biologic
               Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1993       
File        : a9205981

Award Number: 9205981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stig M. Bergstrom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The project continues of study of Ordovician and Silurian K-              
              bentonites in the Iapetus region that was started in 1990.  The                
              discovery that the Millbrig K-bentonite in North America represents            
              the same ash fall as the "Big Bentonite" in Baltoscandia makes its             
              possible to use this bed as a unique time plane for various                    
              regional geological studies, such as a recently started Ph.D.,                 
              project on Middle Ordovician conodont biofacies differentiation in             
              the Iapetus region and its ecologic controls.  Being apparently the            
              largest volcanic ash fall known, the Millbrig- "Big-Bentonite"                 
              offers an unusual opportunity to study mortality and extinction                
              effects of a giant ash fall on marine biota, and such a study will             
              be undertaken.  Also, this horizon, along with new biostratigraphic            
              data,  will be used for application of Sweet's American graphic                
              correlation scheme to European successions thereby greatly                     
              increasing the precision in trans-Atlantic correlations.                       
              Geodynamic and event-stratigraphic studies will include chemical               
              fingerprinting of selected beds and modeling of the Millbrig- "Big             
              Bentonite" eruption based on regional grain-size pattern analyses.             
              These will also be used for obtaining a distance figure of the                 
              width of the Iapetus in the Middle Ordovician.  We also plan to get            
              high-precision U-Pb dates on biostratigraphically well-controlled              
              K-bentonites that will provide significant contributions to the                
              Ordovician-Silurian time scale.
