Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9205068

Award Number: 9205068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8505               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Data from the developing world show a strong correlation                  
              between female household headship and poverty, due largely to the              
              status of women in society.  Household members suffer the direct               
              effects of poverty such as malnourishment, disease, and violence,              
              and they are often forced to trade off schooling for work.  On                 
              the other hand, research in the peripheral countries shows a                   
              greater devotion of women's income to household needs, a more                  
              egalitarian distribution of domestic chores, and a less violent                
              domestic environment.  This has opened up to debate the issue of               
              the effect of female headship on women's and household poverty.                
              This project will involve comparative research on the link                     
              between women and poverty in two Mexican cities.  It will examine              
              the circumstances under which female headship arises and the                   
              mechanisms by which these households fall into or break out of                 
              poverty.  Data will be collected for both female and non-female                
              headed households in two different urban cultural environments.                
              Both structured and unstructured interviews as well as                         
              ethnographic data on labor and household histories will form the               
              basis for the analysis.  Analysis will be performed with special               
              software designed for exploring patterns and themes in                         
              ethnographic data.                                                             
                   Results of this research will add new knowledge on the                    
              relationship between household structure and poverty in                        
              developing countries.  It will provide important insights into                 
              the position of women in society, the labor market, and the home.              
              It will also fill in important gaps in knowledge about female                  
              headed households in Latin America, an area of rapid demographic               
              and social change.
