Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9258673

Award Number: 9258673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann Stock   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Robert Wood Johnson Med
	      675 Hoes Lane
	      Piscataway, NJ  088545635    732/463-4687

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9297,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Similar molecular strategies are used in stimulus/response coupling            
              in all cells.  The process generally involves transmembrane                    
              receptors located at the cell surface and a set of intracellular               
              signal transduction proteins that carry information from the                   
              receptors to the target proteins that mediate the specific                     
              responses.  Bacterial chemotaxis is an ideal model system for                  
              investigating the molecular mechanism of receptor-mediated signal              
              transduction.  The system is composed of a small number of                     
              components; a family of transmembrane receptor proteins, two                   
              receptor modifying enzymes, the flagellar motor apparatus, and four            
              cytoplasmic signal transduction proteins that process information              
              linking receptor signaling to the motor response.  The central                 
              signal transduction mechanism in chemotaxis involves                           
              phosphotransfer from a histidine protein kinase, CheA, to a                    
              phosphorylation-activated regulator protein that controls the                  
              direction of flagellar rotation, CheY.  Autophosphorylation of the             
              kinase, CheA, is regulated by the receptors in a mechanism that                
              requires the auxiliary protein, CheW, and is dependent on both the             
              degree of receptor ligand occupancy, and on the modification state             
              of the receptor.  The system provides an opportunity for                       
              elucidating the fundamental principles of protein modification                 
              reactions and protein/protein interactions in regulatory                       
              biochemistry.                                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              A molecular description of signal transduction in the model system             
              of bacterial chemotaxis is critical to understanding the                       
              fundamental chemical strategies for complex regulatory phenomena               
              such as signal amplification and adaptation.  Dr. Stock's                      
              laboratory is using a combination of molecular genetic,                        
              biochemical, and biophysical methods to correlate structure and                
              function of several signal transduction proteins.
