Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Algorithms for Molecular Biology, Optimal Triangulation,
               Minimum Spanning Trees, and Geometric Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1997      
File        : a9258355

Award Number: 9258355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Eppstein eppstein@ics.uci.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9218,9297,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This project addresses research in the design and analysis of  algorithms,
              motivated by applications in many other areas of computer  science.  Very
              similar problems tend to arise in very different  applications.  As an example,
              the ``least weight subsequence problem''  which is studied in connection with
              certain biological sequence  comparison problems has also appeared in page
              layout algorithms, VLSI  design theory, and computational geometry.  Also work
              in motion  planning for parts handlers may be couched in the language of
              automata  theory, and is closely related to some problems in coding theory.  As
               a consequence, theoretical computer science research might be most 
              appropriately grouped by solution style and technique, rather than by  the
              problems that it solves.  Along with traditional sequential  algorithms, there
              is work with parallel (PRAM model) algorithms.  Algorithms in molecular biology
              have become increasingly important, as  the quantity of DNA sequence
              information known has been growing  more quickly than the ability of computers
              to process it.  Until  recently, most workers in biological algorithms were
              mathematicians  and biologists.  Their research identified and formalized many 
              problems in this area, but the algorithms they developed tended to be  simple
              applications of dynamic programming.  This work  applies more sophisticated
              techniques to these problems, resulting in  speedups of one or two orders of
              magnitude.  There will also be ongoing research on problems of computing
              minimum  spanning trees, both for graphs and for planar point sets.  The main 
              focus is on dynamic versions of such problems as the minimum  spanning tree. 
              This has led to a more general study of off-line  algorithms, and to data
              structures for querying the effects on  the MST on potential future update.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
