Title       : Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC): Moderate Resolution Protein
               Structures by Chemical Crosslinking and Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0118481

Award Number: 0118481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1950000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney K. Guy rguy@cgl.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rodney K. Guy, Bradford Gibson and Irwin Kuntz of the University of California
              San Francisco and the University of California Santa Barbara are jointly
              supported by the Division of Chemistry, Special Projects Office, for their
              interdisciplinary collaboration on protein structure determinations by mass
              spectrometry. They will design and synthesize cross-linking agents that will
              selectively bind to pairs of amino acid sidechains when they are within a
              certain distance. By using a variety of crosslinking agents singly or in
              combination, they will be able to chemically connect residues that are 5-20
              Angstroms apart. Isotopically labeled crosslinkers or crosslinkers that
              incorporate an affinity purification tag will also be investigated. After
              crosslinking, the modified proteins will be digested, purified by HPLC, then
              analyzed by mass spectrometry. Computational techniques will be developed to
              analyze the mass spectrometric data and derive the tertiary structure of the
              protein. Initial proteins to be studied include FGF-2  and HIV-integrase. This
              method will also be used to study protein-protein or domain-domain
              interactions.

Determining the tertiary or three dimensional structure of
              proteins or protein complexes is a key problem. This mass spectrometric tool
              will provide a complement to existing techniques of nuclear magnetic resonance
              and single crystal x-ray diffraction. The goal is to develop a highly
              automated, high-throughput system that can infer tertiary structure using small
              amounts of protein.

Collaborative Research in Chemistry (CRC) awards are
              given to interdisciplinary teams of scientists working on problems of broad
              chemical interest. The emphasis in these awards is on new collaborative modes
              of research and training.
