Title       : Information Technology and the Structure of Organizations:Formal Theory as a
               Guide for Empirical Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0118600

Award Number: 0118600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99356              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Marschak marschak@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research considers the impact of improved Information Technology (IT) on the
              structure of organizations.   Recent empirical work suggests that as IT
              improves, the organizations using it may find it advantageous to enlarge the
              scope of individual or departmental decision-making (i.e., to decentralize) and
              at the same time to make the organization's final actions more sensitive to the
              information gathered by all departments (i.e., to coordinate). The research
              will study formal models to determine the assumptions under which these claims
              indeed hold up. That will require precise specification of the organization's
              actions, goals, and information-processing activities and precise assumptions
              about the self-interested behavior of the organization's members when the
              organization decentralizes. In the main class of models, the relevant IT is the
              ability to search large databases. To choose appropriate actions, the
              organization has to track its changing external environment. Each member of the
              organization specializes in some aspect of the environment, and improved
              database-search capability allows the member to learn more about that aspect
              for a given search cost. Search cost will be measured in several alternative
              ways. The results of the research should be useful in suggesting new hypotheses
              and methods for future empirical work on the impact of IT at the level of
              organizations. 
