Title       : Sources of New Production and the Degredation of Organic Matter in a Tropical
               Margin Influenced by Seasonal Upwelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0118867

Award Number: 0118867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond N. Sambrotto sambrott@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0118867

New production is that component of total
              phytoplankton production fueled by nitrate uptake and  the fixation of N2. In a
              nitrogen-limited model of ocean plankton growth, new production can be  used to
              define an upper limit for the export of organic material from the surface to
              deeper layers.  Thus, new production is an important starting point to
              determine the ocean's role in the vertical  flux of bio-active materials such
              as carbon dioxide.  A second critical factor is the amount of new  production
              that is exported to depth.  Both export and new production can vary
              independently and  both need to be understood to predict how efficiently
              material will be removed from surface  waters.  Previous time series
              measurements in the Cariaco Basin off northeast Venezuela  recorded prodigious
              productivity associated with the winter upwelling period and lower (although 
              still moderate) production in summer as well as the possible contribution of
              chemosynthesis at  depth to the total organic export.  Thus, the region is a
              useful example of a low-latitude eutrophic-ocean  margin region in which much
              of the production reaches deep water.  

In this project, researchers from
              the Lamont-Dougherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University will study the
              relative contribution of nitrate uptake and N2 fixation to total particulate 
              export and how these sources vary seasonally in the Cariaco Basin.  The
              proposed work is a companion effort with the ongoing CARIACO Time-Series
              Project. While the latter core effort will provide the basic logistics,
              physical and chemical and  productivity measurements, the work undertaken in
              this project will focus on the source, amount and export  efficiency of new
              production.  Direct incubation methods will be used to measure the seasonal 
              changes in nitrate uptake and N2 fixation in surface waters using both 15 N
              tracer techniques for  nitrate and di-nitrogen gas as well as the acetylene
              reduction for N2 fixation.  Seasonal sampling  of these rates over two years
              will provide a basis for estimating the relative importance of N2  fixation, a
              potentially important input of combined nitrogen to the ocean. In addition to
              sediment  trap comparisons, the overall efficiency of export also will be
              measured with a recently developed 13C dilution method for estimating
              sub-surface carbon respiration.  Finally, these rate measurements will be used
              to calibrate a model of new production and export  in the region based on
              remotely sensed information. The model will explicitly estimate N2  fixation.
              This work will help to constrain the cumulative role of tropical margins in the
              supply of  combined nitrogen to the ocean as well as in total-ocean carbon
              uptake. 



