Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolution Of Environments Within Black Smoker Chimney
               Walls: Microbial Colonization As Functions Of Temperature, Chemistry, And Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0118394

Award Number: 0118394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodey Batiza                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret K. Tivey mktivey@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert M. Bradley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Seewald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The porous walls of hydrothermal chimneys are ideal habitats for microorganisms
              because of the steep chemical and thermal gradients present there.  In this
              proposed study, the PI team will study the physical and chemical conditions in
              growing chimneys over time scales of minutes to months and then determine the
              distribution of microorganisms in this framework.  In addition, there will be a
              modeling component of the study that will try to determine what subsurface
              geochemical processes are occurring in the deep reaction zones that bring
              nutrients and other chemicals to the surface.  This is a collaboration with
              Stakes, Wheat, and Koski, and will use the R/V Western Flyer (MBARI ship) and
              the ROV Tiburon to stud growing chimneys.  Thermocouple arrays will be placed
              on growing chimnes and then will be enveloped as the chimney grows.  Later, the
              chimneys will be recovered and the microbiota studied in wide variety of ways
              including culturing and molecular phylogenetic methods.  At the same time, the
              sulfide minerals of the chimneys and associated vent fluids will also be
              studied in detail to yield mineralogic, chemical and isotopic data that
              constrain the chemical conditions of microbial growth, succession, and
              diversity.  Thermodynamic and advective-diffusive modeling will be carried out
              to constrain the amounts and sources of chemical energy available for metabolic
              activity.  This study will provide a multidisciplinary study of the interaction
              between growing sulfide chimneys and microbes.

