Title       : Taxon-specific contributions to export production - Development of biomarker
               approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0118038

Award Number: 0118038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Goericke rgoericke@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Photoautotrophic picoplankton contribute significantly to phytoplankton biomass
              and primary production in the ocean. The smallest known photoautotroph is
              Prochlorococcus sp. It is unusual because its primary photosynthetic pigment is
              divinyl-chlorophyll a (Chl a2), a unique biomarker for this organism. The
              traditional view of the marine food web suggests that carbon assimilated by
              Prochlorococcus, and other picoautotrophs, is primarily recycled within the
              microbial web. High concentrations of Chl a2-degradation products found in
              surficial sediments and sediment trap material from the Eastern Tropical North
              Pacific suggest that Prochlorococcus may nonetheless contribute significantly
              to export production in that environment. This inference depends on the
              assumptions that 1) water column concentrations of Chl a2 and Chl a1 are
              equally good proxies for the biomass of Prochlorococcus and other
              phytoplankters, respectively, 2) the chlorin-conversion efficiencies of Chl a1
              and Chl a2, when ingested by herbivores, are similar and 3) the diagenesis of
              chlorins in sediments does not alter the ratio of Chl a1 and Chl a2-derived
              chlorins. The first objective of this proposal is to test these assumptions to
              place inferences based Chl a1/ a2-ratios on a firm basis. Knowing the relative
              contributions of Prochlorococcus to export production would allow one to
              calculate the contributions of picoplankton in general. These fluxes are likely
              mediated by pelagic tunicates, assuming that chlorins entering the microbial
              loop are quickly degraded and that pelagic tunicates, or at least some of
              these, are the only macrozooplankters capable of grazing on Prochlorococcus.
              Testing these two assumptions in the field is the second objective of this
              proposal. The proposed work constitutes a biomarker approach that will enable
              us to measure the contribution of Prochlorococcus and picoplankters to export
              production. These tools will help us understand the sources and controls of
              export production in the open ocean. This added understanding will contribute
              to our ability to predict the effects of environmental change on open ocean
              ecosystem.
