Title       : Collaborative Research: Evolution Of Environments Within Black Smoker Chimney
               Walls: Microbial Colonization As Functions Of Temperature, Chemistry, And Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0118240

Award Number: 0118240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154424             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna-Louise Reysenbach reysenbacha@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The researchers will investigate the interaction of microorganisms with their
              geochernical environment in chimney deposits that are actively forming in the
              Guaymas Basin hydrothermal system. The specific objectives of this study are
              twofold.  First, they will trace the evolution of the thermal/chemical/physical
              environment within newly formed chimney walls over time-scales of minutes to
              months and determine the distribution of microorganisms within this
              temporal/chemical/thermal/spatiaI framework. Second, they will assess
              subsurface geochemical processes responsible for the delivery of organic and
              inorganic metabolic energy sources and nutrients from deep-seated reaction
              zones to near seafloor environments.

These goals will be attained by
              identifying microbial populations that inhabit well-constrained temperature and
              compositional domains within the walls of newly formed and existing chimneys
              through a collaborative and interdisciplinary study with Drs. Debra Stakes
              (MBARI), Randy Koski (USGS), and Geoff Wheat (University of Alaska
              Fairbanks-MBARI campus), using the MBARI RN Western Flyer and ROV Tiburon.
              Temperature within the walls of newly formed chimneys will be monitored using
              thermocouple arrays that are enveloped during chimney growth. The new chimneys
              will subsequently be recovered and the solid material in the immediate vicinity
              of each thermocouple used for enrichment cultures, molecular phylogenetic
              approaches, and fluorescent in situ hybridization with 16S rRNA-specific
              probes, while splits of the same material will be fully characterized with
              respect to their mineralogic, chemical, and isotopic composition. Vent fluids
              delivering nutrients and chemical energy from deep-seated subsurface reaction
              zones to the seafloor will be analyzed using a comprehensive analytical plan
              that involves quantitative determination of the abundance of aqueous organic,
              inorganic, and gaseous species. Compositional data for fluids and solids will
              be used to constrain thermodynamic and diffusive-advective models that allow
              estimation of fluid composition and temperature within chimney walls,
              information that will facilitate calculation of the amounts and sources of
              chemical energy available for metabolic activity. Mineralogical, chemical, and
              isotopic analyses of chimney minerals will provide key information on
              conditions present as the chimneys have evolved that can be compared to the
              thermal history as recorded by the thermocouples, and to the results of model
              calculations.

The resultant understanding of the time dependent colonization
              of chimney environments in which the P-T-X conditions are known will address
              important questions about how microorganisms grow in these extreme
              environments, and what the geochemical constraints are on microbial diversity
              and succession. The methods the investigators will use have all been applied
              successfully at other vent sites. What makes this research unique is the
              combination of these technologies and interdisciplinary expertise to assess
              biogeochemical processes within vent environments.


