Title       : PEET: Phylogenetic Systematics of Scale Insects (Hemiptera: Coccoidea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0118718

Award Number: 0118718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Quentin D. Wheeler                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $743893             (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope J. Gullan pjgullan@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The scale insects (Insecta: Hemiptera: Coccoidea) are small, plant-sucking
              insects with
extraordinary biological and morphological characteristics. They
              display unusual development, sexual dimorphism, and have a remarkable diversity
              of genetic systems, including parthenogenesis, hermaphroditism and paternal
              genome elimination. Many species are important pests, causing plant damage via
              sap removal, growth distortion, pathogen vectoring and honeydew contamination.
              Although more than 7500 species of scale insects have been described, there are
              many additional undescribed species, and a substantial proportion of the named
              species, especially in the tropics and southern hemisphere, are difficult or
              impossible to identify with existing literature. Scale insect taxonomy is based
              largely on microscopic cuticular features of adult females and identification
              requires special technical skills in microscope slide preparation. Worldwide
              the number of scale insect researchers (coccidologists), especially
              taxonomists, is declining and recruitment via student training is minimal. This
              project combines the expertise of scale insect systematists, Drs. P.J. Gullan
              and D.R. Miller, and molecular systematist, Dr. B.B. Normark, to train
              coccidology students in taxonomic monography, phylogenetic systematics and
              computer-based data analysis, illustration and  dissemination. Three clades of
              Coccoidea that display unusual modes of reproduction and are poorly-known
              and/or difficult to identify are targeted for study. These are (1) the tribe
              Iceryini of the Margarodidae, (2) the genus Chionaspis Signoret, tribe
              Diaspidini, of the armored scale family, Diaspididae, and (3) the subfamily
              Myzolecaniinae of the soft scale family, Coccidae. Students will be trained in
              field techniques and in taxonomic and curatorial methods, as well as in
              phylogenetic analysis of morphological and molecular character data. The
              trainee researchers will utilize the specimens and specialist libraries
of the
              two largest scale insect collections in North America - the United States
              National
Collection of Coccoidea at the United States Department of
              Agriculture, Maryland, and the Bohart Museum of Entomology, University of
              California, Davis. 

Students will learn to score morphological and molecular
              characters, to manage those data using computer programs, to use the data to
              infer phylogenetic trees, and to use those trees to construct classifications
              and infer the evolution of biological traits.  This will result in training a
              new generation of taxonomic specialists on these important insects.  Products
              of the project will include published monographs, databases, and web-based
              interactive keys that employ digital images that will have broad impact and
              utility to ecologists, agriculturists, conservation biologists, geneticists,
              and others.

