Title       : VISUALIZATION:Manipulating Volumes: A New Paradigm for Advanced Volume
               Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0118760

Award Number: 0118760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah Silver silver@vizlab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As 3D volume data becomes more prevalent from simulations and sensing equipment,
              and as volume rendering APIs are becoming available in software and hardware
              implementations, the need to manipulate volume models arises. However, the work
              on manipulating volume models for analysis and computer graphics applications
              is sparse. The few methods that are available are computationally expensive and
              non-intuitive. This project avoids these problems by using volumetric skeletons
              to control manipulation. The skeleton acts as a ubiquitous data structure for
              volumes and allows manipulation in a much more intuitive and general manner.
              The skeleton is computed from the actual volume with a reversible thinning
              procedure based upon the distance transform. The skeletal points are connected
              and arranged in a skeleton-tree structure. The key to this process is the
              reconstruction phase that maps the sampled voxels around the skeleton-tree. The
              skeleton is an intuitive mechanism for manipulation. For example, a user can
              deform the skeleton to create the corresponding deformations in the volume. The
              skeleton-tree allows the user to reshape volumes and create new visualizations.
              Among other things, this allows culling sections of a volume logically,
              morphing volumes to simulate changes in a 3D feature over time, detecting
              collisions for interactive volume-based virtual reality applications, and
              volume animation and volume graphics (mimicking the standard graphics pipeline
              with volumes). Because skeletons can be generated hierarchically, they can be
              used to perform a variety of tasks including volume smoothing and
              level-of-detail representation.

The goal of this project is to extend and
              fundamentally enhance previous research in volume skeletonization. It will
              develop a full range of robust skeletal algorithms and interactive tools. The
              researchers will investigate the exciting new visualization applications of the
              parameter-based volume skeleton. This should have a wide impact in the
              visualization and computer graphics communities.

