Title       : Collaborative Research: Magnetic characterization of dust in Greenland Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0118470

Award Number: 0118470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87615              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis V. Kent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Kent
OPP-01-18470
Biscaye
OPP-01-18458

This is a collaborative
              proposal between Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory and Rutgers University.  The
              magnetic properties of Greenland ice were tested in samples of Holocene
              (interglacial) and Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) age. The dominant diamagnetism of
              ice prevented useful measurements of magnetic susceptibility, but the samples
              contain a sufficient concentration of iron oxide magnetic minerals that can be
              estimated using isothermal remanent magnetization (IRM) intensity.  Some
              unusual problems had to be solved in order to obtain reliable measurements.
              Coercivity spectra in the Greenland ice samples are consistent with a dominant
              magnetite carrier. An unusual aspect of the preliminary magnetic data is that
              the LGM ice samples tend to have lower IRM values than interglacial ice
              samples, although LGM ice generally contains much higher concentrations of
              eolian dust than interglacial ice. The magnetic minerals constitute only a
              small fraction of the wind transported dust, but may reflect variations in
              pedogenesis and other environmental conditions in the source area(s), as well
              as differences in the possible source areas and/or atmospheric circulation and
              transport. The source area is presumed to be eastern Asia, and is presently the
              Takla Makan and other Inner Mongolian and Mongolian deserts, which were also
              the source areas for the sediments of the Chinese Loess Plateau. The objectives
              of this research are to validate a methodology of ice magnetic measurements by
              calibrating the ice magnetic data with direct measurements of dust extracts,
              and to compare the magnetic properties of polar dust in Greenland ice with
              those of possible source area(s), such as Chinese loess and desert sediments.
              These data will allow us to assess the feasibility of using magnetic properties
              as an independent provenance tracer of Greenland dust and to increase our
              understanding of the processes responsible for the profound
              paleoclimatically-dependent variations in magnetic properties of ice and loess
              deposits. 




