Title       : Quick Response Study: The Gujarat, India Earthquake of 26 January 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0118000

Award Number: 0118000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10613              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise K. Comfort lkc@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9196,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This exploratory research focuses on time sensitive data and field research
              related to the Gujarat, India Earthquake of 26 January 2001.  The severity of
              this earthquake and the magnitude of the losses in lives and property render it
              an important case study in seismic risk mitigation.  The research will focus on
              how different types of information technology are used in mobilizing disater
              response and the extent to which each increases or decreases the efficiency in
              inter-organizational response to disaster.  The broader implications of this
              research are the foundations it lays for developing and practically
              implementing sound models of mitigation and inter-organizational learning to
              contain the cost of natural disasters in both lives and property.  The results
              of this research will be used to develop a preliminary decision support model,
              which links knowledge to action at the first line of response - the community. 
              The proposed field research will be carried out within an interdisciplinary,
              international reconnaissance team, organized by the Western Seismic Safety
              Institute and the Earthquakes in Megacities Initiative involving researchers
              from different disciplines and nations.  Thus another outcome of the research
              will be an expanded global network of hazards researchers.  Three different
              types of data will be collected: 1) interviews with public, private, and
              nonprofit organizations will yield information on the types of information
              technologies use during the hazard response; how well those technologies met
              their needs; and  areas of improvement will be identified; 2) Global
              Positioning Systems (GPS) data will be collected to locate major disaster sites
              to identify primary locations and types of information infrastructures that
              were used to mobilize the response; and 3) documentary data will be collected
              regarding the disaster operations process. Based on these data, a map of
              information flows between the organizations will be generated.  The GPS data
              will be used to develop a GIS map.  A final report will be generated and
              submitted to the NSF.
