Title       : ME: Interagency Announcement of Opportunities in Metabolic Engineering:
               Metabolic Engineering of Plant Vitamin C Biosynthesis for Improved Nutrition
               and Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0118612

Award Number: 0118612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig L. Nessler cnessler@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pedro J. Mendes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Boris I. Chevone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1063,1145,1168,1491,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Humans, unlike most animals, cannot synthesize vitamin C and thus have an
              absolute dietary requirement for this nutrient. Plants are the primary source
              of dietary vitamin C, which is key to several metabolic functions including
              collagen synthesis.  Because vitamin C is a good anti-oxidant it can also be
              used as a natural preservative. Fresh produce with higher levels of vitamin C
              should therefore have improved shelf-life and consumer appeal. Additionally,
              increasing vitamin C in plants would result in higher intake per portion of
              fresh fruit or vegetables that would have a positive impact on human health.
              Toward this goal we will engineer the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana for
              higher steady state levels of vitamin C. Arabidopsis, while not part of human
              diet, is an essential model because it is the only plant with a fully sequenced
              genome. Unlike animals, the vitamin C biosynthetic metabolic network in plants
              is at present still not completely known. A pathway for plant systems has been
              proposed however, a parallel pathway, possibly similar to the animal pathway,
              may also operate in plants.  Evidence for this pathway comes from experiments
              in which a cDNA encoding L-gulono-g-lactone oxidase (GLOase), the terminal
              enzyme in the animal pathway was expressed in tobacco and lettuce, which
              resulted in a 5-7 fold increase in vitamin C levels. Specific aims of the
              project include metabolically engineering normal and vitamin C-deficient
              Arabidopsis mutants to express GLOase to determine if any of the plant pathway
              intermediates directly supply GLOase or its precursors. Genes encoding vitamin
              C pathway(s) enzymes will be identified in activation tagged Arabidopsis lines
              by ozone screening and vitamin C analysis to fill in remaining gaps in the
              pathway(s). The outcomes of this project are anticipated to result in (a)
              Arabidopsis transformants with larger pools of vitamin C than the wild type,
              (b) identification of plant genes related to metabolic steps of vitamin C
              synthesis, and (c) further knowledge of which steps of the animal pathway also
              operate in plants.


