Title       : LAPIS: Development of a Large Area Plankton Imaging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0118444

Award Number: 0118444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499821             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence P. Madin lmadin@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sonke Johnsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for the design, construction and testing of a
              towed video instrument for surveying and identifying macrozooplankton and
              micronekton in the water column. Called the Large Area Plankton Imaging System
              (LAPIS), the device would fill a scale gap between existing optical instruments
              designed for small particles and zooplankton, such as the Video Plankton
              Recorder, and acoustic systems that have a greater range but currently lack the
              resolution to identify different taxa of organisms. We intend to build a device
              that would illuminate and image objects ranging from 0.5 to 100 cm in size,
              within a field of view ranging from 2 to 4 m2. Towed at 1-2 knots, LAPIS would
              survey volumes of water approaching those filtered by Midwater trawls. Power,
              operational data and video signals would be transmitted between the surface and
              LAPIS via standard electro-optical cable.

The instrument would use an array
              of high efficiency LEDs to create a field of intense red light, imaged by a
              high resolution (4 Mpixel) digital camera operating at 8 frames s-1. Red light
              is invisible to most marine organisms, and together with a hydrodynamically
              quiet profile, will render the instrument inconspicuous to target organisms. We
              will take advantage of several technologies that are either existent or in
              development by other groups at WHOI, including the control and data telemetry
              electronics built for the SeaSoar, and the video processing and Telemetry being
              developed for the next generation Video Plankton Recorder. Existing winches,
              wire and slip rings are WHOI will be available for evaluation and use of LAPIS.
              We believe this device will fill an important niche in optical survey
              instruments, allowing rapid and extensive quantification of larger organisms,
              including gelatinous plankton, larger crustaceans and midwater fishes. Although
              proposed now as a towed instrument, the basic configuration could be adapted
              for use on ROVs, packaged with acoustics instruments, or on profiling or fixed
              moorings. Expected applications in the near future include survey of salp
              swarms, of gelatinous predators in the Gulf of Maine, and future midwater
              exploration and quantification in connection with the Census of Marine Life.

