Title       : BioMEMS based micro instrumentation for in-situ quantitative investigations of
               adhesion, structural mechanics and mechanotransduction of single living cells
               and Embryos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0118003

Award Number: 0118003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239908             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. A. Saif saif@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is increasing experimental evidence suggesting that extracellular and
              intracellular mechanical forces have a profound influence on a wide range of
              cell behavior. They include growth, differentiation, apoptosis. gene
              expression, adhesion and signal transduction. Thus it is important to
              understand how the mechanical forces are transmitted into the cell and what
              corresponding molecular changes do they initiate, and how do cells exhibit such
              changes. Although advances have been made towards understanding such questions,
              a significant challenge remains- quantitative evaluation of cell force response
              at a cellular and subcellular level. In the engineering world, a revolution is
              underway through miniaturization of mechanical components, giving rise to the
              field of micro electro mechanical systems (MEMS). Our (UIUC and Harvard Medical
              School) preliminary experiments with bio-MEMS sensors show that local
              mechanical deformation can be applied on single cells and embryos, and their
              force response can be measured quantitatively. The experiments have
              demonstrated the potential of a new class of microinstruments that may lead to
              fundamental breakthroughs in the understanding of cellular mechanics,
              mechanotransduction, tissue engineering, drug discovery and cancer research.
              Professor Donald Ingber of Harvard Medical school will serve as the consultant
              to this project.

The project is highly multidisciplinary. It merges micro
              systems' engineering with cellular biology. The engineering students will gain
              extensive experience with cell culture, cell manipulation, advanced imaging of
              cytoskeletal structures using florescenece techniques, as well as micro
              fabrication and micro mechanics. Interesting experimental results from the
              project will be presented to undergraduate students in mechanical engineering
              and biology. Videos of experiments with Bio-MEMS will also be presented to the
              University High School on UIUC campus - a current project of the P1 supported
              by NSF through REU program.

