Title       : Training Scientists, Crafting Science: A Workshop for Putting Pedagogy on the
               Map for Science Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0118165

Award Number: 0118165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9103               (Estimated)
Investigator: David I. Kaiser dikaiser@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract 
David Kaiser, Program in Science, Technology, and
              Society/Department of Physics, MIT
Training Scientists, Crafting Science: A
              Workshop for Putting Pedagogy on the Map for Science Studies

Questions of
              pedagogy, training, and the crafting of scientific research practices have
              usually fallen between the cracks separating traditional institutional and
              disciplinary studies on the one hand, and intellectual or conceptual studies on
              the other. A small but growing literature within the history, sociology, and 
              anthropology of science, however, scrutinizes the intersection of these
              domains.  This project involves a two-part workshop in order to probe the deep
              interrelations between scientists' training, learning, and research efforts
              --and to sharpen and consolidate this nascent segment of the science studies
              literature. The 19 participants in the workshop include several distinguished
              leaders in the field, together with many early-career scholars. The workshop
              convenes in Spring 2002 at MIT and again in Fall 2002, to discuss and analyze
              original pre-circulated papers.  The discussions and papers are to be
              disseminated in an edited volume. The goals for the workshop and edited volume
              are twofold.  First, this meeting should help solidify the small community of
              science-studies scholars who share interests in pedagogy, raining, and
              learning, thereby building connections between otherwise isolated case studies.
               Second, it is to catalyze the larger science-studies field to consider the
              constitutive roles played by pedagogy in making modern science happen.

