Title       : WORKSHOP: Composite Sheet Forming; September 12, 2001, Boston, Massachusetts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0118602

Award Number: 0118602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24926              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian Cao jcao@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this Workshop on Composite Sheet Forming is to address key issues
              related to improving the viability of the composite sheet forming process in
              manufacturing.  To accomplish this, the workshop will provide a forum for
              experimentalists, modeling specialists, statisticians, material suppliers and
              end users with the goal of formulating a feasible and representative benchmark
              and organizing for its execution.  The benchmark will be used to standardize
              materials testing procedures for this new class of materials and to examine the
              current state-of-the-art in simulation.  It is expected that the workshop will
              have significant international representation and will stimulate this kind of
              research in the U.S., which is unfortunately less active than our counterparts
              in Europe and Asia. 

Composite sheet forming has demonstrated great
              potential as a valuable alternative to provide high-strength and low-weight
              products at a much-reduced manufacturing cost.   This cost reduction is due
              primarily to significantly shorter cycle times and parts consolidation.  Over
              the past several years, an international group of academic and industry
              researchers has conducted studies of the material behavior and the forming
              process, in conjunction with fabrication of prototype parts.  The outcome of
              this work is a substantial body of experimental and modeling data.    However,
              as the research in this area is still relatively new, as compared to the longer
              history of sheet metal forming, much of these results have lead to more
              questions than answers, which was well echoed at recent technical conferences. 
              The state of the research efforts in composite sheet forming are at a critical
              point where benchmarking will lead to major advances in our understanding of
              the strengths and limitations of existing experimental and modeling approaches.
              

 

