Title       : Fostering Peripheral Information Awareness through Personalized, Expressive Art
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0118685

Award Number: 0118685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422930             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Stasko stasko@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              


Fostering Peripheral Information Awareness through Personalized Expressive
              Art


This is a standard award.   In today's information-rich society,
              people who are busy and deeply engaged in work or other activities often are
              unable to maintain awareness of peripheral, but useful, information such as
              weather, traffic, and financial news.   In this project the PI will explore the
              concept of Information Art, the process of promoting awareness of peripheral
              information through personalized, expressive art.  This new form of information
              access and presentation system combines elements of both ambient displays and
              information visualizations.  Information Art allows people to identify
              information of interest and then to design a customized, aesthetically-pleasing
              representation of that information.  The primary goal of the project is to
              explore techniques for calmly communicating information without interrupting a
              person's concentration and without robbing space from his/her desktop displays.
                As people gain access to more and more information, it is crucial to develop
              techniques and tools that aid them in managing and utilizing that information. 
              Many computer technologies only seem to exacerbate the situation, however, by
              contributing more (often unwanted) information.  This project will create
              techniques and tools that will empower people to choose information of interest
              to them, and to represent and communicate this information in a manner that is
              personally meaningful and pleasing.  An even broader impact of the project will
              be to explore the space of new, pervasive information displays and understand
              their place in future work and home environments.

