Title       : Cognitive Neuroscience - Dear Colleague Letter: Genomic Changes that During
               Human Origins Increased the Brain's Cognitive Capacities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0118696

Award Number: 0118696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morris Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
              G Kapatos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence I. Grossman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Adaptive changes in the expression and structures of brain functioning proteins
              may have been the crucial process responsible for humankind's unrivaled
              cognitive abilities and complex mental behavior. A search for the underlying
              positively selected genomic changes will be conducted by the methods of
              functional genomics and molecular phylogenetics. This search will focus on the
              anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), a neocortical region involved in monitoring
              and modifying task-specific behaviors (executive function) that require novel
              responses or overriding interfering responses and that may separate humans from
              other primates. A unique population of spindle shaped projection neurons is
              present in the ACC in humans and with lesser numbers of cells in common and
              bonobo chimpanzees (the sister-group of humans), gorillas (next closest
              relative), and orangutans but not in any other primates or other mammals.
              Moreover, among the five ape species, the orangutan ACC has the least spindle
              neurons and the bonobo ACC has the most. Thus, there is reason to hypothesize
              that Darwinian positive selection acted during the more recent stages of
              humankind's evolutionary history on the genes encoding proteins involved in the
              ACC's cellular architecture and function. DNA arrays will be used to analyze
              gene expression levels of thousands of genes that encode proteins that function
              in the ACC. Comparing the expression levels of these thousands of genes in the
              human vs. chimpanzee ACC will identify candidate genes, the subset of genes
              that show marked species differences in expression levels. In situ
              hybridization will be used to locate the cell populations that express the
              candidate genes, thereby testing the prediction that the candidate genes will
              co-localize in the spindle shaped projection neurons. As the candidate genes
              are likely to be involved in functionally interacting biochemical pathways,
              this gene expression data in the ACC should assist cognitive neuroscientists in
              elucidating the role of the ACC in human cognition. These and other candidate
              genes will be analyzed in a series of anthropoid and prosimian primates to look
              for changes in the cis-regulatory elements that control expression of the genes
              and to determine whether the encoded proteins underwent bursts of rapid amino
              acid replacements during humankind's ancestry. This approach builds upon
              previous work showing a number of proteins that are part of the mitochondrial
              oxidative energy metabolism pathway have undergone such bursts of positively
              selected amino acid replacements. This one-year project will show the validity
              of this approach and will set the stage for a more widespread and comprehensive
              attack in the future to characterize some of the important genetic changes that
              allowed the emergence of the large-brained primates.

