Title       : Characterization of Ribosomal Plaque Domains in Axons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0118368

Award Number: 0118368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Koenig ekoenig@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The axon serves as a long line of communication that makes up the 'hard wiring'
              of the nervous system. Its long term maintenance and potential for structural
              plasticity depends on a continuous supply of proteins. It was generally assumed
              that all axoplasmic proteins were synthesized in the cell body and transported
              at slow rates to the axon. The reasoning was based on an apparent lack of
              axoplasmic ribosomes, the ultrastructural correlates of a protein synthesizing
              machinery, despite metabolic and biochemical evidence to the contrary.
              Recently, periodic small discrete ribosome-containing domains were documented
              in the periphery of axoplasm isolated from myelinated axons. The research
              proposal is concerned with testing the hypothesis that "periaxoplasmic
              ribosomal domains" serve as centers of protein synthesis, which supply
              immediate surrounding regions with essential proteins, such as actin.
              Experiments will be performed in the Mauthner neuron, which is a large
              identifiable cell in the goldfish brain stem that projects its myelinated axon
              along the full length of spinal cord. They will determine (1) whether a cDNA
              construct that codes for a fusion protein, comprised of actin and green
              fluorescent protein (GFP), in which the latter serves as a reporter, will
              result in the transport of the mRNA from the cell body to the axon, (2)
              localization of the mRNA in periaxoplasmic ribosomal domains and (3) synthesis
              and subsequent distribution of the fusion protein product to surrounding
              axoplasm. Additional experiments will test the hypothesis in rabbit myelinated
              motor axons, in which sites of initial metabolic uptake of [35S]methionine
              along axons will be analyzed and related to the localization of periaxoplasmic
              ribosomal domains. Subsequent time-dependent distribution of radioactive
              proteins to surrounding axoplasm will be mapped, and analysis of radiolabeled
              proteins will also be undertaken. A complementary issue is whether any membrane
              proteins are also synthesized in the axon compartment, for which signal
              recognition particles (SRPs) would be required. Experiments are proposed to
              analyze (1) for the occurrence of SRPs, (2) for the presence and localization
              of SNAP-25 mRNA, which codes for a membrane protein involved in transmitter
              release, and (3) for glycosylation, a process of cotranslationally adding
              sugars to newly synthesized membrane proteins. Specifically, the experiments
              will address an important question as to whether periaxoplasmic ribosomal
              domains are metabolically active in synthesizing proteins for local utilization
              in the axon compartment. More generally, however, the findings will add
              substantially to a better fundamental understanding of the complex biology of
              the axon.
