Title       : PEET: Monographic Studies of Southeast Asian Saprotrophic Agaricales (Fungi)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0118776

Award Number: 0118776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $745801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis E. Desjardin ded@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Saprotrophic fungi play major ecological roles in litter decomposition, nutrient
              recycling and retention, soil genesis, litter binding that inhibits erosion,
              and as food sources for innumerable animals. Additionally, some mushroom
              species cause extensive damage to economically important food crops, while
              others produce biomedically important antibiotics. Understanding the diversity,
              ecological roles, and phylogenetic relationships of these decomposer organisms
              is essential to understanding how ecosystems function and persist, especially
              in tropical ecosystems where nutrient turnover is so rapid. Dr. Dennis
              Desjardin at San Francisco State University, a mycologist with a productive
              record of research on the mushrooms of the Pacific Rim and especially
              Indonesia, will conduct monographic studies of the saprotrophic agarics (gilled
              mushrooms) from underexplored regions of Southeast Asia. Special emphasis will
              be given to the genera Marasmius, Marasmiellus, and Mycena, which are the most
              diverse yet
understudied genera of decomposer mushrooms in tropical
              ecosystems. Approximately 25% of all mushroom species encountered in Southeast
              Asia
belong to these three genera, and nearly one third of them represent
              species new to science. Monographic studies are imperative in order to build a
              taxonomic foundation to support biodiversity studies, and to provide raw
              materials for phylogenetic analyses and for the screening of biomedically
              important compounds. A central focus of this five-year project is on the
              integration of traditional morphological and ecological studies with molecular
              phylogenetic analyses. Training of undergraduate and graduate students from
              Southeast Asia and the US entails coursework in systematics, laboratory and
              museum studies, and extensive fieldwork in Southeast Asia. All aspects of data
              documentation will be computerized and Internet-distributed, including specimen
              databasing, taxonomic and phylogenetic analyses, nomenclature and bibliographic
              databasing. Collaborations with colleagues and students from Southeast Asia
              will build lifelong partnerships that enhance taxonomic expertise across
              international
borders.


