Title       : NSEC: Center for Biological and Environmental Nanotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0118007

Award Number: 0118007
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Tapan Mukherjee                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10540000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Colvin colvin@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Smalley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1084,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award establishes a Nanoscience and Engineering Center for Biological and
              Environmental Nanotechnology at Rice University.  The Center will foster the
              development of nanotechnology through an integrated set of programs that aim to
              address the scientific, technological, environmental, human resource,
              commercialization issues.  The Center's research program is organized under
              three themes:  (1) wet nanoscience integrating biology and nanochemistry; (2)
              nanomaterials in bioengineering; and (3) environmental applications, origin and
              impacts of nanostructured materials.  Fundamental questions concerning how in
              organic materials interact with biochemical and cellular processes will be
              investigated.  The research will also address the applications of nanomaterials
              to biomedical and environmental problems.  The Center will work in
              collaboration with industry and government laboratories in developing bench-top
              and pilot scale proof-of-concept testbeds.  A multi-user nanoparticle
              fabrication facility will be established with state-of-the art instrumentation.
               The research outreach will include the University of Texas Health Science
              Center and Geoscience and Environmental Laboratory of CNRS, France.  The Center
              will foster nanoscience and engineering education by implementing course
              modules for upper level undergraduates, publication of a new textbook, and
              creating of an interactive web page.  The education outreach activities will
              include training of middle and high school teachers in nanoscience and
              engineering.  The Center will offer lectures and tutoring, experience in
              research laboratories and a sabbatical semester to focus on integrating their
              experiences into their teaching.  The industrial affiliate program will enable
              member companies to send their senior scientists to the Center for research
              residency and tutorial courses.  The Center will offer a year-long team taught
              graduate course on entrepreneurship in nanotechnology.   
