Title       : PEET: Training New Diatom Systematists for New Priorities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0118883

Award Number: 0118883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $737543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Theriot etheriot@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Theriot and Jansen at the University of Texas
              at Austin to train scientists in the identification and ecology of
              microorganisms known as diatoms.  Diatoms are single-celled organisms that can
              dominate the microscopical life in lakes, oceans, and rivers.  They are of
              interest to basic science because they are diverse (thousands of species), are
              easily manipulated in cell cultures for experiments, and have many unusual cell
              properties (e.g., their cell wall is literally made out of glass!).  The latter
              fact also makes them abundant in the fossil record, which makes them important
              more practical uses such as the study of natural cycles of climate change, the
              impact of human activities on lake ecology, and the discovery of oil.  The
              practical uses of diatoms have drawn so much attention to diatom studies, in
              fact, that few people are actually devoted to basic diatom studies.  On the
              other hand, new technologies have attracted many students to fields such as
              molecular biology and away from traditional fields of study.  This is the
              problem addressed by this project and is highlighted by the fact that Dr.
              Theriot is the only person in North America with a university faculty
              appointment who also has formal training in the most basic element of diatom
              studies, their classification.  His colleague, Dr. Jansen, is a leader in the
              field of using DNA and molecular biology to classify higher plants.  Their labs
              have conducted important collaborations essential to the success of this
              project.  This proposal is designed to ensure that there will be a new
              generation of diatom scientists with a background in both the classical
              elements of classification and the tools to further our understanding of
              diatoms in the 21st century.  

Drs. Theriot and Jansen will train, at a
              minimum, two postdoctoral associates, three graduate students, and two
              undergraduates in the science of diatom identification and classification (=
              taxonomy, or systematics).  The training program is centered on three studies
              of the classification, physiology, ecology, geological distribution and
              molecular biology of different groups of diatoms.  The basic research component
              of each study is centered on reconstructing evolutionary relationships by
              comparing the DNA (the genetic makeup of the cells), the morphology (shape and
              form of the cell and its components) with the known fossil record of these
              species.  The evolutionary relationships will then be studied in relationship
              to environmental conditions in which the diatoms originally evolved and in
              which they are found today.  The students will create computerized catalogues
              of the Texas Memorial Museum of Science and History diatom collections, as well
              as computerize all related data including illustrations of the species.  This
              information will be available on the World Wide Web.  The students thus will
              receive the field and laboratory skills necessary to become competent modern
              biologists capable of independent investigations into further aspects of diatom
              biology and/or to apply their knowledge of diatom biology to problems of
              societal and economic importance.  

All studies, basic and applied, using
              diatoms require expert identification of diatoms.  This project will ensure a
              new generation of diatom taxonomists with the combination of old and new skills
              necessary to be successful in the next century.  They will be able to compete
              for academic positions, to train other experts, to be a resource for those
              needing to know about practical application of knowledge about diatoms, and to
              contribute directly to the growth of our basic understanding of these important
              links in the food web and indicators of the health of the natural environment. 
              

