Title       : Reduced-Dimension Decision Feedback Equalizers for High-Speed Wireless Digital
               Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0118842

Award Number: 0118842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298154             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Zoltowski mikedz@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The primary problem addressed is the deleterious effect of
              dynamic
multipath propagation on high-speed wireless digital communications
              
supporting real-time video and multimedia applications.  Digital TV (DTV)
              
is a target application along with Fourth Generation Cellular Communication
              
Systems.  Reflections off buildings and other structures cause ghosts 
and
              other artifacts in the reconstructed video stream.  These multipath 
effects
              can wreak havoc on all functions of the receiver causing
loss of
              synchronization and loss of carrier/timing recovery as well
as inter-symbol
              interference. Discrete ghosts are often associated with 
multipath conditions
              of large, flat surfaces, such as tall steel buildings. 
However, multipath
              conditions can occur in areas with hills and dense foliage
where a signal can
              travel through many paths to the receiver. When the signal
is bounced back
              from a moving object, complex ghosts can arise with a 
time-varying nature
              that is very challenging for the equalizer to overcome.
To accommodate delay
              spreads of up to 40 microseconds, current generation 
Digital TV receiver
              chips employ a Decision Feedback Equalizer (DFE) with 
more than 100
              Feed-Forward taps and more than 400 Feed-Back taps.  This 
constitutes a large
              number of taps to adapt implying slow convergence and 
high computational
              complexity.  Future high-speed wireless multimedia 
applications will place
              even more stressful demands on equalizer performance. 

The investigator will
              develop fundamental advances in the area of
reduced-dimension Decision
              Feedback Equalizers (DFE's).
These include methods for dimensionality
              reduction based on a
powerful reduced-rank adaptive filtering algorithm
              referred to 
as the Multi-Stage Nested Wiener Filter (MSNWF).  The MSNWF
              provides
convergence speeds better than the Recursive Least Squares (RLS)
              algorithm,
but at a much reduced computational complexity due to the fact that
              
that the MSNWF constrains the overall weight vector to lie 
in a
              data-adaptive, low-dimensional subspace.
The MSNWF has been successfully
              employed to effect a reduced-rank, 
linear equalizer for applications in Third
              Generation Cellular Communications
based on both CDMA Technology and the
              European GSM EDGE System.  The
investigator will also develop other means for
              dimensionality
reduction including the use of the channel shortening concept
              employed in 
OFDM systems to reduce the length of the cyclic prefix, and
              symbol waveform 
compression achieved through simple linear filtering at the
              receiver.
In addition, the investigator will study the use of
              reduced-dimension DFE's
for equalization when block space-time coding is
              employed under frequency 
selective multipath conditions.
