Title       : Human Computer Interaction for Direct Brain-Computer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0118917

Award Number: 0118917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $742598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melody M. Moore melody@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Birch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip R. Kennedy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth D. Mynatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              



Human-Computer Interaction for Direct Brain-Computer
              Interfaces




This is a the first year funding of a 3-year continuing
              award.   Recent developments in medical technology have brought closer the
              possibility of direct control of a computer by the human brain, e.g. using
              recordings from electrodes placed on the scalp or a neurotrophic electrode that
              is implanted in the brain.  Although advances in these biometric interface
              device technologies hold much promise, there are many aspects yet to be
              researched.   For the half-million people with locked-in syndrome (completely
              paralyzed and unable to speak), and for many others with severe and progressive
              disabilities such as quadriplegia or ALS, the potential impact of BCI
              technology are staggering; preliminary results achieved by the PI encourage
              vigorous pursuit of refinements and improvements in BCI technology.   In this
              project the PI's objectives will be:  to establish a theoretical framework for
              the field of Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) research;  to investigate the
              effectiveness of various user interaction styles for existing brain-computer
              interface device technologies;  and to validate various interaction styles in
              two quality-of-life application domains, a basic communications application and
              an environmental control application.


