Title       : VISUALIZATION: Integrated Compression and Out-of-Core Techniques for Large
               Time-Varying Data Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0118915

Award Number: 0118915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi-Jen Chiang yjc@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nasir Memon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Han-Wei Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Scientific Visualization is fast becoming a key technology that provides
              scientists with insights that enable them to steer their numerical simulations
              towards solving previously unsolvable problems. However, the size of scientific
              datasets has witnessed exponential growth in the past few years. This sheer
              size often makes interactive exploration impossible, as only a small portion of
              data can fit into main memory at a time and the computation cost is often too
              high to run in real-time. Despite the importance of time-varying datasets, most
              previous research has focused on the visualization of steady-state data (i.e.,
              data with only a single time step). This project will attack the challenges of
              large input sizes posed by time-varying data visualization. There are two
              important and promising research directions towards handling large-scale
              problems: data compression techniques and out-of-core techniques. This project
              will develop integrated lossless compression and out-of-core techniques for
              large time-varying data visualization, including isosurface extraction and
              direct volume rendering. It will mainly consider the class of irregular-grid
              volume datasets represented as tetrahedral meshes, which often arises in
              computational fluid dynamics, partial differential equation solvers, and other
              fields.

Specifically, the project will develop new lossless compression
              techniques for vertex coordinates and scalar values for tetrahedral
              time-varying volume data. It will also develop new out-of-core isosurface
              extraction and direct volume rendering techniques for tetrahedral time-varying
              volume data, and integrate the compression and out-of-core visualization
              techniques together under a unified infrastructure. The expected results would
              be a collection of new techniques and a unified, proof-of-the-concept
              visualization system that will minimize the disk space requirement and the
              visualization rendering time cost. If successful, the system will efficiently
              support full visualization functionalities (isosurface extraction and volume
              rendering) for time-varying datasets much larger than can fit in main memory,
              with performance expected to be independent of the main memory size
              available.
 

