Title       : Observing Wind Induced Near-Surface Currents within the Water Wave Boundary
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2001 
File        : a0118028

Award Number: 0118028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408764             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Zhang xzhang@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0118028 Zhang
This study is aimed at improving the quantification of these
              ocean surface parameters through advanced observational experiments. From
              analysis surface images from the laboratory, the surface currents in the wave
              boundary and small-scale wave breaking will be measured. A wave boundary layer
              is defined as a top layer within a depth of order (kp) -1 . kp is wavenumber of
              dominant wind waves. The method developed here will overcome the problem of
              having sensor in the boundary layer, a difficulty of early measurements. The
              surface waves and near surface turbulence will also be measured at the same
              time. These will make it possible to access the interactions among surface
              currents, waves, and turbulence, to quantify these quantities for
              parameterization. Recent free surface turbulence studies have showed there are
              fundamental differences between wall boundary layer turbulence and free surface
              turbulence. At sea, wind blows over the ocean surface generating waves and
              shear currents. The ocean surface layer is more complex due to the existence of
              these energetic waves. Wave breaking and surface drift can enhance one another.
              The surface shear currents are inherently unstable due to Craik-Leibovich
              span-wise instability. The Langmuir circulations increase the vertical mixing
              which reduces the surface shear. It is questionable that a simple wall
              turbulence analogy would adequately represent the dynamics of a free surface
              boundary layer. To assess the contributions from different ocean surface
              processes, it is critical to observe key surface quantities, such as surface
              waves, surface current, surface turbulence, rate of wave breaking, and vertical
              transport

