Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Modeling the Effect of Climate on Erosion and
               Deposition Events in the Loess Canyons of The Breaks, Cheyenne County, Kansas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0118012

Award Number: 0118012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Johnson wcj@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The deeply dissected terrain of extreme northwestern Kansas and adjacent parts
              of Colorado and Nebraska is known regionally as "The Breaks."  This rugged
              terrain has developed as the North Fork Republican River and its tributaries
              have eroded their way into loess, which is wind-deposited silt.  Although The
              Breaks of Cheyenne County, Kansas provides a striking example of this process,
              with gullies extending as much as 100 meters below the upland surface and
              sufficient stratigraphic expression for detailed investigation, this dissection
              is by no means unique.  The rapid but episodic change evident in gully systems
              throughout the Great Plains necessitates a study of their history and factors
              that control their growth.  This doctoral dissertation research project aims to
              ascertain the role of climate in the development of The Breaks.  The first task
              will be to decipher the spatial distribution and temporal patterns of canyon
              development.  From this, a model using a geographic information system (GIS)
              and containing the information about the morphology of current gullies and the
              primary and reworked loess stratigraphy will be used to reconstruct gully cut
              and fill events.  The second task will then be to correlate and compare the
              temporal record of gully development and canyon growth to local and regional
              records of paleoclimatic proxies.  Preliminary radiocarbon data suggest that
              the region experienced widespread stability from the late Pleistocene to about
              9,000 years ago, after which gully activity accelerated.  Paleoenvironmental
              data derived from the rock magnetic, stable carbon isotopic, and trace element
              signatures of the loess stratigraphy will be applied to support and enhance
              existing knowledge of the environmental history of the central Great Plains,
              while radiocarbon and optically-stimulated luminescence dating will provide
              absolute time control.

Grasslands have a greater capacity than other biomes
              to respond to changes in rainfall regime associated with climate change.  Since
              northwest Kansas has remained grassland throughout the climatic changes of the
              late Pleistocene and Holocene, and loess accumulation during that time has
              recorded those changes, the region is ideal for a paleoclimatic study.  In
              light of global circulation model predictions of greenhouse warming and
              increasing aridity in the central Great Plains, better understanding of the
              role of climate in landscape evolution is necessary to aid in the planning and
              response of agricultural activity.  Better understanding of the relationships
              between climatic change and gully erosion also has significant practical
              implications, because loess-based soils currently produce at least 20 percent
              of the world's wheat supply and significant contributions of other grain crops.
               Within the study region, the undissected uplands are used for dryland winter
              wheat production and cattle feed grains, whereas cattle grazing is the dominant
              activity in the gullied canyon terrain.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
              Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
              student to establish a strong independent research career.

