Title       : PEET: Enhancing Taxonomy In The Cestoda: Monography Of Selected Tetraphyllidean
               Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0118882

Award Number: 0118882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $886120             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janine N. Caira jcaira@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Ruhnke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0118882
Caira and Ruhnke
This is a collaboration between the University of
              Connecticut and West Virginia State College.  The research efforts of this
              project will focus on the generation of taxonomic monographs for four of the
              largest groups in the most diverse order of tapeworms that parasitize sharks
              and rays, the Tetraphyllidea. The monographic research will involve examination
              of museum specimens throughout the world.  Collections of new tapeworms will be
              made from geographic regions previously unexplored for tetraphyllideans
              including Senegal, Madagascar and Western Australia.  In addition to
              morphological data from light and scanning electron microscopy, the monographs
              will include complete illustrations and information on geographic distributions
              and evolutionary relationships of each group.  This work will be complemented
              by evolutionary trees generated using molecular sequence information in
              collaboration with Dr. Tim Littlewood at the British Museum of Natural History,
              London. The tapeworm database developed as a result of an initial PEET award
              will be expanded to include complete data on all species in the four target
              groups of Tetraphyllidea.  This database will also be expanded to treat
              representatives of other tapeworm groups in cooperation with individuals from
              around the world expert on the taxonomy of the non-tetraphyllidean tapeworm
              groups. These experts will be familiarized with the database at a workshop to
              be held at the University of Connecticut in the first year of the project and
              will be assisted by participants in this project with data entry on their
              respective groups. The training components of this project will involve a
              minimum of two Ph.D students, one of which has already been identified, as well
              as a number of masters-level and undergraduate students.  These students will
              be involved with all aspects of the project including taxonomy and systematics
              of tetraphyllidean tapeworms, museum work, field collections, light and
              scanning electron microscopy and databasing.  The PI, Co-PI and two Ph.D.
              students will each have responsibility for one of the monographs.
The
              tetraphyllidean tapeworms remain among the most poorly known, but most host
              specific and morphologically spectacular of the tapeworm orders.  Their
              enormous potential as indicators of shark and ray biology remains
              under-explored.  This
project will train the next generation of
              tetraphyllidean tapeworm taxonomic experts.  Taxonomic information on all
              tapeworm groups will be made easily accessible through the internet.  Finally,
              this project will serve to centralize taxonomic information on tapeworms in
              general, making it available globally.


