Title       : Reliable communication near capacity on nonstandard channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0118670

Award Number: 0118670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401404             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. McEliece rjm@systems.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for NSF Proposal 0118670 "Reliable Communication Near Capacity on
              Nonstandard Channels." 

In 1948 the American mathematician Claude Shannon
              (1916-2001) ushered in the digital age with the publication of his classic
              paper "A Mathematical Theory of Communication."  Of the  many seminal ideas in
              Shannon's paper, perhaps the most important is the notion of channel capacity.
              In brief, the capacity (often called the Shannon limit) of a communications
              channel,  is the  maximum possible rate at which information can be transmitted
              reliably over the channel.   Shannon showed how to calculate the limit but did
              not explain how it could be achieved practically.  Since 1948, however,
              generations of communications researchers have made steady progress towards the
              ultimate goal of building practical systems that operate near the Shannon
              limit. An historic milestone was reached in May of 1993 with the introduction
              of "turbo codes" by a group of French researchers led by Claude Berrou.  
              Berrou showed that turbo codes attain practically near Shannon-limit
              performance on an important but restricted class of channels, the Gaussian
              channels, which are good models for satellite and deep-space communication. 
              This research is concerned with using the underlying turbo code ideas to extend
              the range of channels for which near Shannon-limit communication can be
              attained.  The channel models to be considered include channels for optical
              communication,  mass storage of data,  and the channels  encountered in
              cellular phone and other multi-user systems. 

2.  The 1993 discovery of
              turbo codes by Berrou et al., which was closely followed by the
rediscovery
              of, and improvement on, Gallager's low-density parity-check codes, and the
              subsequent invention of repeat-accumulate codes, has revolutionized and
              energized the field of error-correcting codes. However,  most of this
              extraordinary research has been restricted to a relatively small set of
              standard channel models, predominantly the binary erasure channel (BEC), the
              binary symmetric channel (BSC), and the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
              channel.  For these channels, Shannon's Problem, viz., the problem of
              communicating reliably and practically at rates close to channel capacity, has
              now been solved.  But Shannon's theorem tells us that reliable communication at
              rates near capacity  is possible on any channel, not just the BEC, the BSC, and
              the AWGN. From this viewpoint,  Shannon's problem has barely been scratched. It
              is believed, however, that the "turbolike'' codes mentioned above (together
              with the associated iterative decoding algorithms) can be used, after suitable
              modifications,  to solve Shannon's Problem on virtually any channel. Thus the
              object of this research is to study the effectiveness of binary "turbolike''
              codes on a variety of nonstandard channel models, including nonbinary and
              nonsymmetric channels.


