Title       : PEET: Monography And Phylogeny Of New World Scarabaeoid Beetles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2001   
File        : a0118669

Award Number: 0118669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Jameson mjameson1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brett C. Ratcliffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Scarab beetles are prominent members of the insect fauna and are important
              biocontrol agents, pollinators, agricultural pests, and habitat indicators.
              Despite their economic importance, diversity, and ecological significance, less
              than 50% of the New World genera of scarabs can be identified with reliability.
              The New World tropics contains the greatest diversity of scarab species, yet it
              is the poorest known taxonomically.  Scarab groups from this region were
              selected for training in monography, phylogeny, and bioinformatics. The
              proposed research will create comprehensive catalogs and electronic databases
              of specimen-level information, including character data,  geographic and
              temporal distributions, host plant associations, and images. It will produce
              monographs, an identification guide to genera of New World scarabs, and a
              database of New World genera of scarabs that are retrievable electronically.
              Phylogenetic research will stabilize the higher-level classification of the
              Scarabaeoidea by targeting enigmatic and poorly known groups. The research will
              contribute to the development of computer infrastructure for organizing and
              accessing knowledge about scarab beetles, and it will provide the foundation
              for future work in scarab systematics.
	This research extends the goals of our
              previous NSF-PEET support by creating keys and databases to all genera of New
              World scarab beetles (approximately 600), and it builds on our existing
              foundation in scarab systematics to monograph poorly known groups of New World
              scarab beetles and train students in scarab systematics. These activities will
              contribute directly to the training of a new generation of systematists as well
              as advance our knowledge of a prominent (but poorly known) superfamily of
              insects. Monographic works, electronic databases, interactive keys, and newly
              trained systematists are needed in order to meet the global needs for knowledge
              of biodiversity and to strengthen the foundation for all fields of biology. One
              of the most important benefits of monographic research is a predictive system
              of classification. Results of the phylogenetic analyses will be used to
              stabilize the current classification of scarabs in this study. A natural
              classification of scarab groups can be used to address other questions that
              include: evolution of parental care, evolution of horns, biogeography,
              evolution of myrmecophily, and others. The on-line key and bioinformatics
              resources for all New World scarab genera will create the bench-mark for
              Scarabaeoidea systematics. It will be useful to people engaged in agriculture,
              research, education, and natural resource management. The guide will form the
              foundation for keys to all world Scarabaeoidea, a future project that would
              involve participants from around the world.


