Title       : Paleo Ice Flow Paths from Till Provenance in the Ross Embayment, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0118455

Award Number: 0118455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95938              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Lang Farmer farmer@terra.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0118455
Farmer

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative research
              project to study glacio-marine sediments from the Ross Sea toward an
              understanding of the history of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet (WAIS). Reliable
              predictions of the future response of the WAIS to changing climate and rising
              sea level depend, to a large extent, on improving our knowledge and
              understanding of its ice dynamics during the last glacial maximum (~18,000 yrs
              ago).  Sediments from the Ross Sea, Antarctica, contain a detailed physical
              record that can be used to reconstruct past glacier flow patterns. Although
              significant progress has been made in constraining the extent of ice and the
              timing of its maximum extent, reconstructions of ice flow paths vary
              substantially. Studies have predicted that ice streams (regions of fast flowing
              ice) derived primarily from West Antarctica were dominant features of the Ross
              Ice Sheet, whereas an ice sheet modeling reconstruction showed roughly equal
              input from East and West Antarctic ice. Fundamental differences in rock types
              and ages beneath these source areas should allow the provenance of tills across
              the Ross Sea to be determined, facilitating the reconstruction of past ice flow
              paths. Thus the Ross Embayment provides an exciting opportunity to relate
              modern ice flow dynamics to past ice sheet dynamics and deposits.

A detailed
              provenance study of sediment collected in cores taken from across the Ross Sea
              floor will be carried out by linking the mineralogical, geochemical, and
              isotopic characteristics of the sediments from these cores to reference
              sediments collected from the probable source areas. From these data, the
              patterns of ice flow across the shelf can be constrained for the last glacial
              maximum. For this study, existing samples collected from the Ross Sea, and the
              source areas of East and West Antarctica will be utilized. Composition of the
              till deposited during the last ice advance will be characterized by examining
              the sand and pebble size fraction of the sediment, the clay mineralogy,
              elemental abundance and samarium-neodymium (Sm-Nd) isotopic composition of the
              silt and clay size fraction. The source of silt and clay fraction may be
              problematic because of possible mixing of continental and marine sources. This
              problem will be addressed by determining the composition of modern marine
              samples which can then be 'subtracted' from the till composition.

Samples
              from the source areas will be analyzed first to determine the compositional
              fingerprint of each area. Ice flow paths will be determined based on the
              correspondence between the source areas and the measured values across the Ross
              Sea. The goal of this project is to characterize both lateral and vertical
              variations in diagnostic aspects of till mineralogy and isotopic composition in
              order to make a significant contribution to the understanding of changes in ice
              sheet dynamics on time scale of the past 30,000 years.

Results of this study
              will allow assessment of the hypothesis that ice streams played a significant
              role in the most recent disintegration of the WAIS by testing the validity of
              various ice sheet reconstructions. Additionally, better characterization of the
              configuration of the Ross Ice Sheet during the last glacial maximum will
              improve the quality and reliability of models of the past and future
              characteristics of Antarctic ice sheet behavior.


