Title       : Exploiting The Turbo Principle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0118859

Award Number: 0118859
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hesham M. El Gamal helgamal@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, Turbo coding has emerged as a powerful forward error control
              coding paradigm. Although still new, the success of Turbo coding is witnessed
              by its widespread use in a variety of applications, including deep space
              communication, satellite communication, and digital cellular communication.
              
The key behind this success is the elegant iterative decoder that approaches
              theoretical limits with  
reasonable implementation complexity. More recently,
              the iterative decoder structure was abstracted and 
generalized to what is now
              known as the Turbo Principle. Because of its remarkable performance, it is
              expected that the Turbo Principle will have an enormous impact on virtually all
              aspects of digital 
communication systems. The main goal of this research is
              to explore the fundamental limits of the Turbo Principle while offering
              practical implementations.

The first research thrust aims at developing an
              analytical approach for computing the convergence thresholds of Turbo decoders.
              In addition to the expected savings in computational complexity, the analytical
              approach is 
sought to offer more useful insights for code design. The
              convergence analysis will facilitate constructing 
irregular ``Turbo-like"
              codes that approach the capacity limit of Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN)
              channels. The code performance with small and moderate block lengths will be
              considered as an additional design criterion. This research will also
              investigate graphical code design for multi-path fading channels. Code
              constructions will be optimized for parametric fading models that capture the
              different limitations in practical systems. Furthermore, The convergence
              analysis will be used to explore fundamental limits on the 
performance of
              Turbo multi-user receivers in generalized fading channels.
