Title       : Role of C3 Diversity in Innate Immune Reactions of Teleost Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2002      
File        : a0118387

Award Number: 0118387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oriol J. Sunyer sunyer@vet.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The complement system consists of a complex group of more than 30 soluble
              proteins and receptors that play an important role in innate and adaptive
              immunity. The key component of the complement system is the protein C3. Upon
              activation, the C3 molecule is cleaved into C3b and C3a fragments, enabling C3b
              to covalently bind to foreign particles such as viruses, bacteria, fungi, and
              protozoans. The targeted particles can be recognized and destroyed by
              phagocytic cells bearing complement receptors on their surfaces, or they can be
              further lysed. With the exception of teleost fish, each of the animal species
              studied to date contains only a single form of functionally active C3 that is
              the product of a single gene. In contrast, teleost fish demonstrate a unique
              diversity of functionally active C3 proteins, which are the products of
              different genes.  This C3 diversity may have important biological consequences
              for the wide array of immune mechanisms involving the C3 molecule. It is
              hypothesized that the functional relevance behind this C3 diversity may be
              reflected in a diversification and/or fine tuning of the C3 functions, which in
              turn may both broaden and strengthen the innate immune response of fish.
              Therefore, in this project the functional relevance of C3 diversity in innate
              immunity in teleost fish will be analyzed. The C3 protein is involved in two
              major innate immune mechanisms: phagocytosis and respiratory burst. These
              functions are exerted through two main C3 activation fragments, C3b and iC3b.
              The specific Aims of this project are: AIM 1: To purify and biochemically
              characterize the C3b and iC3b fragments from each of the three trout C3
              isoforms, along with generating the corresponding IgM/C3b/iC3b-coated
              particles.
Although these components are not commercially available for trout,
              protocols developed from previous work with trout complement has enabled Dr.
              Synyer to purify the various C3 isoforms, along with the other proteins
              required for the generation of C3b and iC3b.  AIM 2: To analyze the interaction
              of the various C3b and iC3b fragments with putative C3 receptors present on
              trout phagocytes. The action exerted by C3b and iC3b is intimately related to
              the receptors to which these C3 derivatives bind.   Dr. Sunyer plans to test
              two alternative hypotheses; that the diversification of the C3 molecules has
              also resulted in a diversification of the C3-receptors and their biological
              roles, or the various C3 proteins share the same receptors to which they may
              bind with similar or different affinities. To address these hypotheses, the
              binding and internalization of the various C3b and iC3b molecules to trout
              phagocytes will be analyzed.  In addition, the investigator will also assess
              possible post-receptor events (changes in intracellular calcium concentration
              and analysis of intracellular signalling events using the patch-clamp recording
              technique) resulting from the interaction of the C3b/iC3b fragments with their
              receptors. This analysis of the interaction of the C3b and iC3b molecules with
              their putative receptors will be useful in interpreting the functional data
              obtained in Aim 3 concerning the function of the various trout C3 isoforms in
              innate immunity.  AIM 3: To examine the role of the various C3 isoforms in two
              major innate immune processes, phagocytosis and respiratory burst.  It is
              hypothesized that the diversity generated in the C3 molecule of teleost fish
              may have also resulted in a diversification and/or fine tuning and
              specialization of some of the C3-mediated functions. Thus, the most critical
              question to assess here is whether the various C3b and iC3b fragments from the
              various C3 isoforms have different effects on phagocytosis and respiratory
              burst and whether such differences relate to the binding, internalization and
              post-receptor events observed upon interaction of the C3b and iC3b molecules
              with the trout leukocytes (Aim 2).  Here, a two-color flow cytometric method
              (FACS) will be used for simultaneous measurement of phagocytosis and
              respiratory burst.
In these studies, the rainbow trout will be used as the
              teleost fish model, since the investigator has already generated many of the
              specific reagents that are required for these studies, including purified trout
              complement molecules and antibodies recognizing all of these molecules. These
              studies should shed new light on the biological significance of the fascinating
              diversity in C3 that makes the teleost fish complement system such a unique
              immune mechanism. These studies are also expected to provide new insights into
              the role of the complement system in the innate immune reactions of teleost
              fish. Many of these studies involve both the use of homologous components
              (purified trout molecules) and innovative techniques that are not commonly used
              in the field of comparative immunology. Therefore these studies will establish
              new directions for the study of the fish immune system and are expected to
              expand understanding of the evolution of immune reactions.

