Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Leadership Strategies in the Halaf
               Period, Southeastern Turkey, 5300-4500 BC
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0118085

Award Number: 0118085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gil J. Stein g-stein@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              As part of her doctoral dissertation research under the direction of Dr. Gil J.
              Stein, Rana Ozbal will co-direct excavations at Tell Kurdu, a Halaf Period
              site, in southeastern Turkey. Traditionally Halaf society of the fifth
              millennium BC is believed to consist of small-scale farming communities with no
              clear evidence for hierarchical social organization. Public buildings such as
              temples or palaces, as well as large villages or towns are conspicuously absent
              from all Halaf excavations in the Halaf "heartland" of northern Iraq.
              

Recently however, archaeologists, prompted by a newfound academic interest
              to investigate the Halaf "hinterlands", have begun to conduct research in
              southeastern Anatolia, modern day Turkey. They have discovered that Turkey
              harbors several Halaf sites of previously unheard-of sizes. These sites,
              substantially larger (10-20 hectares) than contemporaneous sites in Iraq
              (rarely more than 2-3 hectares) are most probably regional centers. Domuztepe,
              the most intensively investigated of these large sites, yielded evidence for
              substantial architectural complexes and complex ideological manifestations. In
              other words, the existing notion that Anatolia was inhabited during the Halaf
              Period by small farming communities needs to be reexamined. 

At 15 hectares,
              Tell Kurdu is an ideal site to investigate new questions on the socio-political
              organization in Anatolia in the fifth millennium BC. As a co-field director of
              the Kurdu excavations, Rana Ozbal will be researching the intra-site
              organization of the site to provide a firsthand look at the functioning of this
              Anatolian Halaf center. Excavations in 2001 will focus on the expansion of a
              1999 trench that yielded the remains of a large monumental building. The size
              and construction style of this 20 x 20 meter structure, with walls over one
              meter in thickness, suggest that it may be something other than a domestic
              residence, possibly having public and/or ritual significance.

In order to
              understand what the building may have been used for, Rana Ozbal will rely on
              two sources of data. The first will consist of the 'traditional' archaeological
              materials that the building yields, such as pottery, tools and other artifacts.
              The second source of information will be gathered from methodologically
              innovative micro-analyses, which involve chemical testing of the building's
              floors and recovery and identification of embedded micro-artifacts (artifacts
              that are less than 1 cm2). This combined research methodology will provide a
              finer level of resolution for inferring the function of this unusual building
              and hence for understanding the organizational complexity of Halaf society.
              



