Title       : Collaborative Research: Linking Subglacial Hydrology and Sliding Dynamics
               Through Variations Along the Glacier Length
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0118488

Award Number: 0118488
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel T. Harper joelh@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil F. Humphrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Harper
OPP-0118488
Pfeffer
OPP-0118721

Basal sliding is the
              principle form of movement of most temperate glaciers and leads to glacier
              surging, causes glaciers to erode their beds, and often controls the overall
              glacier's  mass distribution. A glacier's deformational velocity field can be
              modeled with some confidence, but there are no working models that will
              accurately predict the sliding motion of glaciers. In fact, the variables that
              would potentially go into a sliding model have not been fully established.
              Theoretically, sliding is promoted by both elevated water pressure and water
              storage at the bed. Previous field programs, however, have correlated sliding
              rate with either pressure or storage, with the majority of associations made
              with pressure. These observational programs have correlated sliding and
              subglacial conditions by using only limited spatially and temporally
              distributed measurements. This has made the task very difficult because the
              subglacial drainage system is transient and internal ice dynamics (e.g.,
              longitudinal coupling) complicate the glacier's response to change at its lower
              boundary. The Principal Investigators will conduct a multifaceted study
              focusing on time/space variability in coupling between the subglacial hydrology
              and ice dynamics system which they believe is key to a new understanding of
              sliding dynamics. They will conduct a field campaign on the Bench Glacier, a
              temperate valley glacier in southeast Alaska. Various types of instrumentation
              will be used to collect a comprehensive data set of measurements of basal water
              pressure, surface motion, internal deformation, sliding velocity, video
              observations of the bed, and slug, pump, and tracer experiments on subglacial
              water flow. These data will include at least three elements which have not been
              previously addressed, thus enabling new explorations of the linkages between
              subglacial hydrology and glacier motion: 1) data will be collected at two
              length scales, including measurements spanning the entire glacier and detailed
              measurements focused on a small reach; 2) measurements will be made over a time
              period of at least a year, allowing short to long period cycles to be
              investigated; and 3) an automated survey instrument will allow for
              uninterrupted high-time resolution studies of glacier motion. During the first
              field season, they will focus on the long length scale (kilometers), with
              measurements of basal conditions and velocity made at locations spanning the
              length of the glacier. Data will be used to investigate the longitudinal
              coupling between the bed and ice dynamics. During the second field season, they
              will address a short length scale (10-100 meters), enabling local observations
              to be placed within the context of regional processes. This will permit
              measurements of surface uplift to be fully compared with both ice dynamics and
              hydrology to investigate the cause of the uplift. The resulting data set and
              analyses will be used to test and refine conceptual and numerical models for
              subglacial water flow and to establish links between hydrology and ice
              dynamics.

