Title       : Low Density Parity Check Codes for Channels with Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0118701

Award Number: 0118701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Mitzenmacher michaelm@eecs.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aleksandar Kavcic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been shown
to have
              the power to perform within thousandths of decibels of the
Shannon channel
              capacity of memoryless communications channels.  This
project seeks to answer
              a natural question: how good are these codes
for transmission over channels
              with memory?  The channels under
consideration are Markovian memory channels,
              including both channels
where the memory is dependent and independent of the
              transmitted
symbols.  Such channels arise in several applications, such as
              disk
drives or other storage media.

The analysis and design of LDPC codes
              has benefited from representing
these codes as graphs, where the decoding is
              done by passing messages
along the graph edges.  This graph model allows an
              analysis using
martingales that underlies recent advances, including the
              density
evolution design technique.  The investigators study how to
              extend
this graphical modeling approach to channels with memory. 
              More
specifically, the project is divided into four major tasks:  
designing
              density evolution algorithms under new channel models;
evaluating noise
              tolerance thresholds;  engineering codes for short
block lengths and rapid
              decoding;  and achieving spectral shaping with
low-density parity-check codes.
