Title       : Collaborative Research on Monolithic Optoelectronic Integrated Circuits for
               Biomedical Sensing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0118130

Award Number: 0118130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifton G. Fonstad fonstad@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes a three year collaborative research program by a
              multi-university team of device, electronics, and biomedical investigators
              applying and extending newly emerging technologies for monolithic
              optoelectronic integration to address problems and needs of biomedical research
              and diagnosis. Researchers at MIT have recently demonstrated unique monolithic
              optoelectronic integrated circuits (OEICs) of unprecedented complexity and
              performance, and their ability now to monolithically integrate light sources
              and detectors with complex high density, high performance electronic circuitry
              opens the way to the invention and realization of a wide variety of sensors and
              measurement arrays for medical research and diagnostics. It is this area which
              the proposed effort will address.
The technologies for monolithic
              optoelectronic integration which are under development at MIT are sufficiently
              advanced that they can be applied immediately to solve a variety of problems,
              and one area that is ripe with applications and needs that are addressable with
              the current technology is biomedical research and practice. From the numerous
              possible target applications in biomedicine, we have identified as an initial
              vehicle for applying this technology a integrated source/detector array for
              diffuse optical tomography (DOT). The proposed unit will permit DOT
              observations with a resolution exceeding that of present techniques and will
              lead to the use of DOT in procedures and situations in which it is currently
              unfeasible.
Stated in the most general terms, the proposed effort will be
              directed at developing, applying, and making available a technology to
              monolithically integrate III-V optical emitters and detectors with commercially
              fabricated, custom-designed integrated circuits to produce high resolution
              two-dimensional arrays of individually addressable smart excitor/sensor pixels
              tailored for biomedical research applications and studies. A representative
              pixel might measure 250 to 500 microns on a side, and contain, for example, a
              diode light emitter (LED or laser), one or more light sensors, and a
              significant amount of electronic signal processing circuitry. This basic unit
              is a building block from which a wide variety of biomedical optical measurement
              systems can be realized in a very rugged, compact chip-size format. It promises
              to lead, in the future, to totally new sensor geometries and measurement
              procedures.
The challenges that the program will face include continuing
              development of the OEIC technology and adapting this technology for biomedical
              research; developing suitable signal processing algorithms and designing
              compact, high performance signal processing circuit arrays in the relevant
              electronics technologies to interface with the optoelectronic devices; and
              suitably packaging the OEIC chips for their biomedical utilization.
The
              project team will be aided in this effort by its strong links with the
              Northeastern University Center for Subsurface Sensing and Imaging Systems, the
              Massachusetts General Hospital NMR Center, the University of Utah NIH/NCRR
              Center for Bioelectric Field Modeling, Simulations and Visualization, and the
              MIT Microsystems Technology Laboratory, and by integrated circuit processing
              support from Vitesse Semiconductor Corporation.

