Title       : Diatom Blooms and Planktonic Grazers: Paradigm or Paradox?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0118044

Award Number: 0118044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470259             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce W. Frost frost@ocean.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Phytoplankton blooms are major events in the pelagic environment of temperate to
              subpolar coastal seas. Because blooms are large and relatively reliable
              seasonal pulses of food resources, the life histories of many pelagic consumer
              populations, both planktonic grazers and higher trophic level types such as
              fish, appear synchronized with them. Yet there is an apparent paradox. Results
              from numerous recent laboratory studies indicate that some species of diatoms,
              including species that may be biomass dominants during phytoplankton blooms,
              can inhibit egg production and/or embryonic and postembryonic development of
              several species of planktonic suspension-feeding copepods. The specific
              mechanism underlying the inhibition is currently under debate. Diatoms may be
              nutritionally deficient, but they also contain toxic substances that induce
              deleterious effects in copepods. However, the general relevance of these
              laboratory studies for natural populations of copepods is uncertain, as field
              investigations of the effects of diatom blooms have yielded contradictory
              results.

The goal of this research project is to test in the sea the
              hypothesis that diatom-dominated phytoplankton blooms have inhibitory effects
              on egg production rate and/or postembryonic development of natural populations
              of the planktonic suspension-feeding copepods Calanus pacificus and
              Pseudocalanus newmani. The study will be done in Dabob Bay (Washington State)
              where intense, diatom-dominated phytoplankton blooms occur reliably in March.
              During these blooms, diatom concentrations reach or exceed levels known from
              laboratory studies to have deleterious effects on copepods. Previous field
              studies elsewhere of effects of diatom blooms on copepods have not met this
              condition. To test the hypothesis a combination of approaches is proposed: (1)
              observations on the distribution and abundance of copepods, diatoms, and other
              potential prey; (2) analysis of fecal pellets of adult copepods to verify that
              they are ingesting diatoms in situ; (3) experiments providing adequate control
              and replication to determine feeding rates of adult copepods on diatoms and
              other prey; (4) incubations to estimate in situ egg production rate and
              hatching success of both copepod species; (5) experiments to test for the
              direct effects of diatoms on egg production rate and hatching success and
              postembryonic development of the two copepod species. The possibility that
              diatoms may impact metazoan grazers such as copepods is of enormous basic and
              applied scientific interest. At a basic level, the problem is central to
              understanding the structure and function of marine planktonic systems. Any
              process by which phytoplankton inhibit reproduction or development of grazing
              zooplankton could markedly affect the pelagic food web well beyond the level of
              primary consumers. That is, a process affecting the population response of
              grazers would ramify through the food web, directly impacting other consumer
              species whose reproduction and growth depend on occurrence and abundance of
              eggs and immature stages of grazers. Thus, it is crucial to know whether
              diatoms are deleterious to natural populations of copepods and, if so, the
              specific nature of the effect, how frequently it occurs, and what the
              implications are for higher trophic levels.

On a practical level, the
              magnitude of sustainable harvest of fish from the ocean is ultimately dependent
              not just on the level of primary production, but how that production is (or is
              not) transferred through the food web to higher (harvestable) trophic levels.
              An unambiguous test of the effects of diatom blooms on natural populations of
              planktonic grazers could therefore represent a major advance in understanding
              for pelagic biological oceanography.

