Title       : Repression and Mobilization: What We Know and Where We Should Go From Here
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a0118989

Award Number: 0118989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christian A. Davenport cdavenport@cidcm.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In the past, social movement and collective action research in sociology has
              concentrated largely on mobilization in democratic states.   In contrast,
              studies of the mobilization-repression nexus in political science focus on
              protest in principally authoritarian contexts.  Both areas have neglected
              important insights provided by the other.   Recently, as new data from
              repressive as well as democratic regimes have become available, and as new
              theoretical perspectives on state building, political control, and culture have
              found their way into social movement studies as well as research on
              repression/human rights, there is growing interest among scholars to reexamine
              and reconceptualize this relationship.  This research involves a workshop
              designed to bring together twenty junior and senior researchers who are working
              in diverse settings.  The primary goal is to address the hiatus in theory
              concerning how the range of repressive tactics in democratic and authoritarian
              states shapes repertoires of contention, mobilizing structures, and the framing
              of opportunities and collective identities as various points in cycles of
              resistance, protest, and rebellion.   The workshop output will be a book edited
              by the organizers.   The activity is to contribute to the creation of a network
              of scholars who come to these issues embracing both single-state as well as
              global/comparative approaches.
