Title       : PEET: Studies in the Lasiosphaeriaceae II: Monograph of Podospora and Phylogeny
               of the Lasiosphaeria/Sordariaceae Group (Fungi, Ascomycetes, Sordariales)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0118695

Award Number: 0118695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $744241             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabine M. Huhndorf shuhndorf@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In a continuation of productive studies of the taxonomy and phylogeny of the
              Sordariales, a large and ecologically important group of ascomycete fungi, Dr.
              Sabine Huhndorf of the Field Museum and her students and colleagues are
              focusing on the genus Podospora, one of the largest and most complex in the
              group (138 species worldwide), and related taxa. The genus is key to
              understanding relationships in the group, and is ecologically important as a
              dominant component of the dung decomposer mycota. Previous studies have shown
              that the large genera Lasiosphaeria and Cercophora form a monophyletic group
              together with Podospora and the model organisms Neurospora crassa and Sordaria
              fimicola.  These relationships are significantly different from traditional
              classification schemes. While Podospora species have had a great deal of
              attention from a morphological standpoint, they have not previously been
              included in molecular systematic studies; and a revision of the genus
              incorporating molecular characters is essential for understanding their
              relationship among other taxa in the Sordariales. This study will serve as a
              model system for future studies in ascomycete systematics by using a multi-gene
              approach, incorporating both protein-coding and ribosomal genes, along with
              morphological characters for determining phylogenetic relationships at the
              specific, generic and familial levels. Both the monographic and the family
              level phylogenetic studies will be based on morphological and molecular data
              obtained from type and other herbarium specimens, newly collected specimens,
              and cultures. With the aid of digital image capturing systems, this study will
              produce detailed identification guides for taxa in the Sordariales. Results
              will be available via hard copy and over the Field Museum Mycology WWW site.
              The publication of the resulting monographs, specimen databases, on-line image
              catalog and interactive identification system will greatly assist further
              studies of ascomycetes by researchers worldwide. The research and training
              enterprise involves colleague Dr. Greg Mueller at the Field Museum as well as
              others in Denmark and New Zealand who will assist also with the fieldwork in
              those countries. Students will also participate in ongoing field work in Costa
              Rica and Ecuador.
This program directly addresses several of the major
              challenges currently facing ascomycete systematics including: a) rigorously
              examining patterns of variation in some of the key morphological characters
              currently used in ascomycete taxonomy, b) stabilizing generic, familial and
              ordinal concepts using a phylogenetic approach, c) determining taxonomic
              diversity in tropical countries, d) integrating these data into monographic
              treatments, and e) training students to become well versed in traditional as
              well as modern tools and analyses. Understanding the phylogenetic relationships
              among ascomycetes is important because these fungi play an important role in
              our living world as decomposers of organic matter and as agents of plant and
              animal diseases, and as sources of medically and industrially significant
              compounds.


