Title       : Workshop on Universal Accessibility of Ubiquitous Computing: Providing for the
               Elderly; May 22-25, 2001; Alcacer do Sal, Portugal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a0118350

Award Number: 0118350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachelle S. Heller sheller@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is funding for a jointly sponsored NSF/EU workshop to be held May 22-25,
              2001, at the "Pousada D. Afonso II" situated in Alcacer do Sal outside of
              Lisbon, Portugal.   This relatively secluded site has been chosen by the
              organizers so that attendees can participate without distraction in the
              workshop, which will bring together 35-45 leaders in the fields of universal
              access research, business, academics and policy to review the current
              state-of-the-art and produce a set of research agenda items for near and long
              term activities whose goal is to assure universal accessibility of ubiquitous
              computing by the elderly.  Particular emphasis will be placed on articulating
              an integrated approach to addressing the problems in the context of technology
              and human rights and values, paying attention to challenges due not only to
              physical limitations but also to differences in perception, culture and
              background.   Prior to arrival, all attendees will provide background papers
              highlighting their individual perspectives.  The workshop will begin with a
              plenary session setting the framework for what is to follow;   subsequent
              sessions will each include a short formal presentation followed by a
              facilitator-led discussion.   The tentative list of session topics includes: 
              pervasive mobile computing and the aging population;  exploratory user centered
              design for all citizens;  accessibility and the elderly;  accessibility for
              people with cognitive impairments;  user-centered design with senior citizens; 
              sociological integration facilitated by technology;   and profile of the senior
              citizen's varied needs.  Approximately half a dozen graduate students will be
              included among the invitees;  they will have a unique opportunity to share the
              direction of their thesis work and receive mentoring from senior members of the
              field.  The revised, peer-reviewed workshop proceedings will be published as a
              book by a respected publisher (negotiations are currently under way by the
              organizers with ACM Press and North-Holland).   Additionally, a report and
              research agenda will be submitted to the two major funding bodies (NSF and the
              EU), and workshop contributions, summaries and discussions will be made
              available online through a Web site to ensure timely dissemination to the
              community at large.   The organizers have received expressions of support from
              IFIP TC13 (HCI) and WG13.3 (People with Disabilities), and from ACM SIGCHI,
              SIGCAPH, and SIGGRAPH.   NSF funds will be used primarily to support American
              attendees, as well as some general expenses.
