Title       : Doctoral dissertation improvement grant: Archaeology and tephrostratigraphy of
               the southern Kapthurin Formation, Baringo, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2001      
File        : a0118345

Award Number: 0118345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally McBrearty mcbrearty@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Sally McBrearty, Mr. Christian Tryon will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. His goal  is to use closely dated
              archaeological and paleontological occurrences in the Kapthurin stratigraphic
              sequence in the Baringo region of Kenya to examine the emergence of
              anatomically and behaviorally modern humans. The Kapthurin formation is crucial
              for understanding this transformation because materials spanning the last ca. 2
              million years are interbedded with volcanic ash which is amenable to potassium
              argon dating. Different ashes - the result of individual eruptions - have
              distinct trace element compositions and through their analysis, individual
              ashfalls can be "fingerprinted" and their distribution mapped across the
              formation. Thus they provide a relatively secure framework to track behavioral
              and biological change. Careful crafted hafted stone tools from both the
              Kapthurin  as well as elsewhere in Africa are termed "Middle Stone Age (MSA)"
              and they provide the first evidence for humans with cognitive abilities similar
              to our own. The earliest date, ca. 285,000 years ago comes from the Kapthurin
              and Mr. Tryon wishes to gain insight into this early phase of the process.
              Research to date in the northern Kapthurin exposures has significantly changed
              archaeological views of this process because it has demonstrated that three
              separate stone working traditions, the MSA and two supposedly preceding ones
              are in fact interbedded and do not form a chronologically coherent
              developmental sequence. Researchers do not know whether this variability
              results from a single culture which manufactured different types of tools in
              different situations, or whether three separate and distinct cultures existed.
              In the Near East at a slightly younger date, such replacement occurred with
              different groups ebbing and flowing in response to changing environmental
              conditions.

While much work has taken place in the northern Kapthurin
              deposits, their southern counterparts are more poorly known. Mr. Tryon is
              conducting a geological and archaeological survey of this area both to locate
              sites and to establish a detailed chronological sequence. With NSF support he
              will characterize the volcanic ashes collected and will conduct archaeological
              excavation to provide additional information on cultural variation. This
              research is important because it will shed light on the emergence of behavioral
              modern humans. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

