Title       : Development and Testing of a Tool for Judging Excellence in Science Museum
               Exhibitions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0118011

Award Number: 0118011
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David A. Ucko                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly Serrell bserrell@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Serrell and Associates
	      5429 South Dorchester Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  60615    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              


0118011		PROJECT  ABSTRACT


Serrell and Associates requests an
              18-month grant to conduct research that seeks a valid and reliable way for
              museum professionals to judge the excellence of science exhibitions in museums
              from a 
visitor-experience point of view.  This is a novel and untested idea
              for practitioners of exhibition development in science museums.  The need for
              this research arises from a lack of agreed-upon standards of excellence (or
              even competence) for science museum exhibitions.  Museums that receive funding
              from the National Science Foundation are called upon to document the
              effectiveness and merit of their exhibit projects, yet they have few shared,
              standardized methods to help them do so.  This grant would allow Serrell and
              Associates to conduct a series of meetings with local (Chicago) museum
              professionals and a national advisory panel to facilitate the development and
              testing of an 
audience-based, peer-reviewed criteria for recognizing
              excellence through empirical definition and exemplars.

The research question
              for this project is:  If different museum officials used the same set of
              standards to visit, review and judge the same group of exhibitions, would their
              ratings agree on the degree of excellence for each of the exhibitions?  The
              proposed research methods will be informed by the science education research of
              John R. Frederiksen (University of California at Berkeley and the Educational
              Testing Service, California) who has developed techniques and criteria for
              performance evaluation of science teaching.  His scoring methods incorporate
              direct and positive ways in which assessment can be used to improve science
              teaching.  There are very clear parallels between Frederiksen's assessment
              techniques for science educators and the goals of this project for science
              museum exhibit developers.  These include, but are not limited to: 
              practitioner-developed and practitioner-trained criteria; criteria based upon a
              combination of ground-up and top-down theories; content-free, intention-free
              criteria; and criteria that benefit the process, the product and measurement of
              the impacts.  The 
long-term goal of this research is to improve the quality
              of visitors' experiences in science museum exhibitions.

