Title       : Dissertation Research: Tensas Paleoethnobotanical Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0118849

Award Number: 0118849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle J. Fritz gjfritz@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Under the direction of Dr. Gayle Fritz, Katherine Roberts will complete  The
              Tensas Paleoethnobotanical Project.  This project/dissertation will document
              the emergence of aboriginal farming, in the form of both horticulture and
              agriculture, in the Tensas Basin of Northeast Louisiana located in the Lower
              Mississippi Valley.  It will employ basic models and tenets from evolutionary
              ecology as the main interpretive framework to enable examination of these
              processes in sociopolitical context.  Specifically, it will investigate how
              risk reduction may have influenced decisions about resource utilization.
              Evidence will be taken from plant remains, archaeological data, and ecological
              information.. 
	Current data suggest that although a certain level of
              complexity was achieved in the Tensas based on nut and fruit management, with
              the advent and subsequent intensification of maize, Tensas Basin society became
              noticeably more complex.  In contrast, farming of native seeds had fewer
              discernible social ramifications.  These patterns require further
              substantiation and explanation. Plant remain analyses are an excellent means
              for testing hypotheses about the dynamics of the evolution of economic and
              cultural systems.  This study, combined with application of predictions from
              particular models derived from evolutionary ecology, will help focus
              interpretation on the nature and consequences of the interaction between people
              and their food plants. 
 	The project/dissertation will expand an already
              impressive plant remain database and critically examine factors effecting
              foodways in the Tensas basin through a localized case study.  Completion of
              this project will augment knowledge of the patterns and processes of food
              production during the time period spanning A.D. 700 - A.D. 1400, focusing on
              the effect of agriculture on indigenous economic strategies.  Hypotheses
              concerning the local population's dependence on maize versus native resources
              will be examined on the basis of empirical evidence with consideration of the
              ecological and historical context in which these behavioral changes took place.
               Results of this study will provide insight into the interplay among
              environment, risk, and the evolution of subsistence and social structure,
              ultimately shedding light on developmental processes in other regions as well.
              
	The Tensas Paleoethnobotanical Project will provide some clarification of
              why and how these fisher-hunter-collectors eventually became farmers and in so
              doing,  the study will fulfill the larger objective of developing explanations
              for the origin of food production in the Tensas Basin.  Why the
              hunter-collector-fisher economy in the Tensas persisted as long as it did, and
              why local groups were seemingly so reluctant to embrace maize agriculture, will
              be discussed.  This dissertation will provide a well studied example of
              sedentary and socially complex moundbuilders who subsequently adopted maize. 
              Ecologically based explanations for the adoption of agriculture and the
              socio-political changes it brings will confront arguments of increased
              complexity in Mississippian times deriving from aggrandizing individuals
              striving for power.  Additionally, explanations of population pressure and
              climatic change need not be invoked as exogenous variables for the shift to. 
              Finally, data collection and hypothesis testing involved in this project will
              provide an empirical case study to aid evaluation of proposals for subsistence
              patterning in the region.
	

