Title       : Metaphor and Embodiment in Spanish Ritual
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0118090

Award Number: 0118090
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Gilmore dgilmore@shiva.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0118090
Gilmore
	Monsters are familiar figures in folklore, myth and art
              around the world.  Threatening mythical creatures share common features
              wherever they are found, including large size, hybrid shapes combining human
              and beastly form, violence, cannibalism and of course malevolence.  In most
              cultures mythical monsters serve as metaphors for abstract evil as well as
              antisocial impulses, despised and feared "others" such as deviants, pariahs and
              outsiders.  This pilot research project by an anthropologist from the State
              University of New York-Stony Brook will explore research sites in Spain for a
              study of the social role of monsters in community rituals. In town and village
              festivities occurring between January and July, colorful demonic effigies
              "attack" neighbors, "eat" children, and threaten normative standards until they
              are defeated by united, heroic community action.  The research will integrate
              psychodynamic and social interpretations to gain insight into the processes
              which create monsters in the ritual context. Combining a psychoanalytic
              perspective which assumes that monsters are created from dreamlike images with
              empirically real aspects reflecting repressed desire, guilt, awe and dread,
              with anthropological theories of categorical natural schemes, contradiction and
              conflict, the anthropologist will observe monster rituals, interview community
              members, and discuss the meanings of the rituals with Spanish experts in folk
              culture. The results from this pilot project will be used in preparing a major
              research proposal.

