Title       : Advanced Technological Education - ATE: Bio-Link: A National Advanced
               Technological Education Center for Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0118933

Award Number: 0118933
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2050000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine Johnson ejohnson@biolink.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barton Gledhill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City Coll of San Francisco
	      33 Gough Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941031214    415/239-3000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Bio-Link's mission is to strengthen and expand biotechnology technician
              education at community and technical colleges throughout the nation in order to
              1) increase the number and diversity of well-trained technicians in the
              workforce; 2) meet the needs of industry for appropriately trained technicians;
              and 3) institutionalize community college educational practices that make
              modern, high-quality education in the concepts, skills, and ethics of
              biotechnology available to all students.
Bio-Link's National Center at City
              College of San Francisco provides leadership to seven Regional Centers using a
              coordinated national strategy that is implemented through the Regional Centers.
              The Regional Centers are located at community colleges throughout the United
              States: Northeast-New Hampshire Community and Technical College;
              Southeast-Alamance Community College; North Central-Madison Area Technical
              College; South Central-Austin Community College; Northwest-Seattle Central
              Community College; Northern California Biotechnology Center-City College of San
              Francisco; and Southwest-San Diego City College. Regional Centers pursue a
              number of specific substantive activities that help Bio-Link achieve its
              objectives. Each region also develops relations with local industry and
              educational institutions in order to understand and meet regional needs and to
              distribute information locally.
The goals Bio-Link established are key to
              fulfilling its mission: 1) Provide support for students and technicians, 2)
              improve instruction & learning, 3) share information and resources, and 4)
              foster collaborations and partnerships. Some of the key accomplishments under
              these goals that continue to be supported include a survey of all biotechnology
              technician programs at community and technical colleges across the United
              States; an annual Summer Fellows Forum for community college and high school
              instructors from around the country to share best practices and learn new
              techniques; and the Bio-Link Website that contains information on a myriad of
              topics from job and workshop announcements to a virtual laboratory, equipment
              lists, and instructional materials.
In addition, Bio-Link solicits, tests, and
              reviews instructional materials; assists in program development; devises means
              for attracting students, especially underrepresented minorities, into
              biotechnology; and works with high schools and baccalaureate institutions to
              improve articulation.
In general Bio-Link helps educators keep up with an
              industry that is not only increasing in size, but expanding from research and
              development to manufacturing and computer analysis. In doing so, Bio-Link best
              prepares students to meet the evolving needs of the biotechnology industry.

