Title       : BacterioChlorophyll A in the Open Ocean - Do We Need to Reassess its Role as a
               Biomarker?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0118045

Award Number: 0118045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Milne                             
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49046              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralf Goericke rgoericke@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0118045


Bacteriochlorophyll A (bChl a) is a photosynthetic
              pigment which has been formerly considered a unique molecular biomarker for the
              anoxic photoheterotrophic bacteria. Although anoxygenic photoheterotrophic
              bacteria which live in oxic waters were discovered some 20 years ago, bChl a
              was considered to be expressed solely during, and thus diagnostic of,
              anoxygenic bacterial photosynthesis. These bacteria require anoxic conditions
              to synthesize their bacteriochlorophylls and, in the presence of light, use
              molecules other than water (e.g. sulfide, sulfur compounds, hydrogen, Fe etc)
              as photosynthetic electron donors. This is to be contrasted to the mode of
              existence of cynanobacteria and eukaryotes whose primary pigment, chlorophyll a
              (or one of its close derivatives), enables water to serve as the electron donor
              for photosynthesis, incidentally forming molecular oxygen as a waste product. 
              Recent biophysical methods that detect bChl a  have suggested that aerobic
              bacterial photosynthesis may be much more prevalent in the world's surface
              ocean, and also not limited to niche (anoxic microzonal) environments. As well
              as limiting the  use of bChl a as a paleoecological biomarker for anoxic
              environments (a subject of this study),  confirmation of the presence  of  a
              significant concentration of bChl a in the global surface ocean implies  a
              significant biomass and photosynthetic energy flux due to aerobic anoxygenic
              phototrophs. This may or may not have important implications to carbon fixation
              and ocean carbon transport, but certainly is important in explaining the marine
              ecology of aerobic anoxygenic phototrophs in relation to non-phototrophic
              bacteria, especially in oligotrophic waters. In order to systematically confirm
              the importance of the bChl a signal in oxic seawater, this study will, in water
              samples from several sites:
 i) rigorously chemically identify the pigment,
              bChla, and its related forms, 
ii) investigate  associated particle size
              relationships of its occurrence (indicative of microzonal anoxia) 
iii)
              conduct preliminary microbiological studies of its occurrence in likely  target
              microbial (e.g Roseobacter clade) cultures
iv) investigate the biogeochemical
              transformation of bChla in water columns and sedimentary environments.


