Title       : PEET: Lower Worms Of The Meiofauna - Models for Early Metazoan Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0118804

Award Number: 0118804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $748343             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Tyler styler@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1056,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Among the small invertebrates living between sand grains in the
              marine  environment, are tiny, cryptic worms that many consider to be the most
              primitive of all bilaterally symmetrical animals (that is, all animals
              excluding the cnidarians and sponges).   These worms include two small groups
              called acoel and catenulid turbellarians which are now classified in the
              phylum
Platyhelminthes (flatworms) but that, according to some systematists,
              may not even be related to the more familiar flatworms such as planarians and
              polyclads. Another of these primitive worm groups is the Gnathostomulida, whose
               relationships to other phyla of invertebrates have been similarly
              controversial; by some theories, gnathostomulids are like the ancestors of the
              flatworms.  S. Tyler and W. Sterrer, who have long studied these worms, propose
              training new students in how to find and handle them and in how to decipher
              systematic relationships.  Students working in S. Tyler's laboratory at the
              University of Maine will concentrate on microscopical techniques and taxonomy
              of flatworm groups.  New characters discerned through applying fluorescence and
              electron microscopy on these animals show that the relationships among them are
              not well represented by the current classification system.  Students working
              with Sterrer in his laboratory in Bermuda and accompanying him on sampling
              trips will gauge patterns of distribution of flatworms and gnathostomulids and
              gather specimens for the microscopical and molecular studies.  He will also
              train students in curatorial techniques.

The major focus of this project is
              the training of students-to give them the tools to discover and describe the
              many species of these difficult-to-find, yet  remarkably abundant, enigmatic
              animals and to make sense of their diversity. Without new researchers being
              trained to identify these cryptic animals, we will lose the expertise needed to
              address important questions of animal origins.  The knowledge these students
              unearth will likely provide critical clues to resolve far-reaching questions of
              how the major groups of animals are related.  Identifying and characterizing
              the many undescribed species of lower flatworms will provide a better
              understanding of their biodiversity; knowledge of the geographic distribution
              of both these flatworms and gnathostomulids should provide a means for seeing
              where they arose and how they diversified and spread around the Earth.  The
              results of these students' research will be displayed on a Web site so that
              anyone with a Web browser can use that data to identify similar worms they
              might find or to gauge the historical relationships of geographic sites.

