Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Fetal Origins Hypothesis, Modernization, and
               the Hmong Diaspora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0118984

Award Number: 0118984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Little mlittle@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
	There is good evidence that poor nutrition in the earliest stages of life
              (including the fetal stage) can affect health profoundly in individuals at much
              later ages.  This is known as the "Fetal Origins Hypothesis."  Another major
              factor affecting peoples' lives and their health is the process of
              "modernization," or the cultural transition that people undergo during the
              process of being incorporated into a Western style of life.  These two
              processes (poor early nutrition and modernization) will be studied in Hmong
              refugees who left Laos during the "Secret War" (1961-1980) and who are between
              the ages of 19 and 40 years.  Two populations will be studied: Hmong who have
              resettled in rural, isolated farming villages in French Guiana, and Hmong
              living in the urban setting of Providence, Rhode Island.  Information gathered
              will include life histories by questionnaire and interview and demographic data
              related to early environment, and anthropometric, body composition, and
              physiological measures for estimating outcome.  Sorting out the effects of
              early environment and later modernization will be possible by statistical
              comparisons of the Hmong of French Guiana and of Providence.  This study will
              contribute to our knowledge of: (1) the influence of poor early nutrition on
              chronic diseases in adulthood, (2) environmental effects on body fat
              distribution, (3) Hmong ethnography during the war in Southeast Asia, and (4)
              the health effects of modernization on the resettled Hmong people.

