Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant-The Archaeology of Swahili Social
               Differentiation: Earth-and-Thatch Neighborhoods at Gede, Kenya, 11th-16th
               Centuries AD
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2001      
File        : a0118465

Award Number: 0118465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adria LaViolette ajl4h@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the supervision of Dr. Adria LaViolette, Lynn Koplin will direct
              archaeological
excavations at Gede on the Kenyan coast, where she is
              conducting research
for her doctoral dissertation.  The project examines
              social
differentiation in areas of earth-and-thatch domestic architecture at
              the
major 11th-16th-century Swahili stonetown site.  Because archaeologists
              have
primarily concentrated on the stone components of these
              large,
architecturally-mixed sites, currently little is known about
              activities,
diet and material culture among the majority, the inhabitants of
              earthen
dwellings, often assumed to have been undifferentiated non-elites. 
              The
proposed research will compare frequency and spatial organization of
              craft
production, diet and wealth between stone and earth-and-thatch
              components of
the same town, with a view to elucidating social differentiation
              within
earth-and-thatch areas.  When the distribution of activities and goods
              in
non-stone neighborhoods are better understood, spatial variation
              in
production and consumption may suggest axes of social differentiation,
              with
which to trace social reorganization through time.

The need to focus
              on intrasite variation, expressed in
archaeologically-recoverable forms of
              production and consumption, is
important as archaeologists attempt to
              elucidate indigenous forms of social
complexity in sub-Saharan Africa.  This
              is especially important as it
relates to Swahili society, which until recently
              was attributed to external
factors.  This research is part of a new impetus on
              a larger level to search
within Africa for the constitutive dynamics of
              African societies, and on
Swahili sites in general this requires dismantling
              monolithic conceptions of
the society by examining the overlooked majority,
              those in non-stone
dwellings.  Beyond the level of Swahili archaeology, this
              research draws on
and will contribute to archaeological literature on the East
              African Iron
Age, rise of complex societies, spatial organization and activity
              areas. 
The changes that accompanied the foundation, growth, contraction
              and
abandonment of Gede fit into the larger history of the Iron
              Age
efflorescence on the continent, and Africanist archaeologists are
              attempting
to fill out the magnitude of activities such as pottery making,
              increased
trade, specialized production, farming and other foodways that
              accompanied
social expansion.  Additionally, preliminary insights into the
              principles
organizing neighborhoods of earthen architecture will engage
              the
anthropological debates on spatial organization.  



