Title       : Statistical Field Theories and Collective Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0118213

Award Number: 0118213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehran Kardar kardar@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0118213
Kardar
This grant supports research and education aimed at
              understanding static and dynamic fluctuation phenomena in polymers, gels, flux
              lines, surfaces, complex fluids, and social networks. Field theory and
              numerical methods, e.g. Monte Carlo simulation, will be used to extract
              universal features of these interacting systems. New theoretical methods may be
              developed in the course of the work. Research will focus on several specific
              questions: Are knots and entanglements in polymers such as DNA localized by
              energy or entropy effects on shorter segments? How are fluctuations modified in
              the vicinity of a deformed surface, and can they be used to provide indirect
              information about deformations?  Can we describe the emergence of patterns in
              biological systems (cortical maps, cell motility, and structural constructs
              from molecular motors and microtubules) by continuum field equations, and what
              do we learn from such modeling? What is the interplay of order and fluctuations
              in the non-equilibrium contexts of growing films and drifting lattices? Can
              simple biological systems be mimicked by imprinting desired information in
              seemingly random gels at the molecular level?
%%%
This grant supports
              fundamental theoretical research and education in an area of statistical
              physics dealing with static and dynamic fluctuation phenomena in polymers,
              gels, flux lines, surfaces, complex fluids, biological systems, and social
              networks. The PI will use advanced theoretical techniques to address specific
              questions involving equilibrium and nonequilibrium phenomena in polymer
              physics, film and crystal growth, cortical maps, and molecular biology. 
              Students will be trained in advanced theoretical methods for statistical
              physics and their applications to a wide range of systems including biological
              systems.
***

