Title       : Thermodynamics and Kinetics of Protein Aggregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0118208

Award Number: 0118208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $567618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey W. Blanch blanch@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to investigate the problem of protein
              folding/unfolding, and in particular, the mediation of this process by the
              chaperone DnaK.  This project involves both modeling and experimental studies. 
              First, folding-aggregation competition will be studied.  Measurements of
              interprotein interactions at varied external conditions, e.g.  temperature, pH,
              and ionic strength, will help identify separate contributions to the overall
              interprotein potentials and their role in molecular association.  The Principal
              Investigators (PIs) have developed a three dimensional periodic Monte Carlo
              simulator for capturing the competition between refolding and aggregation of
              initially unfolded protein-like chains.  In this system various interactions on
              short length scales will be considered.  Also, the PIs have predicted that the
              presence of pre-folded proteins improves the folding rate of unfolded proteins
              because of enhanced surface interactions.  This provides a basis for modeling
              the chaperone-unfolded protein interaction so crucial in vivo.  Other
              computational tasks include an understanding of the kinetics of the refolding
              process, since both folded and unfolded forms are thermodynamically feasible so
              that the kinetics may define the overall extent of folding.   

