Title       : Genetic Analysis of the nifM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0118992

Award Number: 0118992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Narasaiah Gavini ngavini@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lakshmidevi Pulakat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Genetics of biological nitrogen fixation is very complex and requires a
              coordinated expression of about 20 nif genes. The enzyme nitrogenase is
              composed of two separate proteins designated the Fe-protein, a homodimer coded
              by the nifH gene and the MoFe-protein, a heterotetramer coded by the nifDK
              genes. Apart from these structural genes (nifHDK), a number of nif accessory
              genes whose products are essential for the maturation and assembly of
              nitrogenase are identified. One of them is the nifM gene whose product is
              necessary for the production of the functional Fe-protein in
              Klebsiellapneumoniae and in Azotobacter vinelandii.  Initial genetic analyses
              of nifM mutants generated by chemical mutagenesis, site-directed mutagenesis,
              and of a
chimeric NifM:PpiC protein, indicate that the NifM protein functions
              as a peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase (PPIase). Moreover,  studies on
              purified NifM protein also showed that this protein has PPIase activity. Based
              on these observations and also on the high homology shared by the PPIases and
              C-terminal
region of the NifM, it is  hypothesized  that the peptidyl-prolyl
              cis/trans isomerase activity of NifM is essential for this protein to exert its
              effect on the maturation (activity and stability) of the Fe-protein. The aim of
              this research is to carry out molecular and genetic analysis on the nifM gene
              in order to understand
the functions of the nifM in nitrogen fixation. To
              achieve this goal, the following specific objectives will be pursued: 1) to
              characterize the nifM point mutants of K. pneumoniae that were previously
              isolated by chemical mutagenesis in order to understand the  molecular basis of
               NifM function; 2) to identify region(s) of the A. vinelandii NifM protein that
              are essential for PPIase activity; 3) to identify the
regions of NifM protein
              that are essential for interaction with the Fe-protein; and 4) to isolate and
              characterize nifM-independent Nif  A. vinelandii mutants. These experiments 
              are directed toward  understanding  how the Genetic organization of the nifM
              gene contributes to the role of its product in the maturation of Fe-protein. 
              Preliminary data from mutational analysis indicate that mutations in both the
              N-terminal region of NifM and the C-terminal region of NifM affect the ability
              of NifM to participate in the maturation of the Fe-protein. These studies will
              help  to assess the role of the C-terminal region of NifM and the PPIase
              activity of the NifM in the NifM ability to participate in the maturation of
              the Fe-protein. Moreover, these studies will help  to delineate  the role of
              the N-terminal region of the NifM in determining the NifM ability. Besides, the
              research projects outlined here make excellent teaching tools, utilizing many
              techniques in modern molecular microbiology and having easily grasped
              objectives. The PIs have started a series of lecture courses that deal with
              biotechnology and one of major goals during this grant period is to start a
              molecular biology laboratory course to conduct active learning, experimental
              learning and mentoring activities with undergraduate students at Bowling Green
              State University.


