Title       : US-Nepal Cooperative Research: Theoretical and Experimental Investigations on
               Some Current Electronic Structure Related Topics in Condensed Matter Systems
               and Ozone-UV Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2001      
File        : a0118022

Award Number: 0118022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tara P. Das tpd56@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5989,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0118022
Das  

Description:  This award supports US-Nepal cooperative
              research entitled "Theoretical and Experimental Investigations on Some Current
              Electronic Structure Related Topics in Condensed Matter Systems and Ozone-UV
              Interaction."  This is an initiating activity among the Theoretical Electronic
              Structure and Properties Research Group, University at Albany, State University
              of New York, the Condensed Matter and Atmospheric Physics Research Group,
              Tribhuvan University (TU), and the Condensed Matter and Materials Physics
              Experimental Research Group, University of Central Florida (UCF).   This
              project covers five diverse areas of research that include glasses, quantum
              computation dealing with solar radiation and upper atmosphere chemistry,
              studies of hyperfine interactions of electron distributions in materials, ozone
              depletion and environmental impacts in Nepal, and a solar cell fabrication
              capability at TU. 

Scope:  This award launches joint activities between two
              US universities and the Tribhuvan University, Nepal.  Topics were selected
              according to common interests at these institutions between theory and
              experimental groups in a way that complement their expertise and enhance the
              potential for future interactions among the three groups.  Faculty and students
              at TU will gain expertise in experimental aspects of Moessbauer spectroscopy
              and characterization of electronic structures of materials.  In the long-term,
              research on solar cell thin films and nanocrystalline particles corresponds to
              Nepalese national development interests.  This is the first cooperative
              research project in physics supported under the US-Nepal Cooperative Science
              Program.  It is jointly supported by the Division of International Programs and
              the Division of Materials Research, Condensed Matter Physics Program. 

    
              

