Title       : Laser-effected Ultra-large Grain Growth and Device Fabrication in Silicon Thin
               Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2001    
File        : a0118366

Award Number: 0118366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas P. Grigoropoulos cgrigoro@me.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsu-Jae King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0118366
Grigoropoulos

The work is focused on laser-driven crystal growth in
              thin semiconductor films for fabricating thin film transistors (TFTs) utilized
              in large area electronics including high-definition flat panel displays. The
              goal is to achieve production of device-quality polycrystalline material
              through one-step manufacturing process with superior control of the single
              crystal growth location, orientation and size. The temporal and spatial
              distribution of the rapidly changing temperature field and solid/liquid
              interface propagation will be investigated at the microscale level. The
              following tasks will be carried out:

1) One-step production of single
              crystal regions that are sufficiently large for fabricating TFTs via the novel
              double laser recrystallization technique. A new laser-based processing tool
              will be developed and instrumented for advanced process control and enhanced
              throughput. Schemes involving processing of patterned regions in conjunction
              with spatially modified beam profiles will be tested.

2) Fabrication and
              characterization of TFTs on the produced poly-Si films in order to examine the
              quality of the poly-Si and hence evaluate the effectiveness of the controlled
              laser recrystallization and lateral crystal growth process. The results will be
              utilized to identify optimal combinations of the laser beam parameters and
              pattern configurations.

3) Design and implementation of a new temporally and
              spatially resolved microscale temperature measurement technique based on
              thermal emission. The measured temperature distribution in conjunction with
              direct in-situ imaging will provide information on the microstructural
              evolution including the quenching rate, the degree of supercooling, the
              nucleation temperature and the solid/liquid interface velocity. The
              experimental findings will enable construction of validated and accurate
              computational models of the complex phase transformation process. These models
              will be then used for improving the process sequence.


