Title       : SGER: Development, Recognition and Retention of Scientific Talent
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0118975

Award Number: 0118975
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory J. Feist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With this for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER), Dr. Feist is
              investigating a paradox in math and science in the US: our high school students
              are average and mediocre compared to international standards and yet our
              professional scientists are the best in the world.   He is also interested in
              the question of whether, during the journey from adolescent talent to adult
              achievement,  gifted women and minorities more likely than men and majorities
              to opt out of math and science careers?  If this is so, Dr. Feist is examining
              some of the psychological influences on these differential rates of attrition. 
              

This project explores these issues from the perspective of the psychology
              of science.  This is a pilot project that will explore and test the basic
              methodology and the primary survey questions.   Specifically, Dr. Feist intends
              to  examine issues related to scientific potential and the scientific
              achievement.  First, a sample of 160 (40 each from 1995, 1985, 1975, and 1965)
              past winners of the prestigious Westinghouse Science Fair are assessed on
              outcome measures, namely degrees obtained, career paths chosen (especially
              science v. non-science) and level of eminence obtained within their careers.
              Moreover, gender and ethnicity are examined in relation to such outcomes. 
              Second, 100 members of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) are  compared
              with 100 matched non-NAS scientists to determine what the early career markers
              of world-class scientific achievement are.  Outcome measures  consist of career
              eminence (titles, honors, awards) and predictor measures include gender,
              productivity (publication and citation rates over the entire lifespan) data as
              well as early indicators of scientific talent. Early indicators  include school
              performance, age of first publication, as well the age that they and others
              recognized their talent for science.  Regression analyses determine the
              relative importance of each "predictor" variable in influencing scientific
              achievement and eminence.  The  goal of such research is to provide answers to
              the question: Who develops interest in, and talent for, science during high
              school and who among those with the most talent are likely to go on to
              productive and eminent careers in science?  

