Title       : Workshop on: Evolutionary Immunobiology: New Approaches, New Paradigms to be
               held on February 21-22, 2002 in Charleston, South Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0118430

Award Number: 0118430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26038              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Warr warrgw@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              L. Courtney Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294252800    843/792-3838

NSF Program : 1114      CELLULAR SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1114,1148,1155,9150,9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The central question of Comparative Immunology is how immune mechanisms have
              evolved. How do they change and adapt in response to the diverse microbial
              challenges present in the many and different environments that are occupied by
              animals? The tremendous diversity of animal life poses, in itself, a great
              challenge to such studies. Although it is clearly impossible (indeed
              counterproductive) to investigate the immune system of all animals, are we
              seriously restricting our knowledge by studying relatively few species? Are we
              missing important aspects of the diverse immune systems that function so
              effectively in animals? This workshop will discuss the current status and
              potential future developments of evolutionary immunobiology while coming to
              grips with the following two issues. First, are there model species that, while
              offering ease of experimental manipulation and/or potential economic
              importance, occupy key phylogenetic positions? Second, can the chosen model
              species be used to establish paradigms (the equivalent of the Rosetta Stone)
              through which evolutionary and immunological processes in other species can be
              interpreted? In addition, the final session of the proposed Workshop will deal
              with the application of concepts from evolutionary immunobiology to
              understanding and managing problems of infectious diseases that affect and
              alter ecosystems.  Biology is going through a revolution resulting from the
              application of genome-wide approaches to understanding organisms. Results from
              those projects which have been, or are about to be, accomplished (including
              human, mouse, Drosophila, C. elegans, pufferfish, zebrafish) have demonstrated
              the extraordinary power of genomics to contribute to the solution of problems
              in genetics, and molecular cell biology. Genomic approaches yield detailed
              information about a species, answering questions and generating new hypotheses
              at a remarkable rate. Yet the advances to be gained from genomic approaches can
              go far beyond simple analyses of the genes present in any given species, and an
              understanding of the control of expression of those genes. For example, we now
              have opportunities to study evolutionary processes through comparisons between
              complete genomes. In addition, as patterns of organization become apparent at
              the level of the whole genome, we will be able to extrapolate efficiently and
              effectively from the findings in favored key species, to make novel and
              testable predictions about other species that have been studied less
              intensively. This workshop has, as a major theme, the actual and potential
              impact of genomics on the field of evolutionary immunobiology.
