Title       : Enabling Distributed Graphics Supercomputing for Neuroinformatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0118928

Award Number: 0118928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur W. Toga toga@loni.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan J. Tobin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Arthur W. Toga at the Laboratory of
              Neuro-Imaging (LONI) of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) to
              enhance the graphic and compute capabilities of an existing supercomputer for
              distributed use in neuroinformatics.  Unabated advancements in imaging
              technology today has provided researchers with the ability to produce very
              high-resolution, time-varying, multidimensional data sets of the structural and
              functional development of the dynamic human brain.  The complexity of the new
              data, however, require immense computing power for effective analyzation and
              study.
LONI and its collaborators will upgrade the facility's SGI Onyx2
              supercomputer with additional graphics pipelines, computational nodes, and the
              incorporation of high speed networking equipment.  The graphics pipelines will
              allow the visual interpretation of brain data and, in addition, drive a Data
              Immersive Visualization Environment (DIVE).  The premise behind the DIVE is to
              provide investigators with the unique ability to visually step inside their
              data and analyze it in new, unexpected ways.  The additional computational
              nodes will accelerate the speed of both interactive manipulation of
              multidimensional brain data sets and complex offline computations.  The
              incorporation of high speed networking equipment will facilitate local and
              offsite network access to these computer resources and improve overall
              communication between the local, national, and international communities of
              neuroscientists.
This instrumentation not only benefits ongoing research in
              brain development, heritability and function but because analysis and
              interpretation of multidimensional brain data is elevated to the next level, it
              will open the doors to new insights and better understanding of brain structure
              and function in health and disease.

