Title       : Conspicuousness and Concealment: The Visual Ecology of Signaling and Camouflage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0118793

Award Number: 0118793
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139014             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Cronin cronin@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Project Summary:  Conspicuousness and Concealment: The Visual Ecology
              of
Signaling and Camouflage

All visual tasks that animals perform take
              place in natural scenes.
Consequently, the visual systems of animals are
              adapted for efficient
(often nearly optimal) analysis of the scenes they view
              in natural
circumstances.  Animals are rarely concerned with general
              scene
properties, however.  Rather, most objects of visual interest are
              other
animals or plant food items such as fruits or flowers.  Sometimes
              the
visual object is decorated to become a strong signal.  Other times,
              it
may conceal itself using patterns that are confused with its
              natural
background - it is camouflaged.   Systems of signaling and
              camouflage
must contend with both vision of other animals and properties of
              the
background. Furthermore, neither the background nor the organism has
              a
constant appearance because of continuous variations in the patterns
              of
illumination falling upon them. These changing conditions
              strongly
influence the visual appearances of scenes and signals.

This
              project considers the interrelationships among illuminants, scenes,
signals,
              and animal vision.  Research will concentrate on marine systems
that offer
              excellent preliminary understanding of vision, color, and
behavioral context:
              coral reef fishes, mantis shrimps, and cuttlefish.
The primary goals are to
              learn how colors (i.e. spectral reflectances)
and patterns of animals are
              adapted for enhanced conspicuousness or
concealment, and how visual systems of
              animals are specialized to detect
signals and to break camouflage. The power
              of this approach is that it
compares a diverse selection of animals, all of
              which must form and
recognize biological signals in shallow, clear marine
              waters. The
research will be a pioneering effort to learn how systems of
              vision,
signaling, and camouflage operate in extremely colorful (or
              well
camouflaged) marine species in the specific contexts of their
              natural
illuminants and backgrounds. The proposed research will
              contribute
significantly to the fields of sensory biology, visual ecology,
              and
animal behavior. It will similarly be of special interest to
              engineers
and scientists working in remote sensing, machine vision, and
              artificial
systems of object detection (including camouflaged objects). It
              will
contribute to the training of graduate students and enhance the
              research
experiences of undergraduates working in the P.I.s laboratory,
              including
women and minority students. (who are already involved with
              similar
research in this laboratory).  Last - and far from least - the
              project
holds promise for stimulating scientific interest in the general
              public
and all those interested in animal vision, color, and crypsis.

