Title       : Is Hemoglobin Gelation an Adaptation to the Cold in Boreal Fishes?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0118372

Award Number: 0118372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ione Hunt Von Herbing ivonherb@umenfa.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Cashon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Recent studies of fish red blood cells found that a regular
              paracrystalline array of hemoglobin (Hb) tetamers formed under low oxygen
              conditions in 2 species of boreal fishes, Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and
              toadfish, (Opsanus tau). This phenomenon is termed hemoglobin gelation and its
              physiological characteristics and importance to survival of boreal fishes is
              unknown. The study outlined in this proposal will obtain preliminary data on
              the frequency and physiological nature of the phenomenon of hemoglobin (Hb)
              gelation in red blood cells of fishes that inhabit cold-water temperate and
              Arctic environments. The present study will test the hypothesis that hemoglobin
              gelation within fish red blood cells may be a feature of normal fish
              respiratory physiology and might be adaptive in extreme cold-water
              environments. Twelve fish species have been examined to date, and only the
              cold-water boreal marine fishes exhibited Hb gelation. In one species, Atlantic
              cod, gelation was relatively mild and did not result in changes in the gross
              morphology of the blood cells. In a second species, toadfish, gelation resulted
              in large crystalline structures that disrupted the red cell membranes and
              ruptured blood cells. The differences in type and severity of Hb gelation among
              fish species may directly affect their physiology and ultimately play an
              important part in their capacity for survival. However, too few species have
              been assayed to determine the extent of hemoglobin gelation in boreal fishes
              and no data exists on the physiological conditions that facilitate gelation.
              Few experimental links have been established between gelation and fish
              hemoglobin structure or between the variation in hemoglobin type and
              physiology.

In this study blood will be sampled from a large number of
              boreal and Arctic fishes and tested for Hb gelation and the presence of the Hb
              paracrystalline matrix. These data will provide an accurate assessment of the
              distribution of the gelation phenomenon within boreal fishes and any
              correlation with genetic variation within species. Some species of fishes, such
              as Atlantic cod, have polymorphic hemoglobin in which multiple hemoglobin
              allotypes are expressed within the red blood cells of the same species. To
              determine if gelation is associated with hematocrit or with the physiological
              characteristics of the isoHb components of a species, blood from a
              representative boreal fish species, Atlantic cod, will be separated into its Hb
              components and each component will be characterized for oxygen binding
              functionality and its gelation capacity. The scientific relevance of this is to
              determine if there are common morphological and physiological traits among
              hemoglobins of boreal fishes that exhibit gelation and whether these traits are
              adaptive in extreme environments characteristic of polar regions. 

