Title       : VISUALIZATION: High Fidelity Virtual Touch: Algorithms, Applications and
               Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0118743

Award Number: 0118743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming C. Lin lin@cs.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dinesh Manocha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Force feedback devices, or haptic interfaces, have the potential to increase the
              qualityof human-computer interaction by adding the sense of touch. However,
              there are still few practical force feedback applications, due in large part to
              the stringent computational requirements of haptic rendering. In order to
              maintain a high fidelity system, haptic update rates must be as high as 1000
              Hz, rather than the 30 Hz updates for graphical displays. This is especially
              challenging for 6-degree of freedom (DOF) haptic devices which are used to
              display forces and torques for arbitrary pairs of objects. This requires
              accurate contact determination and contact force and torque computation of all
              collision points in less than a millisecond.

This project focuses on three
              aspects of high fidelity haptic display or ''virtual touch''. The first goal
              includes developing new geometric and physically-based algorithms that can
              improve the state of the art by more than an order of magnitude, in addition to
              the expected improvements in processor speed and computing power over that
              time. This will be based on hybrid spatial data structures, simplification
              hierarchies, multi-resolution representations, bounded error approximations,
              and massively parallel rasterization hardware. The second goal is to pursue
              applications that can benefit significantly from the use of high-fidelity 6-DOF
              haptic displays. This includes virtual prototyping of nano-structures, haptic
              visualization of biological interaction between molecules, maintenance analysis
              and interactive modeling and painting. The third goal is the evaluation of
              6-DOF haptic rendering systems as a tool for human-computer interface. This
              will be done in collaboration with Boeing, Sandia Labs, and Sensable
              Technologies. If successful, the proposed research will provide enabling
              algorithms and a prototype software system for designing a high-fidelity
              virtual touch system.

