Title       : Geodynamics and Active Tectonics of Fiordland, New Zealand: Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0118939

Award Number: 0118939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin P. Furlong kevin@geodyn.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0118939
Furlong

The accommodation of transpression along plate boundaries
              can be accomplished in many ways.  Along the Australian - Pacific plate
              boundary within the South Island of New Zealand, there is a profound change in
              the style of transpressional tectonics between the crustal/lithospheric
              shortening and uplift of the Southern Alps segment of the plate boundary and
              the localized subduction-like behavior of the Fiordland segment. Why such a
              substantial change in plate boundary tectonics occurs over distances of only
              tens of kilometers without any significant change in plate kinematics is a
              fundamental issue of lithospheric geodynamics and most likely reflects the
              complex interplay of tectonic history, local lithospheric structure, and 3-D
              plate kinematics.  Unraveling this complex set of processes requires truly
              interdisciplinary studies.  In order to foster such interdisciplinary research
              and develop plans for future collaborative projects, we are holding a research
              workshop focusing on the geodynamics and active tectonics of the Fiordland
              plate boundary region.  The workshop will occur in January 2002 (the New
              Zealand summer).  The 'meeting' segment of the workshop is at the University of
              Otago in Dunedin, while the 'field' segment of the workshop (involving a subset
              of the meeting attendees) is based out of Te Anau, a small town on the eastern
              margin of Fiordland. The university setting provides suitable facilities for
              scientific presentations (both oral and poster) and discussions, while Te Anau
              is an excellent base for sorties into Fiordland.  In order to encourage focused
              discussions of our current understanding of the tectonics of the region, poster
              presentations and substantial discussion time are the main component of the
              meeting part of the workshop.  To provide an overview of the interdisciplinary
              issues, there is one 'background' presentation for each half-day session of the
              meeting.

