Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Determinancy, Descriptive Set Theoretic Methods in
               Topology, Random Homeomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9207707

Award Number: 9207707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C. Jackson jackson@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Daniel Mauldin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigators are engaged in ongoing research in set                  
              theory, descriptive set theory, topology, and analysis.  Part of               
              this research will be conducted by the investigators separately and            
              part will be conducted jointly.  A main line of research for                   
              Jackson continues the development of the structural theory for the             
              model L(R) assuming determinacy.  This includes pushing the current            
              theory further, as well as refining the theory at the projective               
              levels.  Jackson will also work on problems in other areas of set              
              theory.  The investigators will work jointly on problems in                    
              descriptive set theory, the theory of equivalence relations, and               
              problems both set-theoretic and topological in nature.  Some                   
              examples include the determinacy transfer problem at the odd                   
              levels, questions about metrizable continua with sigma-finite                  
              linear Hausdorff measure, and the existence of natural norms on                
              K(X), the n-dimensional kernel of a complex metric space.  Mauldin             
              will also investigate some problems in the theory of random                    
              homeomorphisms, for example:  for one natural method for producing             
              circle homeomorphisms, do almost all homeomorphisms of the unit                
              circle have periodic orbits?  Are there natural methods which                  
              produce homeomorphisms with irrational rotation numbers?                       
                   Considering that the real numbers can be thought of as the                
              ordinary number line of grade school arithmetic, it is surprising              
              how much structure can be imposed upon them and how intricate the              
              questions that can be asked about this structure.  Descriptive set             
              theory is the theory that addresses these questions with all the               
              machinery of modern mathematical logic.  For example, a standard               
              construct of this theory is the Borel hierarchy of sets, consisting            
              of two infinite sequences of families of sets, the Pi sets and the             
              Sigma sets, defined inductively, and hence of increasing                       
              complexity.  One of the obvious applications of the theory is to               
              locate precisely in this hierarchy a particular set which arises in            
              analysis, say the set of points at which a function is                         
              differentiable.  In fact, it is a typical and classical theorem of             
              descriptive set theory (due to Mazurkiewicz) that any such set of              
              differentiability belongs to the family Pi-one-one in the Borel                
              hierarchy.  A central concern of the investigators are questions of            
              this character, i.e. questions which make logic relevant to the                
              wider world of mathematics.
