Title       : Responses of Plants to Acute and Chronic Heat Stress in a High-CO2 Environment:
               Linking Molecular Biology with Physiological Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1996 
File        : a9207203

Award Number: 9207203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Coleman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hallberg  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric concentrations of CO2 and other greenhouse gases                   
              continue to rise.  This phenomenon may lead to increases in the                
              mean global temperature as well as in yearly, and even daily,                  
              variations in temperature.  One consequence of increasing variation            
              in temperatures if that plants may be exposed to sudden and severe             
              increases in temperature (i.e, heat shocks) at a greater frequency             
              than they are now.  The ability of plants to withstand these                   
              hyperthermic episodes is most likely related, at least in part, to             
              their capacity for elevating levels of certain heat shock proteins             
              (hsps).  A great deal of information regarding the molecular                   
              biology of these proteins in plants exist.  Yet, little is known               
              how the physiological state of the cell or whole-plant prior to the            
              imposition of heat stress affect the synthesis and accumulation of             
              hsps or the ability of plants to survive heat stress.  This void in            
              understanding is particularly critical because plants in natural               
              environmental of plants may not only be characterized by changes in            
              temperature patterns, but will almost certainly contain extremely              
              high levels of air pollutants (e.g., CO2, ozone) and changing                  
              nutrient contents in precipitation and soils.  Thus, understanding             
              the role that plant physiological status may play in governing the             
              heat shock response may provide new essential data on the roles of             
              heat shock proteins in the acquisition and maintenance of                      
              thermotolerance in plant tissues.  The overall goal of this                    
              research is to assess the relationship between the synthesis and               
              accumulation of heat shock proteins at the cellular level and the              
              overall stress responses of whole-plants and tissues grown under               
              distinctly different physiological environments.  Specific                     
              genotypes of corn (Zea mays) and tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum)              
              will be grown in environments with different availabilities of                 
              carbon (CO2) and nitrogen resulting in plants at different                     
              physiological states.  These plants will then be exposed to heat               
              stress or to control conditions.  The kinetics of heat shock                   
              protein synthesis and the patterns of recovery of normal protein               
              synthesis (molecular level); the capacity of plants to harvest                 
              light and CO2 for photosynthesis (tissue level); and overall plant             
              performance (whole-plant level), will be examined simultaneously.              
              The results should help to clarify the biological role of hsps by              
              linking molecular phenomena to processes occurring at tissue and               
              whole-plant levels.  Furthermore, how plants in both agricultural              
              and natural systems will respond to the  predicted changes in the              
              global climate is a critical question, and understanding how the               
              stress response of plants might be altered in a high CO2                       
              environment would be an important step in solving that problem.
