Title       : Neolithic and Bronze Age Chiefdoms of Thy, Denmark
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1993     
File        : a9207082

Award Number: 9207082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Earle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Timothy Earle and                 
              his colleagues will continue their archaeological research on the              
              Thy peninsula which is located in northeastern Jutland, Denmark.               
              While limited work has been done in this area, the region is                   
              known to be rich in archeological remains including large numbers              
              of barrows or burial chambers. In a first season of survey and                 
              excavation Dr. Earle located a number of additional sites which                
              are settlement or living areas. During the next two seasons a                  
              number of these will be excavated. He and his team will first                  
              conduct a reconnaissance survey of 2 square kilometers in two                  
              parishes and undertake intensive line walks over 5 square                      
              kilometers to locate more sites. Surface materials will be                     
              collected and the upper "plowzone" level of the soil will be                   
              sampled. More intensive excavation will be conducted at 15 sites               
              distributed across the Neolithic and Bronze age periods. On this               
              basis it should be possible to determine how complex societies                 
              developed in this region.                                                      
                                                                                             
              Following the development of agriculture and pastoralism in many               
              parts of the world, one can trace changes in social organization               
              which lead, ultimately, to the rise of states. Early in this                   
              process, chiefdoms arose and anthropologists still do not                      
              understand the mechanisms through which this happened. Some argue              
              that population growth permitted by a more stable subsistence                  
              base provided the driving force while others point to other                    
              factors such as the development of long distance trade. Over the               
              course of the Bronze and Iron Ages in Scandinavia, chiefdoms                   
              underwent cycles of rise and decline. The data collected from                  
              this area will allow comparison with cases from other parts of                 
              the world. From this it should be possible to separate historical              
              particulars from the more basic underlying mechanisms.                         
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. It will also increase                 
              our understanding of the processes which led to the rise of                    
              complex societies such as our own.
