Title       : Genetics of Starvation-Induced Resistance in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1992      
File        : a9207101

Award Number: 9207101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A.C. Matin a.matin@forsythe.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1168,
Abstract    :
              Starving bacteria are important ecologically, in biotechnology, and            
              as models of biological differentiation.  Upon starvation, the non-            
              sporeforming bacterium Escherichia coli differentiates into                    
              markedly resistant cells by expressing some 50 genes in early                  
              starvation.  The KatF protein, which is believed to be a novel                 
              sigma factor, is required for the synthesis of several of these                
              proteins, since defect in the katF gene substantially prevents                 
              starvation protein induction and resistance development.  This                 
              finding suggests but does not prove the involvement of KatF-                   
              regulated starvation proteins in the development of cellular                   
              resistant state.  Direct evidence will be sought for this role. A              
              katF deletion strain will be constructed.  A drug resistance marker            
              will be inserted into the cloned katF gene which will be crossed               
              into the E. coli chromosome, using a recB recC sbcB strain,                    
              followed by transfer of the mutated gene into the wild type                    
              background.  The katF structural gene under the control of a                   
              titratable promoter will be introduced into the deletion strain.               
              Different amounts of KatF will be produced during starvation, and              
              correlation to the degree of resistance to starvation, oxidative,              
              heat and osmotic stresses will be determined.  Two-dimensional                 
              polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis patterns will be determined in              
              selected instances.  This may shed light on which protein spots are            
              especially important in the development of starvation and other                
              resistances.  Similiar experiments will be done during exponential             
              phase of growth to see if overproduction of KatF can confer                    
              resistance during growth as well.  There is evidence that KatF                 
              synthesis may be regulated at the postranscriptional level.  To                
              explore this, transcriptional and tranlational fusions of katF to              
              lacZ will be constructed using the polymerase chain reaction                   
              technology.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Bacteria in nature exist primarily in a starving state.  What                  
              biochemical characters are expressed under starvation conditions               
              and how this expression is regulated are therefore important in the            
              understanding of bacterial activities in nature which include                  
              besides disease causation, recycling of elements and environmental             
              detoxification.  Starving bacteria are also important in microbial             
              based industrial fermentations because their use permits rapid and             
              cheap biotransformations using special bioreactors.  Some fifty new            
              genes are expressed by Escherichia coli when this bacterium is                 
              starved.  A subset of these may be concerned with synthesis of                 
              proteins that make the cells more resistant to many different kinds            
              of stresses.  How might these proteins make cells more resistant to            
              stresses is an important biological question which can be                      
              conveniently explored in this model system.  In this proposal, the             
              aim is to clearly determine if a specific subset of starvation                 
              proteins is involved in stress resistance.  This subset is                     
              controlled by a novel genetic element called KatF.  By using                   
              techniques of molecular biology, the amount of KatF in the cells               
              will be precisely regulated, the concentration of the proteins it              
              regulates will be qunatified, and a determination will be made of              
              whether their concentration correlates with the degree of                      
              resistance acquired by the cells.  Identification of proteins that             
              determine the cellular resistant state can make it possible to                 
              manipulate cellular resistance; and an insight into their                      
              biochemical role can provide information about fundamental cellular            
              functions.
