Title       : Relationships and Classification of Primitive Hexapods and Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1995      
File        : a9207624

Award Number: 9207624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward C. Wheeler wheeler@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will examine the phylogenetic relationships of               
              four basal hexapod groups--Entognatha, Thysanura, Paleoptera and               
              Plecoptera--using a combination of molecular sequence and                      
              morphological data.  In the origin of these four lineages, we                  
              find the fundamental events that define insect diversity since                 
              the Devonian.  Illuminating the relationships among these groups               
              will allow a more precise interpretation of their attributes.                  
              Moreover, robust cladograms of extant taxa will aid in our                     
              understanding of problematic fossil taxa.                                      
                   DNA sequences will be determined for the nuclear 18S rDNA                 
              regions.  These data will be combined directly with a matrix of                
              morphological features.  Representative taxa will be chosen for                
              each of the higher groups based on the systematic relationships                
              at lower hierarchical levels.  Using the conclusions of earlier                
              studies, cladistically distant taxa will be chosen to infer the                
              ground plans of Hexapoda, Insecta, Dicondylia, and Neoptera.                   
              Alcohol-preserved and dried museum specimens will be used to                   
              assure the inclusion of the most basal lineages possible, thereby              
              yielding a more robust data set.                                               
                   This approach, combining multiple loci, phylogenetically                  
              based sampling and extensive morphological analysis, ensures that              
              this work will increase our understanding of the evolution and                 
              systematics of these, the oldest hexapod lineages.
