Title       : An Anisotropic Decision Aid Model of Spatial Preference and Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9207765

Award Number: 9207765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81252              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. MacKay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A key characteristic of the spatial choice and behavior                   
              literature is that many of the most frequently investigated                    
              behaviors involve choices among a discrete set of stimuli.                     
              Frequently studied discrete choices include mode choice,                       
              residential choice, destination choice, industrial site choice,                
              land use policy choice, and retail choice.  Psychophysics and                  
              cognitive science research finds that perception is                            
              probabalistic; even at the individual level there is a random                  
              effect in how individuals perceive stimuli.  This research                     
              project will develop and evaluate a model that acknowledges the                
              probabalistic nature of the spatial preference and choice process              
              by portraying stimuli as having differential amounts of                        
              variation.  The proposed model has estimation properties that                  
              allow it to be directly used as a decision-making aid in ways                  
              that previous models cannot.  By explicitly modeling uncertainty               
              and ambiguity, the model will allow for the unique estimation of               
              a single ideal stimulus or ideal decision alternative.  The                    
              proximity of existing decision alternatives to the ideal decision              
              alternative determines each alternative's utility.  This is not                
              possible with existing models.  The model will be tested using                 
              consumers expressing individual preferences for residential                    
              alternatives and analysts making consensual public policy                      
              recommendations.                                                               
                   Probabalistic choice models were conceived because observed               
              behavior was too complex to be accounted for by simpler                        
              deterministic models.  This project continues this tradition by                
              seeking to develop a probabalistic choice model that will enhance              
              the ability to model a variety of complex behaviors.  The                      
              resulting model will be useful in describing individual as well                
              as consensual decision-making.  In addition to its attractive                  
              mathematical properties, the model opens up a variety of new                   
              process models for conceptualizing individual decision-making.
