Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9207863

Award Number: 9207863
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin R. Cox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In developing countries such as India, as much as one-third               
              of the population lives below the poverty line.  Since most of                 
              the poor live in rural areas, national and state governments have              
              directed their economic development policies for alleviating                   
              poverty to rural localities.  The relative success of alleviating              
              poverty is geographically variant and seems to be related to the               
              constraining and enabling effects of the local ruling class.                   
              This project will attempt to answer why programs for the                       
              alleviation of poverty in rural India are more successful in some              
              villages and states than in others, and it offers a theoretical                
              framework for evaluating this geographical variation.  Two                     
              specific rural development programs will be examined.  A                       
              multivariate analysis will establish the degree to which sub-                  
              districts with high levels of success in implementation of these               
              programs have lower incidence of poverty.  Areas of very high and              
              very low success rates will be studied in detail in terms of the               
              relations among local state officials, local ruling classes, and               
              party leaders, and local organizations representing lower                      
              classes.  Unstructured interviews and data from local archives                 
              will serve to illustrate that local variation in policy                        
              implementation success rates depends upon local social and                     
              political structures.                                                          
                   The results from this project should demonstrate the                      
              relative importance of local elites, bureaucracies and                         
              organizations representing the poor in explaining the                          
              geographical variation in the success of various policies to                   
              alleviate local poverty.  These results will have important                    
              implications for rural economic development policy makers in                   
              developing nations in terms of designing implementation programs               
              to raise the standard of living of large numbers of poor                       
              households.
