Title       : Purification of Monoclonal Antibodies by Ion-Exchange Displacement
               Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9207631

Award Number: 9207631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neville G. Pinto npinto@alpha.che.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal studies the purification of monoclonal                           
              antibodies (MAbs). The effort will focus on  the purification                  
              of  mouse IgG1   and  IgM, and a subfractionation of mouse IgG                 
              into IgG1, IgG2a, IgG2b and IgG3.  MAbs are produced by either                 
              the collection of ascites fluid from mice which have been                      
              injected with hybridoma cells in their peritoneal cavity, or                   
              by the collection of the nutrient medium in which hybridoma                    
              cells are cultured in vitro.  Whatever the method,  the                        
              antibody must be separated from a complex mixture of proteins.                 
              The proposal  suggests using ion exchange dispacement                          
              chromatography to effect the purification and                                  
              subfractionation.  In this method, the feed is first passed                    
              through a column, and the antibodies adsorb onto the column.                   
              Experiments will be conducted  on a preparative HPLC system                    
              using the weak anion exchanger PAE-1000 as the adsorbent.  The                 
              next step is to displace the adsorbed molecules. The PI                        
              suggests using dextran sulphates as the displacers. The PI                     
              will investigate the potential of tailoring the molecular                      
              weight and charge of dextran sulphates in order to vary the                    
              affinity of the sulphates to the adsorbent  relative to the                    
              antibodies. Some of this tailoring will involve synthesis                      
              since only two molecular weight sulphates are commercially                     
              available, and each of these at only one sulphate content and                  
              therefore charge density. Pure component isotherm measurements                 
              will be undertaken of the MAbs, sulphates and two                              
              representative contaminating proteins, transferrin and                         
              albumin. These isotherm measurements will be used to determine                 
              suitable displacers, and then multicomponent isotherms of the                  
              displacers, MAbs, transferrin and albumin will be determined.                  
              Lastly, displacement experiments in the column will  be                        
              undertaken.
