Title       : Mapping Post-synaptic Domains in Hybrid Muscle Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1994      
File        : a9207052

Award Number: 9207052
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187879             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman Gordon flash@ns.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9106,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Muscle fibers contain as many as 10,000 nuclei bounded by a single             
              cell membrane, in contrast to most cells of the body which contain             
              only one nucleus and only one copy of the genetic blueprint for the            
              cell.  During development, many individual muscle precursor cells              
              fuse together to form each large muscle fiber.  A basic problem                
              arises when one considers that muscle fibers are separated into                
              three, largely discrete, functional domains.  Most of the length of            
              each fiber contains contractile machinery, but the ends of the                 
              fibers are specialized for attachment to tendons while the very                
              small synaptic region in the middle is specialized for attachment              
              to tendons while the very small synaptic region in the middle is               
              specialized for response to neurotransmission.  To what extent can             
              nuclei that have fused into one part of a muscle fiber contribute              
              to a specialized function that occurs in another part of the same              
              muscle fiber?  The answer to this question is essential to an                  
              understanding of the regulation and organization of muscle fibers.             
              The proposed research addresses the nuclear contribution to the                
              small but essential post-synaptic specialization where the muscle              
              receives instruction from the motor neuron.  Cells of a muscle cell            
              line in tissue culture can be induced to fuse into multi-nucleated             
              myotubes which spontaneously contract and express elements of the              
              post-synaptic specialization even in the absence of neurons.  When             
              muscle cells of different genetic origin are co-cultured, hybrid               
              myotubes form which contain nuclei from both sources.  A                       
              computerized microscope can then be used to track the different                
              nuclei and the molecules that they contribute to the post-synaptic             
              specialization.  With this approach, it will be possible to decide             
              whether an identified nucleus is always associated with a                      
              post-synaptic domain or whether it is free to migrate within the               
              myotube, thereby expanding its zone of influence.  Careful mapping             
              of the post-synaptic molecules on the myotube surface will also                
              provide an understanding of how fixed and mobile components of the             
              post-synaptic specialization interact.
