Title       : Mathematical Models of Selection and Interaction Among Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1998  
File        : a9207293

Award Number: 9207293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel E. Cohen cohen@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Humans are one species in an ecological community.  The functioning            
              of the ecological community can strongly affect human well-being.              
              One approach to understanding an ecological community uses food                
              webs.  Food webs describe who eats whom in an ecological community.            
              Food webs are important to human health and well-being because                 
              chemical and biological toxins are often concentrated, and                     
              metabolized energy is lost, in each predator-prey link of the food             
              webs.  The aim of the study is to show that the diverse structures             
              of reported food webs may be explained by a small number of general            
              principles, and to use these general principles to understand the              
              structure and dynamics of ecological communities.  An understanding            
              of food webs has practiced applications.  In collaboration with the            
              International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines, the food             
              web of rice fields will be constructed and analyzed.  This study               
              may yield novel suggestions for improved biological control of                 
              agricultural pests and provides an opportunity to test basic                   
              scientific generalizations about food web structure.  A substantial            
              effort will be devoted to answering new questions of mathematics,              
              statistics, and computation raised by the study of ecology and                 
              populations.  There is intellectual leverage in developing                     
              mathematical tools for studying biological problems, because                   
              experience shows that concepts, models, and analytical techniques              
              developed in one biological setting are frequently helpful in                  
              others.
