Title       : Rapid Computational Analysis of Biomolecular Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9207256

Award Number: 9207256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Toni Kazic                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Honig   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholls Anthony  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This award will support the development of new algorithms for the              
              rapid analysis of macromolecular conformation and for their                    
              integration into the Graphical Representation and Analysis of                  
              Surface Properties (GRASP) computer program.  GRASP was designed               
              as a research tool to facilitate the analysis of the structural                
              and energetic properties of proteins and nucleic acids.  The                   
              program is distinct from existing ones in that it allows rapid                 
              evaluation of conformational and binding energies based entirely               
              on physical properties that can be mapped onto the molecular                   
              surface.  This in turn is represented using a fast surface                     
              rendering algorithm, for display and manipulation by graphics                  
              workstations.  The underlying scientific component of this                     
              project is based on the ability to calculate the conformational                
              and biding free energies of macromolecules by using a continuum                
              treatment of solvent.  GRASP will exploit a new version of the                 
              DelPhi program for electrostatics and a new treatment of the                   
              hydrophobic effect which evaluates the relevant interactions                   
              based on surface area and curvature.  When combined with a                     
              traditional "gas phase" force field, these methods should allow a              
              complete evaluation of free energies including solvent effects.                
              We plan to develop algorithms which make it possible to carry out              
              accurate calculations in relatively short periods of time.   By                
              fully integrating them into GRASP we intend to make these methods              
              available to the scientific community.  The graphical component                
              of GRASP emphasizes the mapping of all physical properties onto                
              the molecular surface.  This ability gives researchers the                     
              potential to obtain novel insights into protein and nucleic acid               
              structure and design.  The fact that it will run on graphics                   
              workstations implies that its capabilities will be readily                     
              available to a large number of researchers in the biological and               
              chemical communities.
