Title       : Development of a National Information Directory for Academic Supercomputing
               Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1992    
File        : a9207382

Award Number: 9207382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert G. Voigt                         
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Bender bender@osc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests support for establishing  a formal means                
              for collecting and storing information on the nature and use of                
              academic computing resources dedicated to large scale scientific               
              computing (supercomputing) in the United States.  Funding is                   
              requested for staff support for conducting an information                      
              gathering activity, an organizational workshop, and related                    
              costs.  It has been voiced on frequent occasions that such an                  
              information directory, if easily accessible, and maintained with               
              current data, could ablely serve to assist the users,                          
              administrators and planners in the area of high performance                    
              computing.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The effort, proposed by Charles Bender, director of the Ohio                   
              Supercomputer Center, would be carried out under the auspices and              
              with the involvement of members of the Coalition of Academic                   
              Supercomputing Centers (CASC), a consortium of 15 state and                    
              national academic supercomputing centers in the United States.                 
              CASC has served as a successful medium of information exchange                 
              among supercomputing centers and is likely to enlarge its role in              
              this regard as high performance computing resources become more                
              widely deployed.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The specific intent of this proposal is to develop the concept                 
              and structure of a National Information Directory for academic                 
              supercomputing centers and high performance computing resources.               
              As a first step, a study would be conducted to solicit baseline                
              information related to how users view their evolving                           
              computational requirements and their experiences at existing high              
              performance computing centers.  The study materials would be                   
              distributed and responses collected via the national network.                  
                                                                                             
              Given broad participation and involvement of users and providers               
              of high performance computing resources this effort is likely to               
              produce valuable information and useful products.
