Title       : Creation of a Trace Gas Laboratory at the University of Colorado Mountain
               Research Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1992  
File        : a9207881

Award Number: 9207881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31425              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Seastedt tims@culter.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell K. Monson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William D. Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The University of Colorado's Mountain Research Station (M                      
              RS) has a unique research mission. The station sponsors the                    
              sole alpine Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) site in the                   
              national network and maintains the longest, continual record                   
              of  temperate alpine climate and atmospheric carbon dioxide                    
              concentrations in North America.  Recent analysis of  long-                    
              term climatic trends at this site demonstrates a cooler,                       
              wetter pattern in temperate alpine.  These findings, in                        
              conjunction with the addition of new research personnel                        
              associated with the alpine long-term research program, have                    
              stimulated substantial interest in short-term (trace gas)                      
              and long-term (soil carbon) studies in the alpine and                          
              subalpine.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project will support the acquisition of field and                          
              laboratory equipment sufficient to support an alpine                           
              ecosystem trace-gas research program.  Two gas                                 
              chromatographs equipped with appropriate detectors and                         
              columns are requested.  One will be used for measurement of                    
              radiatively active trace gases (carbon dioxide, methane,                       
              nitrous oxide and others) while the other will be used to                      
              measure more complex organic gases produced by plants                          
              (isoprene and microbes (phospholipid fatty acids).  Data                       
              loggers and a Time Domain Reflectometery (TDR) system are                      
              requested for time-series measurements of soil temperature                     
              and soil moisture.                                                             
              * * *
