Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9207276

Award Number: 9207276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen M. Samuels                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Marcus mbmarcus@earthlink.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay S. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Professors Marcus and Rosen will continue their                           
              investigations of the relationship between Gaussian processes and              
              the local times of symmetric Markov processes put into evidence                
              by the Dynkin Isomorphism Theorem. A compact form of this Theorem              
              will be used in an attempt to obtain Borell type inequalities for              
              local times.  Analogous to their recent work which shows the                   
              equivalence of sample path properties of the local times of a                  
              symmetric Markov process and an associated Gaussian process they               
              will study the relationship between continuous additive                        
              functionals of a symmetric Markov process indexed by measures and              
              an associated class of Gaussian chaoses indexed by measures. This              
              will require an investigation into measure indexed Gaussian                    
              processes and chaoses in general. They will also try to extend                 
              their recent work on the law of the iterated logarithm for the                 
              local times of symmetric Levy processes and random walks to cover              
              the interesting case of recurrent random walks on a two                        
              dimensional integer lattice.                                                   
                   Professor Marcus and Rosen will continue their                            
              investigations of the relationship between Gaussian Processes and              
              the local times of symmetric Markov processes.  Until recently                 
              these stochastic processes were not considered to be related at                
              all, except in the case of Brownian motion, a relationship was                 
              implied by a recent isomorphism theorem of Dynkin.  This                       
              isomorphism has been exploited by Professors Marcus and Rosen to               
              show that there are deep connections between these two                         
              fundamental classes of stochastic processes, both of which serve               
              as models in countless applications to continuous time random                  
              phenomena.  This research could lead to significant new knowledge              
              about our random environment.
