Title       : Dietary Restriction and Trade-offs Between Survival and Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1992  
File        : a9207757

Award Number: 9207757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Rose mrrose@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence D. Mueller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Drosophila that have evolved enhanced longevity usually have                   
              reduced early reproduction.  There are also negative correlations              
              between reproduction and survival characters (e.g. starvation                  
              resistance) in D. melanogaster.  Similarly, Drosophila and other               
              organisms that have enhanced survival as a result of dietary                   
              restriction have reduced fertility.  What is not clear is how                  
              nutrition and selection might interact with each other in the                  
              enhancement of survival, given that both are affected by this type             
              of trade-off.  The central questions for this project revolve                  
              around this interaction: (i) Can genetic trade-offs between                    
              survival and reproduction be surmounted by nutritional                         
              manipulation? (ii) Can selection change the effects of dietary                 
              restriction upon survival and reproduction?  Two main experiments              
              are planned. (1) Estimation of genetic correlations between early              
              fecundity and starvation resistance (a factor that controls                    
              longevity) over four nutritional environments.  This experiment                
              would test the environmental dependence of genetic correlation.                
              (2) Selection for increased starvation resistance under varying                
              nutritional regimes:  high or low nutrition before starvation and              
              high or low nutrition after starvation but before egglaying.  One              
              of these selection regimes would favor the erosion of the normal               
              dietary restriction (high then low nutrition), while one would                 
              favor it (low then high nutrition).  The experiment would test the             
              degree to which the dietary restriction response can be genetically            
              changed by selection.  Experiments (1) and (2) might reveal                    
              conditions under which trade-off between fecundity and starvation              
              resistance is circumvented.
