Title       : Factors Influencing Female Participation in Drug Distribution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9207761

Award Number: 9207761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137059             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira Sommers isommer@calstatela.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Fagan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Baskin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY John Jay College
	      444 West 56th Street
	      New York, NY  100193602    212/489-5183

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Very little scientific research has been conducted on the nature               
              of female involvement in drug selling in the United States. And,               
              the limited amount of research conducted to date reveals striking              
              inconsistencies regarding the nature and extent of female drug                 
              selling.  This study seeks to advance basic knowledge about female             
              drug selling, and address womens' roles within and between the                 
              formal and informal labor markets operating in inner cities.                   
              Focusing on two, inner city neighborhoods in New York City, the                
              project explores the type of organizations they participate in,                
              what they earn from participation, the role the drug economy plays             
              with respect to individual and family resources, the nature and                
              extent of dealing-related violence and victimization, and how                  
              selling fits into larger careers and lifestyles.                               
                                                                                             
              To do this, the investigators conduct qualitative interviews with              
              150 female drug dealers.  Purposive sampling is used to select and             
              interview: 40 women who are active drug dealers in the community               
              and have little criminal justice system contact; 30 recently                   
              arrested female drug dealers; 40 women in jail on drug convictions;            
              and 40 women in state prison for drug sales.  The life histories               
              generated from these interviews and their contextualization in                 
              urban neighborhoods provide rich data on the adaptive strategies               
              used by some marginalized women to gain economic footholds, and                
              whether economic opportunities presented by drug selling are                   
              diverting women from the formal labor market.  As such, this study             
              represents the first systematic effort to explore the consequences             
              of women's participation in drug dealing for family economics and              
              other aspects of family life.  Equally important, it provides an               
              explanation of women's pathways into drug dealing based on the                 
              combination of situational factors (e.g., involvement in other                 
              crime networks) and structural factors (e.g., inner city labor                 
              market).
