Title       : U.S.-Philippines Cooperative Research on the History of Explosive Volcanism and
               Volcaniclastic Sedimentation around Taal Caldera and Mt. Pinatubo, Philippines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9207423

Award Number: 9207423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: W. Y. B. Chang                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18024              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Self self@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5927,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. Stephen                                
              Self, Department of Geology and Geophysics,                                    
              University of Hawaii, to pursue with Mr. Ronnie                                
              C. Torres and Dr. Raymundo S. Punongbayan,                                     
              Philippine Institute of Volcanology and                                        
              Seismology (PHILVOCS), for 24 months, a program                                
              of cooperative research on the history of                                      
              explosive volcanism and volcaniclastic                                         
              sedimentation around Taal Caldera and Mt.                                      
              Pinatubo, Philippines.  This project will                                      
              define the stratigraphy and extent of the major                                
              volcaniclastic units and analyze their                                         
              textures, facies, and depositional                                             
              characteristics of the ignimbrites and related                                 
              surge and lahar deposits.  Combination of data                                 
              from the reworked and primary deposits will                                    
              allow interpretation of the history of                                         
              explosive volcanism and catastrophic                                           
              sedimentation, including pyroclastic flow-lahar                                
              transitions.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              This research will yield data pertinent to                                     
              several unusual and important problems.  A by-                                 
              product of the information gained, and                                         
              collaboration with PHILVOCS, will be an                                        
              improved understanding of volcanic and related                                 
              hazards for the Greater Manila region.  Dr.                                    
              Self has an excellent reputation for research                                  
              in the field of this proposal.  Mr. Torres is                                  
              an intermediate level employee of PHILVOCS with                                
              several years of experience in studying                                        
              volcanic phenomena in the Philippines.  The                                    
              proposed work will form the core of his                                        
              dissertation research at the University of                                     
              Hawaii.  This project is relevant to the                                       
              objectives of the Science in Developing                                        
              Countries Program which seeks to increase the                                  
              level of cooperation between U.S. and                                          
              developing country scientists and engineers                                    
              through the exchange of scientific information,                                
              ideas, skills, and techniques and through                                      
              collaboration on problems of mutual interest                                   
              and benefit.
