Title       : Molecular Organization of Mammalian Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1994       
File        : a9207014

Award Number: 9207014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Burnett BURNETT@WISTAR.UPENN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wistar Institute
	      3601 Spruce Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/898-3700

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              An architectural model of adenovirus has been developed by                     
              combining information from several areas:  a high-resolution                   
              crystallographic structure of hexon, the major coat protein;                   
              image analysis of electron micrographs of capsid fragments; and                
              biochemical stoichiometric determinations.  The basic model for                
              hexon packing is supported experimentally with a three-                        
              dimensional image reconstruction at 35 A resolution using                      
              unstained images from cryo-electron microscopy.  This reveals                  
              that the virion has curved facets, provides the shapes of the                  
              vertex proteins, and suggests locations for several "cementing                 
              proteins".  Hexon density will be calculated from the known                    
              atomic coordinates.  Suitable contrast transfer functions will be              
              derived to match crystallographic hexons to their electron                     
              microscopic counterparts.  Hexon positions in the virion will be               
              refined.  Accurate difference density will be calculated by                    
              subtracting a hexon shell from the virion density to image vertex              
              proteins and minor components in greater detail.  The                          
              reconstruction will be extended to higher resolution.  Difference              
              imaging of mutant virions lacking structural components, and                   
              virions labelled with monoclonal antibodies, will identify these               
              proteins and define virion epitopes.                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              The overall goal of this project is to explore the principles by               
              which mammalian viruses are constructed from their constituent                 
              proteins with the focus on determining the molecular structure of              
              adenovirus to high resolution.
