Title       : Laboratory and Numerical Modeling of Some Aspects of the Dynamics of the Arctic
               Ocean and its Adjacent Seas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1995     
File        : a9207822

Award Number: 9207822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles E. Myers                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $483632             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tony Maxworthy   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julian A. Domaradzki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Siavash Narimousa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1680,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Investigators at the University of Southern California will                    
              undertake research to model and investigate some of the important              
              dynamical processes that have been identified in the Arctic Ocean              
              and adjacent Seas.  The Arctic Ocean and its adjacent seas play an             
              important role in global warming, and it is important to understand            
              its dynamical behavior on many space and time scales.  At several              
              locations during the winter, major sources of dense cold seawater              
              are formed and sink.  Much of this water reaches great depths and              
              eventually spreads through the world's ocean basins.  This thermo-             
              haline circulation is a major factor in understanding the long-term            
              evolution of the coupled atmosphere-ocean system.  This work will              
              examine some aspects of this problem.  Primarily, the mechanisms               
              whereby the motion of the dense water that is formed by intense                
              cooling and/or freezing is controlled by the environment in which              
              it is created.  Among the issues of interest are: a) The origin and            
              dynamics of small and meso-scale eddy structures that have been                
              observed repeatedly by satellite (IR) images and reported by field             
              investigators at different Arctic locations.  b) The formation of              
              a halocline between the upper mixed layer and the underlaying                  
              Atlantic water, which tends to shield the ice cover from an upward             
              heat flux.  c) The upwelling and/or downwelling processes that have            
              been observed in the marginal ice zones.  d) Interaction between               
              the shelf and the basin waters.                                                
                                                                                             
              To accomplish this work, both laboratory experiments and numerical             
              calculations will be made with well defined objectives.  A wide                
              range of generic problems will be tackled starting from the                    
              simplest convection experiment with a non-uniform heat flux to the             
              most complex in which virtually all of the controlling parameters              
              are incorporated.  In this way individual and combined effects of              
              these various inputs can be studied.
