Title       : Mathematical Models of the Cell Division Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1993      
File        : a9207160

Award Number: 9207160
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165401             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Tyson tyson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The cell division cycle is the periodic repetition of certain                  
              events--DNA synthesis, mitosis, and cytokinesis--that transform a              
              single cell into two daughter cells.  Cell division must be                    
              coordinated to overall cell growth; otherwise, cells could become              
              arbitrarily large or vanishingly small.  By  observing how cells               
              respond to perturbations of the division cycle, cell biologists                
              discovered that the DNA-to-protein ratio plays an essential role in            
              determining the timing of mitosis and cell division.  Recently,                
              molecular studies have revealed four classes of proteins that                  
              participate prominently in the division control mechanism.  Two                
              proteins, (cdc2 and cyclin) combine to form a heterodimer ("mitosis            
              promoting factor," or MPF) that, when activated, triggers all the              
              major events of mitosis and cell division.  The activity of MPF is,            
              in turn, controlled by protein kinases and protein phosphatases                
              that determine the phosphorylation state of MPF.  The long range               
              goal of this research is to develop mathematical models of the cell            
              division cycle in order to build secure, reliable connections                  
              between hard-won molecular details of the control mechanisms and               
              classical observations of the behavior of the intact regulatory                
              system.  The model will describe the regulation of MPF activity by             
              phosphorylation, and how the phosphorylation state of MPF is                   
              determined by the DNA-to-protein ratio of the cell.  The                       
              mathematical approach is a tool to refine our assumptions and guide            
              our reasoning about the essential events of cell growth and                    
              division.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              The goal of this research is to develop mathematical models of the             
              cell division cycle.  The mathematical modeling will be based on               
              recent experimental evidence concerning the biochemical control                
              mechanisms involved in this fundamental life process.  The                     
              mathematical models will be useful in further refining  the                    
              interpretations of experimental data and as a guide in planning                
              future experiments that ultimately should lead to a thorough                   
              understanding of how the cell division cycle is regulated.
