Title       : Metabolic Compartmentation of Vertebrate Glutamine Synthetase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1994     
File        : a9207880

Award Number: 9207880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Two specific objectives will be pursued during the proposed                  
              project period.  The first will be expression of the full length               
              clone, pCGS11N, which contains the coding information for avian                
              liver glutamine synthetase, in expression vectors such as pKK223 or            
              various derivatives thereof.  Of special concern will be a                     
              characterization of the expression product, especially its                     
              conformation.  Preliminary results indicate the expression product             
              may aggregate.  Since this is likely to render it import-                      
              incompetent, conditions that prevent aggregation and also keep the             
              protein in an unfolded configuration will be established.  The                 
              second major objective will be to establish an in vitro system in              
              which glutamine synthetase is imported into isolated mitochondria.             
              If necessary, the original technique of presenting isolated                    
              mitochondria with freshly translated synthetase will be used,                  
              although the use of the pure expression product is now preferable              
              and is required to establish species- and tissue-specific cytosolic            
              import factors.                                                                
              %%%                                                                            
              Seventy-five percent of land vertebrates utilize a uricotelic-type             
              mechanism for detoxifying ammonia formed during hepatic amino acid             
              catabolism.  Ammonia, formed via the glutamate dehydrogenase                   
              reaction, is converted by glutamine synthetase to the amide                    
              function of glutamine which then exits to the cytosol where it is              
              utilized for uric acid synthesis.  In the ureotelic mechanism,                 
              utilized by mammals and some adult amphibians, ammonia is converted            
              to citrulline in the mitochondria, which then exits to the cytosol             
              to be converted to urea.  What these two pathways have in common is            
              that in each case, the ammonia-detoxifying mechanisms are directed             
              toward converting ammonia formed in the mitochondrial matrix to a              
              form that does not bind protons during transit of the inner                    
              mitochondrial membrane and therefore does not uncouple oxidative               
              phosphorylation.  What is particularly interesting is that, in                 
              ureotelic vertebrates (e.g., mammals), the enzyme glutamine                    
              synthetase is only found in the cytosol, never in the mitochondria,            
              whereas in the uricotelic sauropsid vertebrates (reptiles and                  
              birds) the enzyme is localized to mitochondria in the liver but is             
              cytosolic in other tissues such as neural tissue.  A putative                  
              mitochondrial targeting sequence in the avian enzyme, not present              
              in the mammalian enzyme, has been identified.  However, the primary            
              amino acid sequences of the avian liver (mitochondrial) and neural             
              tissue (cytosolic) forms are identical, raising the question of how            
              the differential targeting occurs.  This project aims to understand            
              the molecular events responsible for targeting of the enzyme in                
              sauropsids.  The work is of considerable interest from biochemical,            
              cell biological, physiological, and evolutionary perspectives.
