Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9207169

Award Number: 9207169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7886               (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula Rebert  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The difficulty of adequately delimiting boundaries on the                 
              basis of deficient geographical knowledge is an acknowledged                   
              fact.  A number of considerations must be made in studies of the               
              simultaneous mapping of a boundary by two different agencies,                  
              raising the issues of the authority of maps, the relationship                  
              between ground truth and interpretation, and objective reality                 
              versus subjective elements in mapping.  This project will address              
              the role of maps and cartography in the original U.S.-Mexican                  
              Boundary Survey of 1849-1855.  Cartographic documents have been                
              largely overlooked while most research interest has centered on                
              the general political and cultural history of the boundary.  A                 
              comparative analysis of cartographic and manuscript archives in                
              both Washington, D.C. and Mexico City will form the basis of the               
              research plan.  Maps produced by the two boundary commissions and              
              the commentaries on the mapping process in the reports of the                  
              commissioners will be compared for information bearing on the                  
              role of maps in the making of the U.S.-Mexico boundary.  Analysis              
              should indicate the approach of each commission to the boundary-               
              making task as well as determine each commission's methods of                  
              dealing with specific geographical problems.                                   
                   This research should contribute toward redressing an                      
              imbalance in borderland studies by examining the Mexican                       
              contribution to the boundary issues involved.  It will also                    
              examine the role of an abstraction, the map, in the                            
              representation of reality, a political boundary.  Finally, the                 
              research will assess the potential of maps in boundary-making in               
              general and on our present understanding of international                      
              boundary issues.
