Title       : Experimental Analysis of Species Percolation Through Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1994    
File        : a9207376

Award Number: 9207376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Glenn  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caryn C. Vaughn cvaughn@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9207376  Glenn    Species diversity in a community is partially a product of the
              dynamics of local immigration and extinction.  Barriers to immigration may
              result in shifts in dominance and affect community structure and function. 
              Percolation theory provides a mechanism for developing hypotheses regarding
              movement of organisms through the environment.  Community structure in
              grasslands resembles a percolation network, however, the applicability of
              percolation network, however, the applicability of percolation theory to plant
              community structure has not been evaluated.  A series of hypotheses will be
              tested using field experiments and simulation modeling to determine the
              applicability of percolation theory to predicting spatial patterns of dominance
              and diversity in grassland vegetation.  Previous studies have shown grasslands
              to be highly dynamic at small spatial scales over short periods.  Preliminary
              results from stimulation models of clonal growth in percolation networks
              suggests that species diversity is affected by barriers to movement.  Above a
              critical threshold, species diversity declined in these models as superior
              competitors dominated available space.  A series of experimental percolation
              networks in grassland vegetation will be created and clonal growth of prennial
              species, local patterns of immigration and extinction, species diversity, and
              spatial pattern will be monitored.  Field experiments will be supplemented by
              modelling percolation of clonal plants with different rates of spread and
              competitive abilities.  This study will help to determine the utility of
              percolation theory to small-scale plant comm unity dynamics in grassland
              vegetation.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           !         !       
               !              F                                                              
                            (    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial                          
                    "             h                   Y                 C    abstract   
              Elizabeth M. Behrens Elizabeth M. Behrens                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
