Title       : Reasoning and Inference in Spatial Knowledge Acquisition: The Cognitive Map As
               An Internalized GIS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1993    
File        : a9207836

Award Number: 9207836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Contemporary geographical information systems (GIS) embody a              
              number of functions that are directly analogous to tasks humans                
              normally perform in cognizing and evaluating space.  Since GIS                 
              have become important tools for storing and analyzing spatially                
              referenced information and have many practical applications in                 
              economic, social, and environmental planning, it is important                  
              that the configuration of knowledge in GIS accurately reflects                 
              the ways in which humans cognize space and internally represent                
              environments.  This research project poses the question of                     
              whether a cognitive representation of space is an internalized                 
              geographic information system.  It will determine the degree to                
              which selected processes involved in compiling and using GIS are               
              similar to those involved in compiling and using cognitive maps.               
              Emphasis will be placed on the type of reasoning and the                       
              inference required in both cognitive mapping and GIS and on how                
              such processes can be understood and interpreted by people.                    
              Experiments will be designed to evaluate human competence in                   
              performing such activities as recognizing adjacency,                           
              connectivity, network membership, path selection criteria,                     
              conducting analysis and compilation of overlay and compression                 
              procedures, and undertaking neighborhood delineation and                       
              regionalization activities.  It is not well understood how humans              
              perform these activities nor what types of errors arise when                   
              performing them.                                                               
                   Interdisciplinary research on spatial behavior by                         
              psychologists, cognitive scientists, roboticists, artificial                   
              intelligence engineers and transport modelers is increasing                    
              rapidly.  Behavioral research into the design and use of                       
              geographic information systems and on such topics as                           
              visualization of spatial information, development of user                      
              interfaces and user friendly representation modes can help                     
              software and data base developers improve communication,                       
              analysis, and understanding with GIS.  This project will identify              
              theoretical and practical links between the processes of spatial               
              cognition used generally in spatial knowledge acquisition and the              
              spatial processing and analysis components which form the basis                
              of many geographical information systems.
