Title       : Ship Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1992        
File        : a9207130

Award Number: 9207130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma R. Dieter                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Thompson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5411      SHIP OPERATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Nutrient Enhanced Coastal Ocean Productivity program (NECOP) of            
              NOAA will use the R/V LONGHORN simultaneously and in collaboration             
              with the R/V PELICAN for 30 days in the general area of the mouth              
              of the Mississippi River (Southwest Pass) and the adjacent shelf               
              waters. Several transects of stations across the shelf will be                 
              occupied along the Louisiana shelf and intensive biological process            
              sampling will occur in the river plume and hypoxic areas ranging in            
              depth from 5 meters to 150 meters. Special sampling of river plume             
              fronts and other surface features will occur when encountered using            
              standard hydrocasts and/or underway surface mapping. A minor amount            
              of sampling time may be allocated to collection of samples in the              
              lower Mississippi River, Atchafalaya Bay, and the Mississippi shelf            
              canyon. The ship operation will consist of CTD/rosette hydrocasts,             
              net tows, and sediment boxcoring. Special deployments of in situ               
              zooplankton samplers and moored current meter and in situ                      
              instrumentation arrays will occur at a few selected sites near the             
              river mouth and nearby shelf.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Immediately following the NECOP cruise, R/V LONGHORN will load in              
              Cocodrie, Louisiana, to begin work on the Gulf.Cet program.                    
              Gulf.Cet is a study of the Distribution and Abundance of Marine                
              Mammals in the North Central and Western Gulf of Mexico by Dr.                 
              William Evans. The work is being coordinated under contract to the             
              Minerals Management Service with funding through the Texas                     
              Institute of Oceanography, Texas A & M University. The study area              
              will be covered by 14 transect legs in the Gulf of Mexico offshore             
              from about the Louisiana/Alabama border to the Texas/Mexico border.            
              High powered binoculars will be used for the visual part of the                
              survey and a specially modified hydro acoustic streamer will be                
              used for acoustic detection. A cruise of fifteen days is schedule              
              for each quarter. The first quarter follows NECOP; the second                  
              quarter will be in late August or early September; and the third               
              quarter is tentatively scheduled for November (a final quarter will            
              fall in calendar 1993).                                                        
                                                                                             
              Two weeks in the first part of June will be devoted to work along              
              the Texas/Louisiana Coast for the NSF project, Stable Carbon and               
              Nitrogen Isotopic Compositions of Selected Organic COmpounds by                
              Dr.s M.C. Kennicutt (Texas A & M University), S.A. Macko (U. of                
              Virginia.), and R.R. Bidigare (U. of Hawaii.). IN addition to                  
              boxcoring and hydrowinch work, this project will also utilize R/V              
              LONGHORN as a mother ship, with work taking place off Zodiacs and              
              other small boasts.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Two or more student cruises, for The University of Texas at                    
              Austin's Department of Marine Science, to be scheduled during the              
              summer months, constitutes the remainder of the schedule.                      
              Traditionally the R/V LONGHORN has been able to respond on short               
              notice to last minute requests for shorter cruises within the Gulf             
              of Mexico during open periods of her schedule. We are prepared to              
              schedule some additional work if requested.
