Title       : Extent and Mechanisms of Gene Flow Limitation between Divergent Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1993   
File        : a9207573

Award Number: 9207573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara E. Via   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Pronounced local adaptation and genetic divergence have been found             
              between closely adjacent pea aphid populations on alfalfa and                  
              clover.  However, little is known about the balance between                    
              selection and gene flow that currently maintains the observed                  
              genetic differentiation of aphids on the two hosts.  On both hosts,            
              the performance of transplanted individuals is much lower than that            
              of residents, indicating strong disruptive selection.  Pea aphids              
              are capable of flying between fields of the different crops and                
              specialist clones can interbreed and produce viable offspring, so              
              migration and gene flow are physically possible.  How much gene                
              flow actually takes place?  The major questions addressed in this              
              proposal are (1) is the host-associated divergence maintained by               
              selection in the face of free gene flow between crops? and (2) if,             
              as we expect, gene flow is restricted, by what ecological and                  
              genetic mechanisms does this occur?  First, the extent of inter-               
              host gene flow will be determined using both direct and indirect               
              methods, with measures of gene flow between fields of the same crop            
              as a reference point.  Preliminary results suggest that populations            
              on the two crops are neither completely isolated nor panmictic.                
              Various mechanisms that could act to limit gene flow between these             
              divergent populations will be then evaluated, including habitat                
              choice by alate (winged) forms, selection against migrants,                    
              phenological separations between mating population on the two                  
              crops, and reduced fitness of hybrids due to developmental failure             
              and/or lack of adaptation to the parental environments.  The                   
              results of these experiments will provide a detailed view of the               
              mechanisms by which closely adjacent populations in different                  
              habitats remain genetically differentiated despite the potential to            
              interbreed.  This study represents a unique opportunity to study               
              mechanisms of local adaptation and population divergence.  These               
              experiments will also provide a case study of gene flow restriction            
              that has implications for the study of speciation, and the process             
              by which insect pests adapt to specific crop plants.
