Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Optics Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9252068

Award Number: 9252068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale W. Olson dale.olson@uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Iowa
	      1222 West 27th Street
	      Cedar Falls, IA  50614    319/273-2311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The project goal is to improve optics laboratory instruction at                
              several levels ranging from a sophomore-level holography                       
              laboratory course to senior research projects.  This is being                  
              accomplished by the addition of a versatile rapid holographic                  
              camera and by introducing lasers of a second color.  At present                
              only red helium-neon gas lasers are available.  The affected                   
              courses are Holography Laboratory and Lasers, taken by students                
              interested in applied physics, science education and industrial                
              technology; Optics with Laboratory, taken principally by                       
              physics majors with a special interest in modern optics and by                 
              science education and physics education graduate students; and                 
              Undergraduate Research in Physics.  The major equipment item                   
              purchased as a result of the grant is a thermoplastic recorder,                
              which can he thought of as an instant holographic camera.  This                
              instrument is being used to monitor microscopic distortions of                 
              objects in real time, by observing a pattern of light and dark                 
              fringes these are seen through a hologram when the object is                   
              moved.  This instrument can be used for demonstrations, for                    
              semi-quantitative measurements of microscopic displacements at                 
              the intermediate level, and for advanced undergraduate research                
              projects.  In particular a novel holographically-based method                  
              of measuring surface roughness is being explored.  This method                 
              of measuring surface roughness, developed by the project                       
              director working with previous undergraduate physics majors is                 
              based on monitoring laser light scattered from the rough                       
              surface.  The second major item is a blue argon-ion laser.                     
              This laser permits the wavelength dependence of scattered and                  
              diffracted light to be studied at the intermediate and advanced                
              level.  Also, two-color display holography, of wide interest to                
              students, is also possible.
