Title       : Redesign of the General Physics Laboratory Utilizing Computer Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1992 
File        : a9252196

Award Number: 9252196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark B. Schneider schneidm@ac.grin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Case  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Cadmus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel V. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Grinnell College
	      1121 Park Street
	      Grinnell, IA  501121690    641/269-4939

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Grinnell College Physics Department is redesigning the                     
              introductory physics laboratory in order to incorporate new                    
              teaching methods and new technology.  The most conspicuous                     
              change is the introduction of microcomputers for data                          
              acquisition and analysis.  The computers are equipped with                     
              versatile data acquisition hardware and software, as well as                   
              with graphing software, to permit the same instrumental                        
              configuration to be easily adapted to a wide variety of                        
              experimental situations with minimal software development                      
              effort.  The computers perform the more repetitive and non-                    
              educational tasks, leaving the decisionmaking and intellectual                 
              processing to the students.  The use of computers in the lab                   
              has several educational benefits:  1) experiments for which                    
              data must be taken rapidly become possible; 2) experiments                     
              which involve a great deal of repetitive analysis require less                 
              time between performing the experiment and seeing the result,                  
              increasing the impact on the student; 3) students are able to                  
              see both their own results and the class average, allowing them                
              to see the effects of experimental uncertainties; 4)                           
              experiments can be designed to be more flexible, allowing                      
              greater accommodation to the different abilities and interests                 
              of the students; 5) new or revised experiments can be made                     
              available more easily; and 6) students are gaining some                        
              experience with the use of computers for data acquisition and                  
              analysis.  These changes result in a laboratory experience                     
              which is better suited to the needs of our students, who are                   
              then able to concentrate more on understanding the physics and                 
              less on the mechanical handling of the data.
