Title       : RIMI: Antihemorrhagic Activity in Variation in Hemorrhagic Activity of
               Rattlesnake Venoms & Woodrats Sera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1994    
File        : a9252936

Award Number: 9252936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234869             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Perez   (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Pierce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Univ-Kingsville
	      Campus Box 201
	      Kingsville, TX  783640201    512/595-2111

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1141,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Poisonous snakes use venom for immobilizing and digesting prey.                
              Crotalid and viperid venoms are complex mixtures of toxins and                 
              enzymes which are extremely effective in destroying tissue and                 
              causing hemorrhage.  Physical, chemical, and immunological                     
              properties of venom suggest that a number of hemorrhagic factors are           
              present in a single venom sample.   Even though many hemorrhagic               
              factors are common to several species of snakes and some of the                
              amino acid sequences are similar, geographical variation in                    
              hemorrhagic factors have been demonstrated within certain species.             
              Although envenomation is an effective way to capture prey, we were             
              among the first to show that a number of mammals, such as the                  
              opossum and the grey woodrat, exhibit resistance to lethal toxicity,           
              proteolytic and hemorrhagic activities os snake venoms.  We have               
              isolated antihemorrhagic factors that are not antibodies in the sera of        
              resistant mammal.  The nature of the resistance is significant, since it       
              is broad-spectrum and neutralizes all hemorrhagic toxins tested thus           
              far.                                                                           
              The proposed research will expand and correlated the hemorrhagic               
              variation found in rattlesnake venoms (Crotalus sp.) with the                  
              antihemorrhagic variation found in resistant animals.  The goal of the         
              RIMI proposal is to examine, using recombinant DNA techniques, a               
              hypothesis of correlation between a venomous predator and venom-               
              resistant prey.  The information derived from this study will also be          
              crucial to understanding the mechanism of venom detoxification in              
              resistant species and in developing potential uses of snake toxins in          
              medical science such as the production of immunotoxins.                        
              The RIMI proposal will expand our present venom research program               
              and more students and faculty will be involved.  Both students and the         
              University will benefit by such an expansion.  The teaching load is            
              heavy and undergraduate students require intensive training before             
              they are capable of doing meaningful research.  Many of our                    
              undergraduate and masters' students working under the direction of             
              Dr. John C. Perez have published in professional journals before going         
              on to major universities for doctoral research.  With the RIMI program,        
              three additional faculty would be working with minority students in a          
              very active research program.
