Title       : Equipment for a Flow Imaging and Control Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1992      
File        : a9252157

Award Number: 9252157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83576              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayanan M. Komerath narayanan.komerath@aerospace.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              51        Engineering-Aeronautical                
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Undergraduate education in fluid dynamics can be greatly                       
              improved if analytical descriptions are complemented by the                    
              experience of visualizing and controlling the dynamic behavior                 
              of real flow fields. This project employs modern                               
              multidimensional flow diagnostics and digital image processing,                
              powerful and convenient educational tools, which take the                      
              student far beyond the usual scope of laboratory courses.  The                 
              student can see unsteady flows around complex configurations.                  
              These techniques are incorporated into assignments in a                        
              required first course in fluid mechanics.  A junior-level                      
              laboratory employs flow visualization from both the Eulerian                   
              and Lagrangian viewpoints.  Senior-level elective courses teach                
              advanced flow diagnostics and flow control techniques, while                   
              Special Problem courses facilitate individual undergraduate                    
              research projects in these areas.  Argonion laser beams are                    
              expanded into sheets, with an acousto-optic beam modulator for                 
              fast, controlled strobing.  A laser schlieren system                           
              illuminates density variations.  Images will be captured                       
              through fast-shuttered CCD-array videocameras and analyzed                     
              using computer workstations.  Planar velocimetry and vortex and                
              shock tracking are used for analysis of the spatial and                        
              temporal evolution of flows.  These will be used along with                    
              existing flow facilities and single-point quantitative                         
              diagnostics, to study flow control.  The project makes possible                
              the incorporation of modern unsteady fluid mechanics into the                  
              undergraduate curriculum.
