Title       : VPW: Interaction Between the Syntactic & Phonological Components of Grammatical
               Theory (Linguistics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1994      
File        : a9252940

Award Number: 9252940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130947             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene Vogel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 1311,9225,
Abstract    :
              While it is now accepted that syntax affects the application of                
              postlexical phonological rules (P-rules), much less is known about             
              the effect of semantics, in particular focus, on these rules.  The             
              Rhythm Rule (RR) of English, which has been found to be sensitive              
              to F, will be examined in detail to determine precisely where and              
              how it applies.  Since the domain of application of RR is generally            
              taken to be the Phonological Phrase, the main problem to be                    
              addressed is how focus can be taken as input, along with the usual             
              syntactic information, to P-rules that apply within this domain.               
              In addition, since RR contributes to the overall rhythmic pattern              
              of a sentence, a question that must be addressed is whether there              
              is one universal rhythmic mechanism of language that also accounts             
              for the effects of RR or whether RR is part of the specific                    
              phonological system of English, and is thus treated by a mechanism             
              distinct from that which handles overall rhythmic alternations.                
              Experimental data, which will be brought to bear on the theoretical            
              issues at the core of this research, will consist of recordings of             
              subjects reading sentences a) in isolation, b) embedded in                     
              paragraphs, c) with special intonations (i.e., yes-no question and             
              incredulity patterns) and d) with the syllable "ma" in reiterant               
              speech.  The sentences will contain the appropriate conditions for             
              RR (i.e., stress clashes) in different positions with regard to                
              both syntactic and focus structure.  The recordings will be                    
              analyzed both perceptually and acoustically.                                   
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will investigate the organization of the                 
              phonological component of grammar as well as its interaction with              
              other components of grammar, especially syntax and semantics.                  
                                                                                             
              This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                        
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              arranging weekly meetings of the women graduate students, who will             
              be joined once a month by male students, with emphasis placed on               
              developing the skills needed for careers in linguistics (abstract              
              writing, conference presentations, conducting research, publishing,            
              applying and interviewing for jobs, and teaching)--and women's                 
              problems (for the single gender sessions); inviting prominent women            
              linguists invited within the context of the regular colloquium                 
              series; and teaching an advanced seminar on the interactions of                
              phonology with the other components of grammar.
