Title       : VPW: Role of Gaba and Glutamate Receptors in Limbic Cortex for Memory Processes
               (Neural Mechanisms)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9252912

Award Number: 9252912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105918             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen N. Gale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1191,
Abstract    :
                    The proposed research will employ focal intracerebral                    
              microinfusions of drugs stereotaxically directed at specific                   
              regions of the medial temporal lobe:  perirhinal piriform                      
              cortex, entorhinal cortex, parahippocampal gyrus, and                          
              amygdala.  These microinfusions will be administered to awake,                 
              behaving monkeys via chronically indwelling cappulas,                          
              immediately prior to evaluating performance on a visual                        
              recognition memory task.  The drugs to be used for the                         
              intracerebral infusions are selected for their effects on                      
              specific amino acid neurotransmitter receptors:  1) drugs                      
              which block excitatory transmission mediated via glutamate                     
              receptors (NMDA and non-NMDA subtypes) and 2) drugs which                      
              enhance inhibitory transmission mediated via GABAA receptors.                  
              The brain regions to be investigated have been selected on the                 
              basis of studies in the literature which have demonstrated                     
              significant deficits in visual recognition memory following                    
              individual or conjoint lesions of those regions.  In the                       
              experiments proposed, each subject will be repeatedly tested                   
              under drug and control conditions so that each subject serves                  
              as its own control and different drugs and infusions into                      
              various brain areas can be compared within the same subject.                   
              Once one or more brain areas (alone or in combination) have                    
              been identified in which the drug treatments impair                            
              performance on the recognition memory task, the anatomic                       
              site-specificity of the drug effect will be evaluated.  It is                  
              expected that blockade of excitatory transmission in                           
              perirhinal and entorhinal cortex, as accomplished by the focal                 
              application of glutamate antagonists in GABA agonists, will                    
              rapidly and reversibly impair performance on a visual                          
              recognition memory task.  Furthermore, it is expected that                     
              this acute impairment will require only unilateral drug                        
              application, in contrast to the bilateral damage required in                   
              chronic ablation studies.  It is hoped that the results of                     
              these studies will: (1) provide the basis for a more detailed                  
              investigation of the neurochemical and neuroanatomic                           
              substrates of memory functions subserved by neural networks in                 
              the limbic cortex; and (2) provoke additional studies in the                   
              nonhuman primate using focally applied chemical agents to                      
              probe brain regions crucial for cognitive function.                            
                    The use of reversibility-acting intracerebral focal drug                 
              infusions is expected to offer several advantages in studying                  
              the role of specific brain regions for memory functions in                     
              non-human primates.  In particular, a) the ability to use each                 
              subject as its own control reduces experimental variability                    
              and decreases the number of monkeys needed to generate                         
              interpretable data; b) the ability to test the same subject                    
              repeatedly using different drugs or different anatomical sites                 
              of infusion, maximizes the amount of experimental data that                    
              can be generated from a single monkey and increases the                        
              anatomical resolution that can be obtained; c) the ability to                  
              avoid damage to fibers of passage and problems with                            
              secondary degeneration which complicate the interpretation of                  
              lesion studies; and d) the ability to avoid permanent damage                   
              to the monkeys allows for non-terminal experiments in which                    
              the animals can be used subsequently for other studies.  These                 
              advantages could greatly enhance the feasibility and utility                   
              of pursuing this important field of research in monkeys.                       
                    The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                   
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's                       
              enhanced visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The                   
              proposed activities which contribute to the second objective                   
              include:  training and mentoring graduate and undergraduate                    
              students by involving them in the experiments proposed;                        
              teaching a graduate elective course in Psychology (also open                   
              to undergraduates); leading a workshop for Women in Science                    
              through the Department of Women's Studies; presenting research                 
              accomplishments in lectures/colloquia sponsored by the                         
              Psychology Department and also in a forum sponsored by the                     
              Northwest Center for Research on Women; regularly attending                    
              student-faculty journal clubs in the Psychology Department, as                 
              well as weekly Student Research Seminars in physiological                      
              psychology.
