Title       : Focus on Physics - Computers in the Introductory Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9252250

Award Number: 9252250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn A. Sowell sowell@unomaha.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Omaha
	      60th and Dodge Street
	      Omaha, NE  68182    402/554-2200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The primary aim of this project is to create a modern                          
              laboratory environment for the introductory physics student in                 
              which the student is allowed to focus his or her attention as                  
              completely as possible on the physics of the system under                      
              study.  A secondary aim of this project is to create a                         
              technologically literate introductory student.  These have                     
              meant removing the distractions of poorly functioning                          
              equipment, outmoded data collection techniques, and                            
              mathematical tedium.  These have meant adding the support of                   
              up-to-date computers, electronic data collection via a variety                 
              of transducers, and software for sophisticated data analysis.                  
              This new laboratory environment has been put into place and it                 
              allows the student to identify more easily the underlying                      
              physical principles in a wider range of real-world phenomena                   
              than was possible with the previously existing equipment, thus                 
              the students understanding of physics and its relevance to his                 
              or her own field of interest has been improved.  Care has been                 
              exercised in the design of laboratory experiments so that the                  
              student can use the power of this technologically advanced                     
              equipment without treating it as just another blackbox.  In                    
              achieving the aims of this project, one ensures that the                       
              physics student of today will approach the problems of tomorrow                
              with a better grasp of physical principles underlying those                    
              problems and of the technology necessary to solve them.
