Title       : VPW: An Investigation of Sea Salt Aerosol Reactions Important to Chlorine
               Cycling in the Marine Troposphere (Atmospheric Chemistry)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1992 
File        : a9252957

Award Number: 9252957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163852             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane M. Van Doren   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1524,9225,
Abstract    :
                    This project's goal is to investigate mechanisms which may               
              produce gas phase chlorine atoms from sea salt aerosols--a                     
              problem in atmospheric chemistry with a unique approach made                   
              possible by the combination of expertise of the PI and her                     
              collaborators at Harvard.  Four potentially important reactions will           
              be investigated, applying two different experimental approaches to             
              the study of these surface reactions.  The first approach will                 
              involve studying candidate reactions, using large surface                      
              area/bulk surfaces that may be investigated at relatively high                 
              pressures.  The second approach toward understanding these                     
              reactions and their mechanisms will involve studies of well                    
              characterized single crystal surfaces at low pressure, using state-            
              of-the-art surface science spectroscopic techniques.  Despite its              
              advantages, this latter approach has not been exploited in                     
              investigations of surface reactions of atmospheric relevance.  A               
              series of systematic studies outlined in the proposal are designed             
              to determine the role of each of four reactions in producing gas               
              phase chlorine atoms from sea salt aerosols.  The impact of these              
              reactions on the chemistry of the troposphere will be determined               
              using a comprehensive theoretical model of tropospheric                        
              chemistry.                                                                     
                    Understanding mechanisms which may produce gas phase                     
              chlorine atoms from sea salt aerosols could greatly impact our                 
              understanding of tropospheric chemistry and the basis for                      
              important societal decisions such as the design of pollution                   
              controls and formulation of safe alternatives to chlorofluorocarbons           
              (which are responsible for dramatic losses of ozone in the                     
              Antarctic).                                                                    
                    This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                  
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              organizing and sponsoring a mentoring program for graduate and                 
              undergraduate women in the sciences and engineering;                           
              organizing a lunch time symposium featuring women active in                    
              science and engineering;  developing and delivering a series of                
              lectures geared for undergraduates on topics of current interest to            
              the chemical community; delivering a departmental seminar on the               
              research results obtained during the year; and interacting with                
              faculty and students while pursuing the goals of the research                  
              project.
