Title       : Using Assessment in the Service of Teaching and Learning in Middle School
               Science and Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1996   
File        : a9252881

Award Number: 9252881
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $856771             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Gallagher Gallaghr@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra K. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Assessment is a tool that can serve teaching and learning by                   
              providing teachers with a broader perspective on the                           
              knowledge students bring with them as they approach                            
              learning.  It also can help teachers to understand students'                   
              progress toward desired learning goals.  Therefore the                         
              purpose of this project is to develop:  (1)  a model which a                   
              community of professionals at a local level can use as a                       
              construct to integrate assessment with instruction in the                      
              service of teaching and learning science and mathematics;                      
              and (2)  a sample set of assessment techniques and                             
              strategies for selected topics in middle school science and                    
              mathematics that exemplify the outcomes of implementing the                    
              above model.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Communities of professionals including mathematicians,                         
              scientists, and a measurement expert mathematics and science                   
              teachers and teacher educators are to be engaged in the                        
              development of the model and the set of exemplary assessment                   
              products.  These communities will (1)  decide on learning                      
              goals in line with the newest definitions of science and                       
              mathematics literacy; and (2)  determine what will count as                    
              evidence to indicate the extent to which these goals are                       
              met.  Teachers will (3)  look for such evidence in multiple                    
              ways including student learning journals and video                             
              recordings.  We will document and analyze the collaborative                    
              process involved in creating assessment practices that serve                   
              instruction so that the process can be used effectively in                     
              other settings.
