Title       : RIMI: Parametric Robust Control Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1994    
File        : a9252932

Award Number: 9252932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bobby L. Wilson                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leehyun Keel keel@gauss.tsuniv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Darrell L. Hinton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jiann-Shiun Lew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee State University
	      3500 John A. Merritt Blvd.
	      Nashville, TN  372091500    615/320-3131

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9130,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project deals with various problems of                            
              analysis and design of control systems subject to                              
              parametric uncertainty.  Specifically we consider                              
              interval systems whose transfer function coefficients                          
              are linear or multilinear functions of the parameters                          
              subject to perturbation.  The main goals of this project                       
              are 1) to develop effective methodologies to design                            
              controllers that perform satisfactorily under large                            
              amounts of parametric uncertainties and 2) to expand                           
              understanding of time and frequency domain properties of                       
              various types of control systems.  The project consists                        
              of two parts:  development of new theory and its                               
              implementation as a computer aided design software                             
              package.  The theoretical problems we propose to solve                         
              are as follows:                                                                
              1) Reexamining the classical control design and analysis                       
              techniques with robustness ingredients and developing                          
              new design methodologies for robust parametric control                         
              design.                                                                        
              2) Developing relevant theory for time delay systems.                          
              This includes what is a necessary and sufficient                               
              condition to determine robust stability of a time delay                        
              interval system with a fixed controller, how to                                
              computationally check the robust stability, what are the                       
              frequency and time domain characteristics of a time                            
              delay interval system, and how to adjust selective                             
              parameters within their intervals to improve the system                        
              performance.                                                                   
              3) Developing equivalent theory and computational                              
              algorithms to deal with multilinear interval systems.                          
              4) Developing theory to examine the time domain                                
              properties of interval systems and its use in                                  
              controlling transient response.                                                
              5) Developing a new modeling and identification                                
              technique to determine an interval system from the given                       
              input - output test data and the nominal linear                                
              identified model.                                                              
              The second part of the project is to build an efficient                        
              computer aided design software to incorporate all the                          
              above design methods.  The base system of this software                        
              is MATLAB.  We expect it will be a valuable tool for                           
              robust parametric control design and analysis for both                         
              theoreticians and practicing engineers.
