Title       : SMART Assessments: Scientific Mathematical Arenas for Refining Thinking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1996    
File        : a9252908

Award Number: 9252908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1944380            (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Pellegrino PELLEGJiv@vuctravax  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy J. Vye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              90        Other Sciences                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Project SMART Assessments (scientific and Mathematical                         
              Arenas for Refining Thinking) combines assessment models and                   
              extends them via technology for teleconferencing to create                     
              frequent, intrinsically motivating assessment strategies.                      
              SMART assessment involve a series of stages focused on a                       
              Challenge Series in which students work on problems that are                   
              imbedded into an instructional unit.  Students use gained                      
              knowledge to evaluate answers and arguments in a live video                    
              teleconference format.  They receive immediate feedback and                    
              then work on new problems with the opportunity to respond                      
              again in a second Challenge Series teleconference program.                     
              A series of studies will evaluate the design features of                       
              SMART assessments and how these features enhance learning                      
              and the quality of teaching in the areas of science and                        
              mathematics.  The model will be applied across curricular                      
              areas to establish its generalizability.  Initial                              
              application is to mathematics, in particular to the NSF                        
              funded Adventures of Jasper Woodbury Series.  The model will                   
              then be applied to two other programs in science and                           
              mathematics.  Major outcomes from the project will be:  (1)                    
              a documented set of assessment design procedures with                          
              examples of applications to the three curricula emphasizing                    
              problem solving and reasoning in mathematics and science;                      
              (2)  data from research studies investigating the                              
              implementation of such procedures in multiple classrooms                       
              with different teacher and student characteristics; (3)                        
              data on the impact of such assessment procedures on                            
              instructional program outcomes; (4) analyses of the                            
              implications of the assessment for psychometric modeling and                   
              measurement.
