Title       : AMP: NEW YORK CITY ALLIANCE FOR MINORITY PARTICIPATION
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1997   
File        : a9252789

Award Number: 9252789
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5118491            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fitzgerald Bramwell  (Principal Investigator former)
              Neville Parker parker@tidis0.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9133,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The City University of New York (CUNY) is an academic network of               
              nine senior colleges, seven community colleges, a 4-year technical             
              college, a graduate school, a law school and two medical schools.              
              The network is geographically distributed throughout the entire                
              city, with a total residential population of more than seven                   
              million.  The New York City Alliance will consist of twelve                    
              campuses within CUNY, comprising bother 2 year and 4-year colleges,            
              working together with private colleges, members of the business                
              community and national laboratories.  The initial CUNY college                 
              partners will be four senior colleges (Brooklyn College, City                  
              College, Hunter College and Lehman College), a 4-year technical                
              college (New York City Technical College) and seven community                  
              colleges (borough of Manhattan Community College, Bronx Community              
              College, Hostos Community College, Kinsgborough Community College,             
              La Guardia Community College, Medgar Evers College ?which has both             
              2- and 4-year programs! and Queensborough Community College).                  
                                                                                             
              The principal project activities will involve undergraduate                    
              science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) education, focusing on              
              the points in students' undergraduate experience which are most                
              likely, without intervention, to precipitate a decision to drop out            
              of the science and engineering pipeline.  The transitions from 2-              
              year to 4-year colleges and into graduate school will be                       
              specifically addressed by AMP project activities.  Although not                
              included in the seven proposed AMP activities, the transition rom              
              high school to college is currently served by as number of existing            
              programs involving the partner colleges and will be coordinated                
              under AMP auspices.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The AMP activities will bring about wide-scale deployment of                   
              programs proved in pilot projects; complement related activities               
              funded by state, private and other federal sources' produce a                  
              significantly greater degree of coordination among the CUNY                    
              partners; and bring greater involvement of outside partners,                   
              private colleges, government laboratories and industry.  Our goal              
              will be to create a "seamless whole" of interventions at the                   
              undergraduate level that respond to each of the factors that impled            
              minority student success.
