Title       : Phenylpropanoid Metabolism: The Lignan Branch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1996     
File        : a9219586

Award Number: 9219586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman G. Lewis lewisn@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence B. Davin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9108,9109,9163,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lignans and neolignans are an ever-increasingly important class                
              of compounds ubiquitous throughout the plant kingdom, whose                    
              rather  remarkable plant defense, phytoalexin, cell-division                   
              promoting and pharmaceutical properties are only now beginning to              
              be fully recognized.  Although they are most often found                       
              enantiomerically pure, the mechanisms by which their achiral                   
              precursors undergo stereoselective coupling, and their subsequent              
              postcoupling enantiospecific transformations, have eluded                      
              definition for several decades.                                                
              This proposal addresses the essential unknown biochemistry of                  
              major class of phenylpropanoid metabolites, the lack of knowledge              
              of which has placed an enormous constraint on our ability to                   
              study this area of metabolism at the gene level.  The prognosis                
              is, however, excellent:  recent studies in this laboratory                     
              resulted in the discovery of a highly unusual, novel coupling                  
              enzyme which directly and sterioselective couples achiral                      
              precursors: it is not a typical H2O2-dependent peroxidase.  Thus,              
              one can systematically determine its mechanism of action and to                
              define the scope of the transformations that can be engendered by              
              this enzyme.  In a similar vein, the enantiospecificity of post-               
              coupling transformations can be systematically examined.                       
              Consequently, this study will bring order to this apparently                   
              chaotic branch of phenylpropanoid metabolism in terms of                       
              elucidating biochemical pathways involved.  Following                          
              purification of the enzymes of interest to apparent homogeneity,               
              the application of immunocytochemical methodologies will permit                
              us to determine the subcellular location and tissue specificity                
              of lignan formation, and whether metabolite channeling into                    
              lignan and lignin pathways occurs.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Plants are well known for their ability to produce novel chemical              
              compounds  which can be utilized in both medical and industrial                
              use by humans.  Often chemical synthesis of these compounds is                 
              impractical due the detailed chemistry of some of the compounds.               
              However, by first purifying the enzymes in the plant essential                 
              steps in the biochemical pathway are understood and often an                   
              essential step in the chemical synthesis can be overcome.                      
              Furthermore, this leads to isolation of the genes responsible for              
              the enzyme production and the capability to express the compound               
              in other plants.  The class of compounds called lignans are novel              
              biochemicals which can be use an novel biomaterials.  This                     
              research will study the enzymes and the reactions necessary for                
              their synthesis.
