Title       : Carbon Dioxide Generation in the Soil-Vadose Continuum: Substrate
               Characteristics and Residence Times
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9219788

Award Number: 9219788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Kent Keller ckkeller@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan E. Trumbore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fixation of atmospheric CO2 by plants and mineralization of the                
              fixed C (CO2 production) by respiring biological communities link              
              the soil and atmospheric C reservoirs in a dynamic equilibrium.                
              Resent hydrogeological research has shown that CO2 production also             
              occurs in subsoil vadose zones and that its short-term and long-               
              term impacts on the terrestrial-atmospheric C balance can be                   
              substantial.  Therefore the effort to predict the consequences of              
              perturbations to the soil C reservoir must now be extended to                  
              subsoil vadose zones.  This means that controls on CO2 production              
              in the entire soil-vadose continuum must be identified the                     
              understood.                                                                    
              One key control on subsurface CO2 production is the availability               
              of organic C to support respiration.  Here we will study                       
              characteristics and mean residence times (MRT) of this C, and how              
              these parameters vary in two contrasting geologic settings beneath             
              temperate grasslands.  Determination of the 14C age of the CO2                 
              produced at various depths will identify modern, pedogenic, and                
              ancient C sources, provide estimates of depth variation of MRT of              
              the C sources, and thereby also provide estimates of the time                  
              required production in the soil-vadose continuum.  We hypothesize              
              that it if possible to isolate and characterize a fraction of C in             
              soil-vadose geologic material which can be identified as                       
              respiration substrate by its C isotope signature.  Such                        
              identification would yield new insight into the types of organic               
              C serving as respiration substrates and their evolution with depth.            
              It may also provide methodological basis for construction of                   
              substrate MRT-vs-depth functions using a relatively simple                     
              isolation procedure.
