Title       : Biochemical and Genetic Regulation of Haustorial Development in Striga
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1997     
File        : a9219949

Award Number: 9219949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Timko mpt9g@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Riopel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9104,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Parasitic angiosperms attach to and penetrate their host vascular              
              system by the development of a highly specialized organ termed a               
              haustorium. The haustorium serves as a physical bridge that allows             
              the parasite to obtain the water and nutrients necessary for its               
              survival. The development of this unique structure is controlled by            
              a series of chemical signals from the host plant that condition the            
              germination, attachment and penetration stages of growth. Using a              
              combination of in vivo and in vitro approaches Drs. Timko and                  
              Riopel have begun to examine the biochemical and genetic mechanisms            
              involved in haustorial induction and development in Striga asiatica            
              (witchweed), a major parasite of agronomically important grasses.              
              They have standardized methods to synchronize growth of a large                
              number of individual plant in order to look at sequential                      
              developmental stages (germination, radical extension, pre-                     
              attachment haustorial development, attachment, and host                        
              penetration) in axenic culture in 3-4 days. The overall goal of the            
              present experiments is to define the cellular and molecular genetic            
              events that constitute the developmental pathway in Striga leading             
              from haustorial initiation to successful attachment and penetration            
              of a susceptible host plant species. They propose to complete the              
              characterization of the putative root and haustorial specific cDNA             
              clones identified in the previous studies and initiate additional              
              rounds of differential screening to identify gene products                     
              expressed during the attachment and penetration phases of                      
              haustorial development. The goal of these studies is to establish              
              subsets of clones representing gene products temporally and                    
              spatially distinct in their expression during the pre-attachment,              
              attachment, and penetration stages of Striga haustorial                        
              differentiation. The patterns of gene expression activated during              
              attachment and differentiation of the penetration peg will be                  
              compared in Striga haustoria developed in contact with host versus             
              non-host tissues. Such information will assist in the subsequent               
              attempts to define the signal transduction pathway controlling                 
              overall haustorial development. A greater understanding of the                 
              biochemical and cellular factors governing haustorial                          
              differentiation may contribute to future manipulation of host                  
              resistance. When completed these studies will provide substantial              
              new information on a unique developmental process in plants.
