Title       : Structure and Function of Type I Reaction Centers: Photosystem I and Green
               Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1993  
File        : a9219383

Award Number: 9219383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Uffen                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Biggins Brown University  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9161,
Abstract    :
              Support is requested to investigate the structure and function of              
              photosynthetic reaction centers in photosystem 1 and the closely               
              related green sulfur bacteria.  The project will focus on the                  
              role of FeS centers and quinones as transient intermediates in                 
              electron transfer.  Flash kinetic spectrophotometry and EPR                    
              spectroscopy will be used as principle analytical methods.  In                 
              the case of green bacteria we will reconstitute the acceptor side              
              with a 22 kDa FeS containing polypeptide that has been expressed               
              in E. coli.  Elucidation of the mechanism of inhibition of the                 
              quinone binding site in Photosystem 1 is important because of the              
              potential of using this site for a new class of herbicides.                    
              A new project has been initiated on Photosystem 1 following a                  
              molecular modeling study of the core heterodimer.  The lab has                 
              already tested one hypothesis generated by the modeling                        
              concerning the interaction of the subunit PsaC with the Fx domain              
              in the core heterodimer.  This will be continued together with a               
              direct experimental test of the role of the leucine zipper motif.              
              This will involve synthesis of peptides containing the motif and               
              studying their physical properties.  Future experiments will                   
              create models of Photosystem 1 by synthesizing designed proteins               
              that fold into 4-.-helical bundles and installing redox centers                
              of relevance to Photosystem 1 in the interhelical loops.  This                 
              initiative will provide footholds for future studies of models                 
              that would contain photoactive components.                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Photosynthesis is accomplished in plant and certain bacteria by                
              the interaction of light with specialized pigment containing                   
              metal-protein complexes.  The components of the complex and the                
              ration of metal, pigment, and protein  are to be analyzed in the               
              proposal by sophisticated analytical methods.  Also, the nature                
              of the interaction of certain chemical compounds with the complex              
              is important as a model for the design of herbicides that can                  
              interfere with photosynthesis.
