Title       : Glucose-regulated Transcription in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1995     
File        : a9219839

Award Number: 9219839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Dickson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Glucose is a global regulator of transcription in most organisms,              
              however, the mechanisms of regulation are unknown except in                    
              bacteria.  To begin to understand the mechanism(s) of glucose-                 
              regulated transcription in eucaryotes, we are examining how glucose            
              represses transcription of the lactose-galactose regulon in the                
              common dairy yeast Kluyveromyces lactis.  This organism is well                
              suited for such studies because of the molecular genetic techniques            
              that can be used to isolate genes and introduce mutations into any             
              nucleotide in the genome.  We have recently shown that glucose                 
              repression of the lactose-galactose regulon is mediated by a                   
              promoter element, URS, present in front of the LAC9 transcription              
              activator gene.  We hypothesize that the presence of glucose in the            
              culture medium is sensed and transmitted by a signal transduction              
              pathway that culminates with a repressor protein.  We further                  
              hypothesize that the repressor binds to the URS element and                    
              restricts transcription so that the concentration of the LAC9                  
              protein is below the critical level needed to activate                         
              transcription of structural genes in the lactose-galactose regulon.            
              These and related hypotheses will be examined under three Specific             
              Aims.   A major goal for the three year duration of this project               
              is to identify and characterize one or more of the protein                     
              components of the glucose signal transduction pathway:  The long               
              range goal is to elucidate the entire pathway.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This research project seeks to understand how the sugar glucose, a             
              vital molecule in animals, regulated various cellular activities               
              including turning genes on and off.  The effects of glucose in all             
              organisms are very complex which makes it difficult to sort out                
              individual effects.  To overcome some of this complexity we are                
              using a simple single-celled yeast as a model organism.  Such a                
              model offers many advantages over more complex organisms                       
              particularly since yeasts can be subjected to quantitative genetic             
              analysis including the isolation and mutation of any of its genes.             
              The results of these studies should increase our understanding of              
              how glucose is detected by cell, how this information is                       
              transmitted to the cell's nucleus, and how genes are turned on and             
              off in the nucleus.  Such information will be essential for                    
              understanding normal cellular processes that we currently do not               
              understand and for developing cures for diseases including diabetes            
              and cancer.
