Title       : Water-Assisted Time-Dependent Compaction on Natural Quartz Sands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1992  
File        : a9219709

Award Number: 9219709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Dewers tdewers@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This collaborative research explores the physico-                         
              chemical means by which sediments deposited at the earth's                     
              surface become lithified during burial.  Solution-transfer                     
              creep is a possible mechanism, but the kinematics are not                      
              well defined.  Experiments at Texas A&M University will                        
              monitor rates of pore-volume loss and water-rock interaction                   
              in sand-water mixtures under hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic                    
              conditions as a function of temperature, confining pressure,                   
              fluid pressure, grain size, clay content and aggregate                         
              volume strain.  These will be performed in reactively inert                    
              pressure vessels that simulate temperature and pressure                        
              conditions typical of diagenesis.  Experiments at University                   
              of Oklahoma will be conducted in a similar vessel, but with                    
              the added capabilities of triaxial loading and constant                        
              fluid flow.  This effort will study compaction as a function                   
              of applied differential stress, study stress-related sand-                     
              water reaction kinetics, long-term constant flow conditions,                   
              and effects of solution undersaturation on compaction rates.                   
              data sets from both institutions will be interpreted in                        
              terms of constitutive "creep" laws for time-dependent volume                   
              strain, and together with reaction rate laws of mineral-                       
              water interaction under nonhydrostatic conditions (also                        
              experimentally determined), will be extrapolated to                            
              geological scenarios using numerical methods.  The aim of                      
              this research is ultimately to quantify rates of pore-volume                   
              loss in sandstones during burial and to understand the                         
              thermodynamics kinetics of water-rock interaction under                        
              hydrostatic and nonhydrostatic conditions.
