Title       : Do Gill from Symbiont-free Mussels Gain Sufficient Cellular Energy from Sulfide
               Oxidation to Support Cellular Work?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1993   
File        : a9219658

Award Number: 9219658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannette E. Doeller biof007@uabdpo.dpm.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Kraus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0521800   Shelf & Esturine Ecosystem              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hydrogen sulfide, which is naturally produced in marine sediments,             
              is poison to most living organisms. However, some animals from                 
              sulfide-rich environments avoid this poisoning with sulfide                    
              detoxification reactions at the cellular level, and these oxidation            
              reactions may be a potentially useful source of energy. The goal of            
              this project is to determine if sulfide inhabitants gain sufficient            
              cellular energy from sulfide oxidation to support cellular work.               
              The experimental tissue choice will be ciliated gills from two                 
              species of marine mussels, one from sulfide-rich environments and              
              one from sulfide-free environments. Gills are hard-working tissues             
              that act as the primary interface between filter-feeding animals               
              and their environment. In the presence and absence  of sulfide, we             
              will measure several parameters of cellular energy metabolism,                 
              including energy production by the mitochondria and energy                     
              consumption by the gill cilia. This research will begin to address             
              basic questions concerning the regulatory mechanisms that                      
              coordinate cellular energy consumption with energy production; the             
              molecular and cellular mechanisms that allow survival in natural               
              stressful habitats; and the invasion of the sulfide habitat by                 
              marine invertebrates that may have led to the eventual development             
              of the symbiosis between invertebrate hosts and sulfide-oxidizing              
              bacteria. It will address questions concerning the contribution of             
              sulfide systems to the total productivity of estuaries.
