Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Calibration of Late Cenozoic Incision, Uplift, and
               Erosion Along the Indus River, Northern Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9219852

Award Number: 9219852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23279              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary R. Reid reid@ess.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Understanding of the evolution of alpine topography in                    
              many mountain chains represents an unresolved problem.  A                      
              region like the northwestern Himalaya provides a                               
              particularly intriguing site for the study of evolving                         
              topography, because it is characterized by rapid Quaternary                    
              denudation, differential uplift, rivers showing some of the                    
              highest gradients and largest sediments loads in the world,                    
              a breadth of climatic regimes, active tectonicsm, and                          
              extreme topographic relief.  In the absence of knowledge of                    
              rates of denudation, bedrock uplift, and surface uplift,                       
              reconstructions or models of topographic development are                       
              forced to rely on untested assumptions concerning the                          
              absolute magnitude and relative importance of each of these                    
              factors.  In the northwestern Himalaya and Karakoram, it                       
              appears possible however, to combine digital elevation data                    
              sets with chronologic and geomorphic data on timing and                        
              magnitude of incision, erosion, and uplift in order to                         
              provide a calibrated perspective on topographic evolution of                   
              this dynamic region.  The goals of this study are to define                    
              the timing and rates of incision and bedrock cooling in this                   
              part of the Himalayan orogen; to make volumetric                               
              approximations of regional denudation, reconstruct base-                       
              level changes along this part of the Indus River; and to                       
              reconstruct the interactions among tectonically generated                      
              localized uplift, regional uplift (tectonic or isostatic),                     
              and erosion and denudation.  The approaches that will be                       
              used include:  exposure-age dating of strath surfaces using                    
              cosmogenic nuclides; development of cooling ages histories                     
              using multi-mineral dating of vertical relief sections;                        
              reconstruction of river profiles based on temporal and                         
              geometric constraints; and analysis of slopes, altitudinal                     
              distributions, gradients, and volumes based on digital                         
              elevation data set for the NW Himalaya.
