Title       : Higher Plant Ca 2+-ATPase: Gene Regulation and Cellular Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1995   
File        : a9219600

Award Number: 9219600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309910             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan B. Bennett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the prior NSF grant period this laboratory cloned and                       
              characterized a higher plant (tomato) calcium-ATPase gene closely              
              related to the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum calcium-ATPase of            
              animal cells.  They also observed that its messenger RNA abundance             
              increased dramatically following salt exposure, suggesting that                
              this calcium-ATPase may play a role in the mitigation of                       
              deleterious effects of elevated cytosolic calcium, proposed to                 
              result from extracellular salt exposure.  Molecular cloning of this            
              calcium-ATPase now provides the basis to characterize it at the                
              molecular level, including a critical assessment of its role in                
              cellular responses to salt, and perhaps other stresses.  The                   
              objectives of the current phase of this research are to:  1)                   
              establish the precise subcellular localization of this class of                
              calcium-ATPase, 2) elucidate the basis for the accumulation of                 
              multiple calcium-ATPase messenger RNA transcripts, 3) determine the            
              factors regulating calcium-ATPase gene expression, especially in               
              response to stress, and 3) critically assess its physiological                 
              function in responses to environmental stress using transgenic                 
              plants with altered calcium-ATPase gene expression.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              The regulation of cytosolic calcium levels is widely recognized as             
              a central element of cellular regulatory processes in eukaryotes,              
              and is essential to the proposed role for calcium as a second                  
              messenger.  In addition, it has been proposed that salt and                    
              chilling stress in plants may induce, as the primary cellular                  
              insult, increases in cytosolic calcium levels.  Both calcium-                  
              ATPases and a calcium/proton pumps maintain calcium homeostasis in             
              the cytosol of plant cells.  Based on extensive characterization of            
              ATP-dependent calcium transport in membrane vesicles prepared from             
              plant cells, there appear to be at least two calcium-ATPases with              
              properties likely to be important in the maintenance of very low               
              cytosolic calcium levels:  one located in the plasma membrane and              
              one in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane.  In spite of the                    
              relatively extensive characterization of calcium transport                     
              activities catalyzed by plant calcium-ATPases, little success has              
              been reported in their purification and molecular characterization.            
              Research from this laboratory has begun to fill in these gaps, and             
              the proposed continuation of these studies promises to provide more            
              critical information on the cellular mechanisms involved in plant              
              responses to their environment.
