Title       : Stage-specific Flagellar genes of Leishmania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1995     
File        : a9219767

Award Number: 9219767
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan H. LeBowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal describes an approach to exploring novel                    
              mechanisms of gene regulation in Leishmania, a Trypanosomatid                  
              protozoan and one of the most ancient of eukaryotic lineages.  A               
              number of lines of evidence suggest that transcription initiation              
              may not be the major regulatory point for gene expression in                   
              Leishmania.  An attractive alternative model might be that gene                
              expression is modulated by regulation of trans-splicing.  The                  
              maturation of Leishmania nuclear mRNA proceeds via an obligatory               
              trans-splicing event in which a trimethyl-G capped miniexon is                 
              ligated to splice acceptor sites located close to the 5' end of                
              each coding sequence in a polycistronic precursor RNA.  Therefore,             
              splice acceptor sites rather than promoters determine the 5' end of            
              mature mRNAs.  Trans-splicing would be an ideal point for the                  
              regulation of genes whose expression is restricted to one stage of             
              the Leishmania lifecycle.  Genes encoding promastigote-specific                
              components of Leishmania flagella will be isolated.  Promastigote              
              specific genes will be characterized by sequence analysis and                  
              genomic clones will be isolated.  Cis elements responsible for                 
              promastigote specific expression of flagellar genes will be                    
              identified and their mode of action determined.  Sequences                     
              responsible for the stage-specific pattern of expression will be               
              identified by transfecting chimeric constructs in which potential              
              regulatory sequences flanking isolated stage-specific genes are                
              appended to a reporter gene into both amastigote-like and                      
              promastigote forms.  Mutant parasite lines lacking individual                  
              flagellar will be constructed to test for the functional importance            
              of cloned genes.   Analysis of mutant parasite lines will be                   
              coupled with ultrastructural and fluorescence microscopic                      
              examination to develop an understanding of the function of deleted             
              genes.                                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              Leishmania has two distinct stages in its life cycle with different            
              hosts and has evolved a morphologically distinct form specialized              
              for survival in each.  The amastigote form is optimized for growth             
              in the lysosomal compartment of mammalian macrophage and the                   
              promastigote form multiplies extracellularly in the gut of the                 
              sandfly vector.  The unique properties of each stage must reflect              
              the expression of stage-specific genes but as yet, little is known             
              about how expression of such genes might be regulated.  The results            
              of this study should give greater insight into such stage-specific             
              regulation of gene expression.
