Title       : Dynamics of Cortical Actin in Fibroblasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1995      
File        : a9219670

Award Number: 9219670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian P. Heath 7137996659  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      1200 Moursund Avenue
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/790-4846

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Moving cells show a pronounced rearward flow of membrane and                 
              cytoskeletal structures from the marginal lamellipodia through the             
              lamellar cortex.  The hypothesis to be explored is that this flow              
              is an essential mechanism of cell locomotion and that it is driven,            
              in part, by an actomyosin-like contraction of a more centrally                 
              placed lamellar cortex.  This will be studied using computer-                  
              enhanced video microscopy in combination with immunocytochemistry,             
              single-cell electron microscopy, and fluorescence marking to                   
              examine the movement and the three dimensional organization and                
              flow of actin filaments and bundles in protruding lamellipodia.                
              The mechanisms of the flow of the dorsal cortical microfilament                
              sheath of the lamella will be examined using specific markers,                 
              photobleaching, and myosin II competitors.  The recent discovery               
              that stress fibers form in concert with cortical flow will be                  
              extended to examine the mechanism of stress fiber elongation and               
              the development of a sarcomeric organization of cytoskeletal                   
              proteins in fibers.  The rebuilding of the cortex and stress fibers            
              after elimination by cytochalasin will be examined.  These studies             
              will advance the field of cell motility by contributing to                     
              understanding of the mechanism of cellular migration and its role              
              in the morphogenesis of matrix and tissues.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Cellular motility is a fundamental and critical property of                    
              virtually all organisms.  This project focuses on "ameboid" or                 
              "crawling" motility, in which cells on a solid surface extend                  
              projections out in the direction in which they are moving and                  
              appear to "pull themselves up" to those projections.  This form of             
              cellular motility occurs in virtually all animals (invertebrate and            
              vertebrate), and is critical for morphogenesis during development,             
              regeneration and tissue remodelling after injury, host defense                 
              mechanisms, and other vital functions, and also occurs in cells of             
              other phyla (e.g., protozoa, slime molds).  The approach to be used            
              is to correlate high resolution video-enhanced microscopic                     
              observations on the motility of living cells with both                         
              ultrastructural observations at the EM level on the same cell and              
              with immunocytochemical localization of specific proteins also on              
              the same cell.  Very few other laboratories in the world use this              
              difficult but highly informative approach.  These studies will                 
              contribute to our understanding of the molecular organization and              
              mechanism of the machinery of cell motility.
