Title       : Anaerobic O-demethylation of Phenylmethylethers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1997   
File        : a9219277

Award Number: 9219277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Cornish Frazer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lily Y. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9119,9161,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to define the biochemistry of the                  
              anaerobic O-demethylation (AOD) reaction in Acetobacterium woodii,             
              a homoactogenic bacterium.  Initial studies will be undertaken to              
              identify the product(s) of the reaction.  To accomplish this,                  
              demethylation enzyme(s) will be partially purified to minimize                 
              interference by other competing cellular reactions that may act to             
              modify the test substrate and/or transform reaction product(s),                
              thereby obscuring the chemistry of the demethylation reaction                  
              itself.  Currently, little is understood about A. woodii AOD,                  
              except that O-demethylation is stimulated by exogenous                         
              tetrahydrofolate (THF) and by ATP.  To begin the understand the                
              chemistry of the reaction, we will first identify reaction                     
              product(s) formed in the presence of THF and determine if other                
              low-potential reductants also serve to stimulate the reaction. Our             
              studies will continue on to determine the role played by ATP in O-             
              demethylation.  If time permits, and if it appears warranted, we               
              will attempt to purify O-demetylation pathway proteins to                      
              homogeneity.  To begin to learn about the regulation of the                    
              pathway, we will also initate studies to screen for transposon-                
              generated AOD regulatory mutants cells.                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Aromatic compounds containing O-methyl ethers are abundant in foods            
              and wood processing wastes.  The first step in biodegradation of               
              these compounds is removal of their methyl group by the O-                     
              demethylation enzyme.  The reaction has already been studied in                
              aerobic organisms where it uses oxygen as a reactant.  The                     
              mechanism of action of the analogous enzyme is not understood in               
              anaerobic bacteria, where oxygen is not used.  It is important that            
              we understand how this anaerobic reaction also operates, because a             
              major part of the earth's biosphere is anaerobic.  For example,                
              important anaerobic environments include the digestive tracts of               
              animals, fresh water and marine sediments, and man-made anaerobic              
              digestors.  In our research program, we plan to determine how the              
              mechanism of anaerobic O-demethylation (AOD) operates in                       
              Acetobacterium woodii, a common anaerobic bacterium.  The results              
              gained from our study will contribute to understanding the natural             
              anaerobic process.  In addition, we may discover ways to engineer              
              the O-demethylation reaction in these anaerobic bacteria, and then             
              use it commercially for the conversion of renewable biomass waste              
              material and for the production of industrially useful products.
