Title       : Regulation of Glyoxysomal Membrane Electron Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1995   
File        : a9219413

Award Number: 9219413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Donaldson robdon@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall purpose of the investigation is to identify                        
              features of the glyoxysomal membrane electron transport (GMET)                 
              system which regulates oxidation of NADH generated by fat                      
              metabolism within glyoxysomes during germination of oil seeds.                 
              This metabolic process is regulated by the oxidation of the NADH               
              generated within the glyoxysomes.  NADH is oxidized by the GMET                
              system comprised of a 32 KDa protein (gm32) and secondary transfer             
              protein(s) in the membrane.  During the germination of an oil seed,            
              glyoxysomes acquire membrane electron transport activities at the              
              same time that fat metabolism becomes active.  The first objective             
              of this project is to identify the cytoplasmic electron acceptors              
              for GMET.  The physical exposure of the proteins will be examined.             
              We will determine if GMET activity is regulated by the appearance              
              of different proteins in the glyoxysomal membrane or by                        
              modifications (e.g., phosphorylation) of proteins.  The amino acid             
              sequence of gm32 will then be determined, to allow comparison with             
              other electron transport proteins.  This work is being done with               
              glyoxysomes obtained from the endosperm of germinating castor                  
              beans.                                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This project concerns fat metabolism, which is directly                        
              related to agriculture and to human health.  Many agriculturally               
              important seeds (corn, sunflower, soybean, peanut, cotton, castor              
              bean) contain fat and depend on fat metabolism for germination.                
              Specific subcellular organelles, peroxisomes and glyoxysomes, are              
              involved in the metabolism of fats.  Peroxisomes and glyoxysomes               
              consist of a concentrated solution of enzymes (proteins) enclosed              
              by a membrane and fat is metabolized by the enclosed enzymes.  As              
              fat is metabolized within a peroxisome or glyoxysome, molecules and            
              energy (as electrons) must pass in and out, through the membrane.              
              Thus the membrane must contain enzymes which regulate fat                      
              metabolism inside the organelle.  The specific purpose of this                 
              investigation is to identify these membrane enzymes and to                     
              determine how they might be regulated.  The basic information of               
              membrane transport can then be applied to understanding fat                    
              metabolism in humans, as well.
