Title       : Molecular Structures in Oriented Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9219736

Award Number: 9219736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Millane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rengaswami Chandrasekaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is concerned with determination of the three-                     
              dimensional molecular and crystal structures of biopolymers,                   
              primarily polysaccharides, using x-ray fiber diffraction analysis.             
              Such polymers do not form extensive crystals that can be analyzed              
              by traditional x-ray crystallography.  However, they can often be              
              prepared as fibers consisting of more-or-less parallel                         
              microcrystals.  The structures of the polymers in such fibers can              
              be determined by supplementing the x-ray diffraction data with                 
              stereochemical information, and optimizing model structures so that            
              diffraction calculated from the model agrees with that measured, as            
              well as possible.  The goals of this project are:  (1) To extend x-            
              ray fiber diffraction technology by improving techniques for data              
              collection, allowing use of data from more disordered polymer                  
              specimens, improving optimization of model structures and                      
              developing measures of accuracy; and (2) to determine the                      
              structures of a variety of polysaccharides of biological and                   
              industrial importance and so identify the intra- and inter-                    
              molecular interactions that are the molecular basis of their                   
              important properties.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The significance of this research is that:  (1) It will allow x-ray            
              diffraction analysis of biopolymers to be applied with more                    
              precision and more routinely, and to a wider range of biological               
              polymers and assemblies.  These developments will impact not only              
              its applications to polysaccharides, but also to nucleic acids,                
              helical viruses and membrane proteins that form disordered planar              
              arrays.  (2) The polysaccharide molecular structures and                       
              interactions determined will help us and others to understand why              
              these molecules have the properties they do, and that such                     
              knowledge will both prompt and discipline further useful inquiries.            
              Specific information to be expected includes the molecular basis of            
              the useful viscosity properties of solutions of bacterial                      
              polysaccharides such as xanthan, acetan, wellan, and XM6, and the              
              plant polysaccharide konjac mannan; and relationships between the              
              molecular structures and biological functions of a number of                   
              polysaccharides that are important components of mammalian                     
              connective tissue and the exoskeleton of insects and crustaceans,              
              that are antigens to some bacterial pathogens, and that are                    
              important in the process of nitrogen fixation.
