Title       : Modeling the Hydrologic Budget, the Heat Budget, and the Circulation of Crater
               Lake, Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1995     
File        : a9219953

Award Number: 9219953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Collier rcollier@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests support for a postdoctoral investigator to              
              assist in implementing state-of-the-art models of Crater Lake which            
              couple the observed atmospheric forcing with the heat budget, lake             
              circulation, and the hydrologic budget.  Crater Lake, the deepest              
              lake in the United States, is a closed-basin caldera lake, located             
              at an elevation of 1882 meters in the Cascade mountains of south-              
              central Oregon. Ongoing Limnological studies funded by the National            
              Park Service will be expanded by a new six-year study of climatic              
              control on the hydrologic budget, the heat budget, and on the                  
              circulation of the lake.  This program, will be funded by the Park             
              Service as part of the new "Integrated Studies of National Park                
              Ecosystems" and will be tied in with other elements of the Olympic             
              Peninsula Biogeographic Area.  As part of this project, we have                
              deployed a permanent thermistor mooring covering the full water                
              column.  This continuous data set is also supported by CTD                     
              (conductivity, temperature, depth) data collected whenever the lake            
              is accessible ( 3 months/year).  Meteorological data is also being             
              collected on the lake from a buoy and from instrumentation                     
              elsewhere within the Park.  Precipitation data are collected  from             
              several locations and lake level is continuously monitored from a              
              USGS gauging station.                                                          
              The primary effort will be the application of various one                      
              dimensional vertical models of mixing and heat fluxes in the system            
              using the meteorological data sets to determine surficial fluxes               
              and the thermistor data set for model parameterization and                     
              validation.  Long-term goals for the modelling effort include the              
              eventual development of a biological model of primary and secondary            
              production for  this  ultra-oligotrophic system which must include             
              a proper description of lake physics.  The post-doctoral                       
              investigator will work closely with R. Collier (OSU Oceanography)              
              and with G. Larson (NPS and OSU Forestry) to integrate the model(s)            
              with on-going data collection and experimental design.
