Title       : A Unified Approach to Inter-Domain Multiple-TOS Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1992 
File        : a9219216

Award Number: 9219216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323431             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob Rekhter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IBM T J Watson Res Ctr
	      
	      Yorktown Heights, NY  10598    /   -

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              The Internet today has evolved from a model based on a hierarchy               
              to one mainly based on a richly interconnected mesh.  Due to this              
              change in topology, in addition to the exponential growth the                  
              Internet is currently experiencing, there exists a dire need for               
              new protocols that support both the ability to route traffic                   
              based on policy (PB) and/or type of service (TOS) and the ability              
              to scale well with respect to the memory, computational,                       
              and bandwidth resources necessary to provide for adaptive routing              
              of traffic.  This proposal addresses these requirements by                     
              combining the best of three current routing protocols.  The                    
              Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) was first implemented on the NSFNET              
              backbone as a direct response to the need for a new exterior                   
              gateway protocol in the late 1980s to handle the increase in size              
              of the Internet and the non-hierarchical peering that was                      
              beginning to appear. It is based on a path-vector routing model                
              which uses static routes with accompanying policies per network                
              and is intended for use with IP-based networks. It is currently                
              being adapted and implemented by major routing vendors in their                
              products.  The Inter Domain Routing Protocol (IDRP) is BGP with                
              additional capabilities and adapted for use in the OSI world                   
              using CLNP.  IDRP is very close to passing its last international              
              standards vote and will then be an ISO/CCITT standard.  Its                    
              emergence will be very helpful in the deployment of U.S. GOSIP                 
              compliant networks.   The Inter Domain Policy Routing (IDPR) is a              
              model that allows for the pre-selection of the networks a packet               
              will transit based on the policies and TOS supported by the                    
              transit networks in addition to the policies or TOS required by                
              the source.  This capability is one that many Federal agencies                 
              need in order to select network paths based on security,                       
              cost factors, guaranteed bandwidth for multi-media and real                    
              time experimental control, in addition to providing the agencies               
              with the tools necessary for implementing their acceptable                     
              use policies.  The IDPR uses dynamic installation of routes to                 
              accomplish its goals.  The combination of BGP, IDRP, and                       
              IDPR would provide the best of all worlds. Economy of resources                
              would be gained using the aggregation features found in BGP/IDRP,              
              there by reducing routing table sizes, reducing the                            
              computational cycles required to calculate routes, and the                     
              bandwidth necessary for transmitting the routing information. In               
              addition, the flexibility found in IDPR, required to handle                    
              special cases such as those defined by the federal agencies, and               
              both quality of service and type of service support will be                    
              provided.  This proposal aims at building on the currently                     
              deployed infrastructure and protocols in a manner that would not               
              require a mass scale replacement of current technologies and                   
              equipment, and therefore provide for a phased evolution to an                  
              Internetwork with enhanced capabilities.
