Title       : Genetic Studies of infection-related morphogenesis in Magnaporthe grisea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1995      
File        : a9219305

Award Number: 9219305
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Hamer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1112      GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research concerns the morphological and biochemical                       
              specialization demonstrated by the rice blast fungus, Magnaporthe              
              grisea.  Asexual spores of M. grisea attach to plant surfaces,                 
              initiate growth through the emergence of a germ tube, and                      
              differentiate an infection structure called an appressorium (1).               
              The appressorium is a specialized cell capable of generating                   
              enormous turgor pressures that facilitate the direct penetration               
              of the plant epidermis (2).  Large, swollen, infectious hyphae                 
              rapidly appear within and between plant cells (3).  Finally,                   
              surface borne conidiophores produce numerous asexual spores to                 
              reinitiate the disease cycle.  The goal of this research is to                 
              understand the biochemical events that key disease-related                     
              morphogenesis in M. grisea.  Genetic and biochemical investigations            
              can identify components in this process that could elucidate                   
              central processes in fungal cell morphogenesis and may provide                 
              strategies for the development of novel disease control measures.              
              Previous investigations identified a genetic locus termed SMO1 (4).            
              Phenotypic analysis suggests that the SMO gene product plays a                 
              central role in establishing the polarity of cell growth and                   
              morphogenesis in particular disease-related cell types of M. grisea            
              and thus Smo-mutations reduce pathogenicity towards rice.                      
              Additionally, mutations at this locus occur at a high frequency in             
              certain genetic backgrounds of M. grisea.  The SMO locus has been              
              cloned by a novel mapped based cloning procedure developed by this             
              laboratory for M. grisea.  The studied have demonstrated that SMO              
              is closely linked to chromosomal duplication.  To advance the                  
              understanding of the SMO locus and its relationship to fungal                  
              growth and disease-related morphogenesis, three related                        
              experimental strategies will be used: (1) A fine structure analysis            
              of the SMO locus and smo-minus. (2) Cytological and biochemical                
              identification of the SMO protein and more refined characterization            
              of the duplication around the SMO locus. (3) The isolation and                 
              characterization of additional mutations affecting disease-related             
              morphogenesis in M. grisea.                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The fungus Magnaporthe grisea is an economically significant                   
              pathogen of rice.  The goal of this research is to increase our                
              understanding of the process by which this fungus undergoes the                
              structural changes necessary to initiate an infection.  The                    
              investigator will be studying a gene which he has already shown to             
              function in the development by the fungus of a specialized                     
              infection structure and will identify and characterize other                   
              mutations affecting morphogenesis related to the infection process.
