Title       : The Biological and Geological Significance of Calicle Morphology in the
               Chaetetid-Grade Demosponges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1993    
File        : a9219693

Award Number: 9219693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87448              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. West   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Chaetetids, the major framebuilders of Middle                             
              Carboniferous reef mounds, are poorly understood                               
              biologically.  Recent recognition that chaetetids are                          
              coralline demosponges provides a sound basis for better                        
              understanding this simple poorly studied group.  Improving                     
              our knowledge of these builders of reef mounds, known                          
              hydrocarbon reservoirs of the Carboniferous, has useful                        
              economic implications, as well as basic scientific value.                      
                   Coralline demosponges with a chaetetid-grade skeleton                     
              are now known to be polyphyletic.  Thus, it is necessary to                    
              reevaluate and revise their classification by studying                         
              calicle morphology.  This study will address:  (1)                             
              taphonomic (diagenetic) alteration, (2) "astogeny" (3)                         
              possible polymorphism, (4) ecophenotypic plasticity, and (5)                   
              the relationship between calicle morphology and the primary                    
              and secondary skeletons in the three basic growth forms.                       
              Other morphological features, such as the spacing and                          
              frequency of tabulae, will also be addressed.                                  
                   Morphometric analysis of data obtained from strained                      
              and unstained thin sections and acetate peels will be the                      
              principal method employed, combined with available detailed                    
              ecological data to determine the relative importance of  the                   
              five points noted above.                                                       
                   Integration of information obtained will aid in:  (1)                     
              establishing a viable taxonomy, (2) understanding the demise                   
              of chaetetid-grade demosponges at the Westphalian-Stephanian                   
              boundary and their pantropical distribution , (3)                              
              understanding the reefal occurrences of Carboniferous                          
              chaetetid-grade demosponges, and (4) evaluating the possible                   
              relationship between chaetetids and algal symbionts.
