Title       : Regulation of Mu activity in maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9219587

Award Number: 9219587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $546434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Freeling freeling@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9197,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The transposable element, Mu, found in maize is unique in several              
              ways.  The element was first cloned by this laboratory, but                    
              subsequent studies by several laboratories demonstrated that all of            
              the cloned elements identified as Mu were imperfect in that they               
              could not in themselves induce transposition.  The "master" element            
              was finally cloned and characterized by this laboratory, as well as            
              two other laboratories in 1991, and the proposed work is a                     
              continuation of those studies.  The element encodes two messages               
              when in an active chromosomal position.  Differences in chromosomal            
              position and mode of sexual transmission can effect the rate of                
              MuR1 transposition.  We have also shown that the element can and               
              will automutate, and we will use these automutants along with other            
              more conventionally derived mutants to describe the mechanism of               
              transposition and functions of the two transcripts and their                   
              proteins.  A long term goal will be to attempt to utilize this                 
              element to transposon tag cereal crops that are so important to                
              world nutrition.                                                               
              %%%                                                                            
              Transposons, or "jumping genes" have proven to be of intellectual              
              interest in understanding fundamental genetic mechanisms and of                
              practical importance, in that they can be engineered as gene                   
              vectors.  Both  of those interests are best served in the complete             
              characterization and understanding of the characteristics of such              
              DNA sequences.  Mu is extremely important to characterize in that              
              it has already been found to have properties which are unique among            
              the hundreds of transposable elements so far characterized.  The               
              detection of the fragments of the element in barley offers the                 
              long-range hope that genetic engineering might provide an extremely            
              important tool for improving cereal crops throughout the world.
