Title       : Analysis of Doa, the Drosophila homologue of mammalian cdc2-like kinase.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1995       
File        : a9219371

Award Number: 9219371
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Rabinow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9219371  Rabinow  We are studying the structure and function of the Darkener of 
              apricot locus of Drosophila, and two tightly linked functionally  related and
              interacting loci, Rem and Msu.  These loci were  identified in mutagenic
              screens for dosage-sensitive modifiers of  gene expression.  Doa mutants
              display a maternal effect, are  recessive lethal, increase transcription of the
              copia  retrotransposon and alter the expression of a number of host genes,  as
              based upon genetic and morphological criteria.  Many of these  properties are
              shared by Rem and Msu, which interact with Doa  allele specifically.  By
              sequencing cDNA clones, we found that Doa  encodes the Drosophila homologue of
              murine and human cdc2-like  protein kinase (clk).  Clk kinase is unusual in
              that it is  structurally related to serine/threonine protein kinases, but auto-
               phosphorylates on tyrosine residues as well as serines and  threonines.  We
              will: 1) Examine the structure/function  relationship among Doa, Rem and Msu,
              whether they are in fact  separable genetic loci, and their functional
              relationship to cdc2  like kinase.  2) Generate antibodies to Doa protein as
              reagents to  determine its intracellular localization and expression during 
              embryonic and imaginal development outside of the eye and eye-  antennal
              imaginal disc.  We will also examine Doa mutant embryos to  determine the
              effects of mutations in the kinase on early  Drosophila development.  3)
              Characterize the specificity and  substrates of Doa kinase in vitro and in
              vivo.  4) Determine  whether Doa mutations affect mitosis.  %%%  Our long range
              goals are to understand the significance and  function of dosage-sensitive
              transcriptional regulators, as one  aspect of the regulation of gene expression
              yielding normal  development.  Our system provides a unique example for the
              study of  the functions of a dual-specificity kinase in the context of an 
              organism amenable to genetic analysis and which undergoes complex  development.
               ***
