Title       : Dissertation Research: Ceramic Production Labor Estimates asIndices of Economic
               Transformation and State Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1997     
File        : a9219485

Award Number: 9219485
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Louise M. Senior  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Carol Kramer MS Louise Senior will                  
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will study ceramic             
              materials excavated from the site of Tell Leilan which is located              
              in Northern Syria. Tell Leilan was occupied from approximately 5000            
              - 1750 B.C. and has been excavated by a Yale University                        
              archaeological team for a number of years. The importance of the               
              site is now clear because it documents the rise of complex state               
              level society. Over the course of the 3rd millenium BC Tell Leilan             
              was transformed from a rural town to the center of an urbanized                
              state. MS. Senior wishes to learn how production of ceramics                   
              changed over this time period. In particular she wishes to know                
              whether, in effect, mass production techniques were adapted and                
              less time and care were devoted to producing individual objects. To            
              accomplish this she will study potsherds from a number of                      
              perspectives. She will reconstruct the method by which they were               
              made and the amount of care devoted to clay preparation. Through               
              neutron activation analysis it will be possible to determine where             
              clays were collected  and whether standardization emerged. Through             
              reconstruction of firing temperatures MS Senior will learn how much            
              fuel was expended per pot.                                                     
                                                                                             
              Anthropologists wish to understand how economic organization                   
              changed as complex societies emerged in regions such as the Near               
              East. From the study of buildings such as temple mounds and                    
              identification of status objects much has been learned about the               
              development of religious and political organization. However it is             
              more difficult to gain insight into changes in production and                  
              economic organization. Since ceramics was one of the main classes              
              of objects produced at Tell Leilan (and many other archaeological              
              sites as well) and since they preserve well in the archaeological              
              record they afford an excellent data base to examine such an issue.            
              MS Senior is not interested in ceramics per se  but rather what                
              they reveal about more basic processes. Since the site covers the              
              change from more simple to more complex society comparison of                  
              earlier and later assemblages will provide insight into change over            
              time.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of how complex societies emerged and were                    
              organized. It will help to develop an analytic technique which will            
              be useful in many archaeological situations. It will also assist in            
              the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
