Title       : Policy Workshop in NREN Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1992 
File        : a9219671

Award Number: 9219671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George O. Strawn                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35469              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. King   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Educause
	      1150 18th Street NW, Suite 1010
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/872-4200

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
                   Passage of the High Performance Computing Act of 1991                     
              initiated an active cycle of planning for implementation of the                
              National Research and Education Network (NREN) by federal                      
              agencies, educational institutions, and private sector firms.                  
              Many of these agencies and organizations have previously been                  
              active in networking but a number are new to the field as a                    
              result of expansion o the scope of the NREN during Congressional               
              deliberations.                                                                 
                   To assist the study process and NREN constituent                          
              organizations in their own activities, a two day policy and                    
              planning workshop is planned.  The workshop will serve several                 
              important goals:                                                               
                   -bring together in a single forum one hundred o the                       
              individuals most directly concerned with NREN planning and                     
              implementations;                                                               
                   -provide an informed critique of policy proposals and                     
              positions from organization with roles in the implementation and               
              operation of the NREN;                                                         
                   -reduce to written form the consensus of the workshop on the              
              major policy issues on which the Congress has requested an                     
              Executive Branch study.                                                        
                   The consensus of the workshop does not imply unanimity with               
              respect to proposals for future Congressional or Executive Branch              
              actions involving the NREN.  However, it is expected that                      
              illumination of agreements and differences in policy positions,                
              and the reasons for deferring assessments, will be valuable to                 
              federal agencies and to the Congress in the evolution of the NREN              
              program.                                                                       
                   This conference will bring together policy level                          
              representatives from the numerous constituencies which are                     
              essential for the design, development, deployment, and operation               
              of a robust, high performance computer network to meet pressing                
              needs for improved research collaboration and productivity in the              
              United States.
