Title       : Interaction of SV40 with MHC Class I Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1993     
File        : a9219207

Award Number: 9219207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard C. Norkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this proposal is to analyze the role of MHC class I              
              proteins in the entry of simian virus 40 (SV40) into the cell and              
              its targeting to appropriate intracellular compartments.  MHC class            
              I proteins were recently shown by this laboratory to be an                     
              essential component of the cell surface receptor for SV40.  One                
              major concern is to confirm preliminary findings which suggest that            
              SV40 remains associated with MHC class I proteins during and after             
              its entry in the cell.  The functional significance of this                    
              association for virus entry and transport will be evaluated and the            
              residues on the MHC class I proteins that might be important in                
              these processes will be identified.  Of particular interest is                 
              whether SV40 is transported to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in               
              association with MHC class I proteins.  This is important because              
              MHC class I proteins acquire antigenic peptide fragments in the ER             
              and because SV40 provides the only precedent for a targeting                   
              pathway from the plasma membrane that can access the ER.  Thus,                
              this study may enable the evaluation of the important but as yet               
              unsubstantiated possibility that MHC class I proteins recycle to               
              the ER.                                                                        
              Whereas this laboratory has confirmed that SV40 accumulates in the             
              ER prior to replication in the nucleus, it is not certain that                 
              transport to the ER is part of the pathway leading to productive               
              infection.  Nor is it certain whether or not virus entry leading to            
              infection occurs by receptor-mediated endocytosis via coated pits.             
              Experiments are proposed to address these issues.  In addition, the            
              rate at which MHC class I proteins are spontaneously internalized              
              into control cells, the rate at which SV40 enters cells, and the               
              effect of SV40 adsorbed to the cell surface on the rate of entry of            
              MHC class I proteins will be measured.  This will permit the                   
              determination of whether or not SV40 induces the internalization of            
              the MHC class I proteins to gain entry into the cell, rather than              
              entering passively in association with them.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              These studies are likely to be of general significance for what                
              they might reveal about the natural in vivo activities of the                  
              crucially important MHC class I proteins.  These molecules are best            
              known for the central roles they play in immunity.  They are widely            
              recognized for presenting endogenously synthesized antigenic                   
              peptide fragments for recognition by cytotoxic T lymphocytes                   
              (CTLs), thus playing an essential role in host cellular defense                
              mechanisms.  They also play a central role in the thymic selection             
              of the T cell repertoire and the establishment of tolerance.                   
              Nevertheless, many important questions about their activities                  
              remain unanswered.  The studies proposed here will provide                     
              important information about their recycling into cells and                     
              intracellular targeting.  They will also provide important                     
              information about the little studied, but potentially significant,             
              pathway of targeting from the cell surface to the ER.
