Title       : DNA Repair and Differentiation in B. subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9219436

Award Number: 9219436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald E. Yasbin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Bayles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              All living cells are constantly exposed to chemical and physical               
              agents that have the ability to alter the primary structure of DNA.            
              Thus, it should be expected that all organisms appears to have                 
              mechanisms for the removal or repair of this damage.  During the               
              last thirty years, a great of effort has been placed on trying to              
              elucidate the various DNA repair mechanisms that exist as well as              
              the relationship of these repair systems to cell survival,                     
              mutagenesis, genetic recombination, DNA replication,                           
              carcinogenesis, toxicology, differentiation and development.  The              
              Gram positive spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis a model for            
              the study of the interactions of DNA repair with differentiation.              
              Specifically, aspects of this SOS system are spontaneously                     
              activated when B. subtilis differentiates into its competent state.            
              The present study concentrates on the molecular mechanisms that                
              regulate the damage induction and the competence specific induction            
              of din(DNA damage inducible) genes and of the recA gene.                       
              Operator/promoter regions from these genes have been isolated and              
              sequenced.  Regulatory elements, transcription start sites have                
              been tentatively identified.  The preliminary data suggest the                 
              existence of complex regulatory networks involved in the regulation            
              of some of these genes, especially the recA promoter.  Using the               
              appropriate techniques of molecular biology and genetics, such as              
              S1 nuclease protection, gel mobility shift assays, Western Blots,              
              DNA sequencing, cloning mutational analysis, polymerase chain                  
              reaction, transposon inactivation, etc, the following questions                
              will be addressed: 1) What DNA sequences are essential for the                 
              damage inducible expression of the recA gene; and 2) what DNA                  
              sequences are essential for the competence specific induction of               
              the recA gene?                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              This award should provide detailed insight into how bacterial cells            
              regulate an important aspect of their response to environmental                
              stress.
