Title       : Telomere Synthesis and Maintenance in Higher Eukaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9219775

Award Number: 9219775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Todd M. Martensen                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg B. Morin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,9183,9251,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Telomeres are defined as the ends of chromosomal DNA and are                   
              essential for the faithful inheritance and stability of                        
              chromosomes.  The enzyme telomerase is necessary for telomere                  
              maintenance, thus the mechanisms of DNA recognition and synthesis              
              by telomerase, and the cellular patterns of telomerase expression              
              and regulation are essential for a complete understanding of                   
              telomere biology.  The structure and length of telomeres,                      
              parameters which may determine the proliferative lifespan of cells,            
              is regulated by controlling the activity and expression of                     
              telomerase.  By identifying telomerase components and using them as            
              markers to track telomerase expression, the relationships between              
              cell division and telomere function can be defined.  Human                     
              telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein, its essential RNA moiety will be            
              identified with polymerase chain reaction amplification techniques.            
              The RNA sequence is critical to understanding the telomerase                   
              reaction mechanism, since it is believed to contain a sequence that            
              templates telomeric repeat synthesis.  Conserved features of the               
              RNA will be elucidated by comparing the gene sequence from a                   
              variety of vertebrates, the importance of RNA structures and                   
              sequences will be tested by expressing altered telomerase RNA genes            
              in cell lines.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Chromosomes carry the genetic blueprint that is used by all                    
              multicellular organisms from worms to humans to make organs,                   
              muscles, skin, etc.  An enzyme in these organisms is responsible               
              for adding special nucleic acid sequences at the end of each of the            
              chromosomes that is necessary for their stability.  This is                    
              important for chromosomes in sperm and egg cells but also for cells            
              of the body.  These sequences may be important in the development              
              of cells into tissues and whether the cells live or die during the             
              life of the organism.  The structure of the enzyme which contains              
              both nucleic acid and amino acids is not understood; the gene for              
              the enzyme has not as yet been found.  These two aims will be                  
              investigated by the laboratory.
