Title       : P1-Bh: A Maize Regulatory Gene Controlled by DNA Methylation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1995     
File        : a9219282

Award Number: 9219282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen C. Cone conek@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus upon the molecular and genetic analysis of             
              Pl-Bh, a gene which controls the synthesis of purple anthocyanin               
              pigments in the maize plant. Preliminary analysis indicates that at            
              the nucleotide level, this gene is nearly identical to the wild-               
              type Pl gene but, unlike that gene, is heavily methylated. The                 
              planned experiments will test the hypothesis that methylation of               
              the Pl-Bh DNA is responsible for the variegated pattern of                     
              expression or the altered tissue-specificity of this allele or                 
              both. The methylation status will be determined using genomic                  
              sequencing methods and will be correlated with the level of gene               
              expression in lightly pigmented and darkly pigmented cells from                
              plant and kernel tissues. Possible alterations in chromatin                    
              configuration and/or protein-DNA contacts will be analyzed by DNase            
              footprinting. Both the wild-type and mutant genes will be                      
              introduced into various tissues by microprojectile bombardment and             
              their expression correlated with phenotypic differences. We will               
              look for genetic modifiers of the mutant allele and it will be                 
              determined if the modification is a result of alterations in the               
              methylation pattern of the Pl-Bh allele.                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              DNA methylation plays an important role in the regulation of gene              
              expression in many eukaryotes, usually by silencing gene                       
              expression. In only a few cases has it been shown to influence the             
              tissue-specificity of expression. The results of these experiments             
              should serve to enhance our understanding of this and other                    
              epigenetic mechanisms which modulate plant gene expression.                    
              $$$
