Title       : Studies of the Primary Reactions of Bacterial Photosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1994        
File        : a9219378

Award Number: 9219378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neal W. Woodbury NWoodbury@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aileen K. Taguchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9112,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Woodbury proposes to investigate the mechanism of initial                  
              electron transfer in bacterial photosynthetic reaction centers.                
              Particular interests lie in furthering the understanding of the                
              role that the protein matrix plays in modulating the thermodynamic             
              and kinetic parameters of photosynthetic electron transfer.  To                
              this end, Dr. Woodbury will utilize a combination of directed                  
              mutagenesis to alter the amino acids near the reaction center                  
              cofactors and transient spectroscopy to assay the kinetics and                 
              thermodynamics of electron transfer between redox active cofactors             
              as well as to identify the mechanistically important intermediates             
              involved in this reaction.  Several specific projects are proposed.            
              One involves the use of site-directed mutagenesis to investigate               
              the effect of hydrogen bonding on the redox properties of the                  
              initial electron donor and then to determine the effect of changing            
              this important thermodynamic parameter on the electron transfer                
              mechanism.  Dr. Woodbury will perform most of the fast spectroscopy            
              in this project; the mutants were designed and constructed by Allen            
              and Williams.  Another project involves comparing the electron                 
              transfer mechanisms of reaction centers from different organisms by            
              exchanging regions of DNA sequence between the reaction center                 
              genes of these organisms.  At the level of the protein backbone,               
              the reaction center has a near two fold-rotational symmetry.                   
              However, the amino acids present on the two sides are largely                  
              different.  The result is that electron transfer is very                       
              asymmetric, occurring almost exclusively down one of the two                   
              possible pathways, even though two pathways exist with chemically              
              identical cofactors.  This will be studied by exchanging regions               
              between the two sides and performing spectroscopic analysis of the             
              direction, kinetics and intermediate states involved in initial                
              electron transfer.                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              There are two broader goals of the project.  First, an                         
              understanding of solar energy conversion during photosynthesis is              
              itself a major interest of this laboratory.  Essentially all of the            
              energy used by living organisms ultimately comes from this source,             
              and a mechanistic understanding of this process could be very                  
              useful in the development of molecular devices that require a                  
              specific energy input (which is what a reaction center really is).             
              Second, the reaction center provides an excellent laboratory for               
              the study of cofactor-protein interactions in general.  There are              
              few protein-chromophore systems where reaction mechanism can be                
              probed in such detail on time scales as short as femtoseconds                  
              (which encompasses the time scale of molecular motion).  Here                  
              again, the information obtained from these studies can be used in              
              the rational design of many types of molecular devices and in the              
              understanding of a very wide range of protein-mediated chemical                
              reactions.
