Title       : Electronic Properties in Quantized Space Charge Layers in Group IV
               Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1993   
File        : a9219140

Award Number: 9219140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip J. Stiles   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              A one year program of determing the electronic properties of                   
              macroscopic and mesoscopic systems composed of the group IV                    
              elements will be carried out.  Having determined the properties of             
              Si in such configurations, and having done some preliminary work of            
              Ge MOSFETs as well, concentration will first be on investigations              
              of the Ge:Si alloys in the Ge rich end of the phase diagram and                
              then proceed to further studies of the Ge surface.  If time allows             
              the SiC system will be studied, which is unique in having many                 
              different stacking orders and band-gaps.  A physical construct that            
              will aid the testing of surface conduction with no lithography                 
              needed on the surface of the sample is being developed; it will all            
              be on the probe.  The properties in a MOSFET, quantum well or                  
              pristine surface configuration will be tested.                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              Advanced materials (that is those materials which have not been                
              studied before or previously known materials that are studied in               
              new configurations and hence their behavior is governed by this                
              configuration), their properties the phenomena  that occur in them             
              will be studied.  One often learns to understand these two                     
              important aspects by comparing two similar events or materials and             
              determining what causes the difference.  This study compares and               
              contrasts many similar materials that have been the foundation of              
              modern electronics or will be in the future.  Alloys and elemental             
              forms of carbon (diamond), silicon, and germanium will be looked at            
              with standard tools and a new one invented that allow a quick                  
              determination of the surface conductance properties.
