Title       : Structure and Permeability of the Outer Mitochondrial Membrane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1993       
File        : a9219353

Award Number: 9219353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214906             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carmen A. Mannella   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project employs tools of Biophysics to answer fundamental                 
              questions about the structure and function of the gated membrane               
              channel,  VDAC or mitochondrial porin, which is formed by a 31-kD              
              protein in the mitochondrial outer membrane.  The main technique               
              used is high-resolution electron microscopy and computer-based                 
              image analysis.  The channel spontaneously forms planar crystalline            
              arrays when the outer mitochondrial membrane of the fungus                     
              Neurospora crassa is treated with phospholipase A2.  The image                 
              processing technique of correlation averaging is used to obtain                
              projection images with resolution approaching 10 angstroms from                
              these two-dimensional crystals embedded in either vitreous ice or              
              the sugar, aurothioglucose.  Three-dimensional structures are                  
              obtained by combining projection data from variously tilted                    
              crystals.  The phospholipase-induced crystals are polymorphic, i.e.            
              there are several types, and the occurrence of certain types                   
              correlates with exposure to effectors of the channel's gating                  
              properties.  Thus, it is hoped that comparison of the channel                  
              structures in the different crystal polymorphs will shed light on              
              the conformational changes underlying gating.  In order to overcome            
              the 10 angstrom resolution limit, needed to directly visualize                 
              protein secondary structure, attempts to reconstitute the channel              
              protein into larger, better ordered two-dimensional crystal are to             
              be undertaken.  Also, three-dimensional crysal trails will be                  
              initiated using protein overexpressed in bacteria.  If successful,             
              this will open the way for x-ray crystallographic studies.  In the             
              meantime, complementary information about the folding of the                   
              channel polypeptide will be provided by circular dichroism studies             
              and by immunolabelling of the crystals with Fab fragments of                   
              sequence-specific, anti-peptide antibodies.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              The cell and its internal compartments are bounded by membranes                
              composed of lipids and proteins.  The lipids form a bilayer sheath             
              that is impenetrable to polar ions and molecules.  Proteins make it            
              possible for the different compartments to communicate, i.e.,                  
              exchange material.  For example, some proteins form channels,                  
              water-filled passageways across the membrane bilayer which open and            
              close (or gate) in response to different stimuli.  The basis                   
              structure of channels and the molecular mechanism(s) of their                  
              gating are only poorly understood.  In this project, we are                    
              studying a channel that occurs on the surface of the intracellular             
              organelle that is the cell's powerplant, the mitochondrion.  This              
              channel is switched by transmembrane electrical potentials between             
              states with different degrees of openness, and this gating appears             
              to be controlled by other proteins in the mitochondrion.  Using                
              electron crystallography and other biophysical and biochemical                 
              approaches, we are determining the three-dimensional structure of              
              the channel in different states, in order to understand how it is              
              formed how it opens and closes.
