Title       : Grant for Exploratory Research: High-Pressure Photoacoustic Calorimetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9219341

Award Number: 9219341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore J. Burkey tburkey@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research is made by the                       
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program                  
              to support the development and application of high pressure                    
              photoacoustic calorimetry.  Dr. Theodore J. Burkey of the                      
              Chemistry Department, Memphis State University, will construct                 
              a cell in which to carry out reactions of organometallic                       
              compounds and measure the change in volume due to differences                  
              in the volumes of reactants and intermediates or products.  The                
              method will be useful in determining detailed reaction                         
              mechanisms for photointiated reactions, including substitution                 
              reactions and activation of alkanes and other small molecules.                 
              The project is viewed as risky since the method may not be                     
              sufficiently sensitive.  If successful, the method could be                    
              useful for studying organometallic reactions, whose mechanisms                 
              have not been extensively studied, and for comparison of                       
              results with the few other methods used for determining volumes                
              of activation.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              During the course of reactions, both reactant and solvent                      
              molecules rearrange themselves to optimal orientations required                
              for reaction.  As a result of this rearrangement, the volume of                
              the reactants changes during the course of the reaction.  The                  
              volume of the products also differs from that of the reactants.                
              Thus, measurement of volume change during reaction provides                    
              information about the energy and steric requirements for                       
              reaction.  With the support of this award, Dr. Theodore J.                     
              Burkey will attempt to develop a new method for measuring                      
              volume changes and will gain information on a number of                        
              important organometallic reactions, including some catalytic                   
              and some light induced processes.
