Title       : Stochastic Transport in Heterogenous Flows and Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1995     
File        : a9219845

Award Number: 9219845
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney Redner redner@sid.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research will be conducted in order to gain a better               
              understanding of fundamental physical laws that govern stochastic              
              transport processes in heterogeneous media with macroscopically                
              correlated disorder.  For composites with "block" disorder,                    
              conventional macroscopic transport equations generally do not                  
              apply, and an attempt will be made to formulate the appropriate                
              composition laws that permit a macroscopic description of transport            
              in such systems.  The superdiffusive motion of Brownian particles              
              in a randomly stratified flow field will then be investigated.                 
              Steady-state and first-passage characteristics of this system                  
              appear to be controlled by exceptional fluctuations, leading to a              
              multiplicity of basic time scales in the system.  Theoretical and              
              numerical studies will determine the appropriate macroscopic                   
              description.  The unusual transport properties of Brownian                     
              particles which are driven by prototypical random flow fields will             
              also be explored.  Finally, the first-passage characteristics in               
              source-sink flow will be studied, where the interplay between                  
              spatially varying convection and molecular diffusion are                       
              anticipated to yield unusual first-passage properties.  The studies            
              will be extended to fractured media, where fast transport in                   
              fracture competes in a subtle way with slow transport modes.                   
                                                                                             
              This project is coordinated with an identical one at the Department            
              of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, which supports Professor Joel                
              Koplik of the City University of New York who is collaborating with            
              Professor Redner.                                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              Analytical and numerical research will be conducted on random                  
              transport in heterogeneous media and flows.  In particular, the                
              movement of a passive particle in porous media will be studied                 
              under the influence of various types of random disorder.  Examples             
              include fluid flow in stratified geological media and the                      
              propagation of fracture in rocks and other heterogeneous materials.            
              The research addresses fundamental issues in statistical physics               
              and, at the same time, has many real applications.  The research is            
              coordinated with an identical grant at the Department of Energy                
              which supports Professor Koplik at the City University of New York.
