Title       : Collaborative Research: The Jemez Tomography Experiment (JTEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1993      
File        : a9219128

Award Number: 9219128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15201              (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Jiracek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The Jemez Tomography Experiment (JTEX) is a cooperative and               
              interdisciplinary  research program involving scientist from six               
              major Universities, the Los Alamos National Laboratory with support            
              from the DOE, and the U.S. Geological Survey.  The Jemez Mountains             
              volcanic field (JMVF) is a major Late Cenozoic silicic volcanic                
              system.  Perhaps its best-known feature is the Valles Caldera and              
              associated 1.1 to 1.6 Ma explosive volcanic products including the             
              Bandelier Tuff.  The fundamental questions that relate to the JMVF             
              and other recent silicic volcanic systems and which are addressed              
              in the project are:                                                            
                                                                                             
                   1.   What is the nature and extent of crustal involvement and             
                        accompanying modifications of the crust during the                   
                        volcanic activity in the JMVF?  Are crustal intrusions,              
                        pluton, or underplated regions present in the crust                  
                        beneath the Valles Caldera and Jemez Mountains?                      
                                                                                             
                   2.   How has the JMVF evolved through the last 15 Ma,                     
                        culminating in eruption of the Bandelier rhyolite                    
                        ignimbrite and caldera collapse?  Petrologic models of               
                        silicic magma generation suggest that large volumes of               
                        mafic intrusions (on the order of ten times the volume               
                        of erupted material) are present in the crust beneath                
                        major silicic volcanic centers.  Can we image these                  
                        intrusions geophysically and interpret their                         
                        relationships to the observed volcanic geology?                      
                                                                                             
              In order to address these and other questions related specifically             
              to the JMVF and generally to continental magmatism, the principal              
              investigators will conduct intensive geophysical studies of the                
              JMVF, analyze the data collected and interpret the results in                  
              concert with petrologic and geochemical information.  The new                  
              geophysical data will include:  seismic refraction/reflection,                 
              teleseismic delay time and waveform, gravity, magnetic, and                    
              magnetotelluric (MT) data.  The program is designed to provide a               
              three-dimensional image of the magmatically modified c rust beneath            
              the JMVF.  Tomographic inversion of the explosion seismic and                  
              teleseismic data and combined interpretation with the potential                
              field, MT and geologic data will produce the most high resolution              
              3-D study of crustal scale features that is currently available.
