Title       : "Collaborative Research: Circadian Rhythms of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1995   
File        : a9219880

Award Number: 9219880
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl H. Johnson carl.h.johnson@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9109,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Circadian rhythms are an adaptation of organisms to the regular                
              daily change of their environment.  Although much is known about               
              the formal properties of circadian rhythms which allow them to                 
              synchronize to the daily light\dark cycles, almost nothing is known            
              about how these rhythms work on a biochemical level. This project              
              is two-fold.  First, the simplest organism now known to express                
              circadian rhythms will be used namely, prokaryotic cyanobacteria.              
              Second, genetic tools will be used to analyze its mechanism.  A                
              reporter gene encoding a bioluminescence enzyme has been attached              
              to an endogenous promoter.  Not only does this construct make these            
              cyanobacteria bioluminescent, the glow meets all of the salient                
              criteria of circadian rhythmicity|  This is the first "artificial"             
              overt rhythm of a circadian clock yet described.                               
              This unique case of circadian gene expression will be exploited to:            
              (1) identify by action spectroscopy the photoreceptor involved in              
              the clock's entrainment; (2) analyze the control pathway by which              
              the circadian clock regulates this "artificial rhythm; and (3)                 
              search for genes which are involved in the clock's central                     
              mechanism.  Using a simple prokaryotic system should accelerate the            
              identification of cellular mechanisms by which circadian                       
              oscillators operate.                                                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Most organisms respond to the cycles of light and dark by                      
              physiological mechanisms that are not well understood.  Plants                 
              respond to these cycles by turning on and off certain genes.  By               
              genetic manipulation these investigators have introduce a light                
              emitting enzyme gene into a gene that is turned on by a daily                  
              light-dark cycle. Thus after light exposure these bacteria will                
              begin to glow as the gene is turned on.  This novel technique will             
              allow the investigators to better understand the biochemical                   
              genetic mechanisms by which organisms respond to light-dark cycles.
