Title       : Neuroendocrine Control of Amphibian Metamorphosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9219211

Award Number: 9219211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Koenig                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225914             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Nicoll   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  For over two centuries, amphibians have been primary models               
              for embryological and developmental studies.  Much of what we                  
              know about early embryonic development, the techniques for the                 
              successful culture of embryos in vitro, and the role of hormones               
              in   early development have come from studies on amphibian eggs and            
              tadpoles.  Because amphibian eggs develop outside of the mother's              
              body, it is relatively easy to culture them in the laboratory and              
              to experimentally manipulate them.  The vast majority of what we               
              have learned about the developmental biology of amphibians is                  
              directly applicable to our understanding of human development.                 
              Dr. Nicoll will examine the role of hormones in early development              
              of amphibians, and will determine how external environmental                   
              variables can influence hormone production and the rate of                     
              development.  He is focusing on the corticotropin-releasing hormone            
              system since the release of this hormone may represent a                       
              phylogenetically ancient initiator or cue in development.  He will             
              determine how this neurohormone regulates the secretion of                     
              thyroid-stimulating hormone and adrenocorticotropic hormones, two              
              pituitary hormones known to be important in the metamorphic                    
              process.  The basic information gained from these studies will                 
              contribute to our understanding of the complex events which occur              
              within the womb during human development.  Moreover, given the                 
              recent global decline in amphibian populations, the findings are               
              directly related to the conservation of biological diversity.                  
              Identification of the environmental and physiological factors which            
              influence development, and the ways in which amphibians respond to             
              these variables through careful, controlled experimentation will               
              help in the design of effective conservation strategies.
