Title       : Structure and Molecular Mechanism of the Mitochondrial Tricarboxylate Transport
               Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9219387

Award Number: 9219387
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Kaplan   (Principal Investigator current)
              David O. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9111,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The long-range objective of this project is to understand, the                 
              structure and function of the mitochondrial tricarboxylate                     
              transport protein.  This protein catalyzes a tricarboxylate-                   
              H+/dicarboxylate antiport across the mitochondrial inner membrane,             
              an action which is essential to the energy metabolism of the liver             
              parenchymal cell.  Experiments will be conducted to: 1) isolate,               
              characterize and sequence the cDNA that encodes the entire rat                 
              liver mitochondrial CTP in order to deduce the complete amino acid             
              sequence of this carrier; 2) elucidate the topography of the CTP               
              within the mitochondrial inner membrane via the use of site-                   
              specific polyclonal antibodies, in situ proteolysis, and vectorial             
              labeling; and 3) begin to identify and localize specific amino acid            
              residues which form the substrate binding site within the CTP                  
              through the use of both active-site directed and group-directed                
              probes in combination with amino acid sequence analysis of modified            
              domains.  The proposed studies are both necessary and fundamental              
              for an in depth understanding of the molecular mechanisms that                 
              biological systems utilize to transport anions across membranes and            
              thereby meet metabolic meeds.                                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The aim of this project is to understand, at the molecular and                 
              chemical levels, the structure and function of the mitochondrial               
              citrate transport protein (CTP).  This protein transports citrate              
              and malate across the mitochondrial inner membrane and is essential            
              to the energy metabolism of hepatic cells.  In order to accomplish             
              this aim we will conduct experiments to: 1) deduce the complete                
              amino acid sequence of the rat liver mitochondrial CTP; 2)                     
              determine how this transport protein is folded and orientated                  
              within the mitochondrial inner membrane; and 3) begin to identify              
              and localize specific amino acid residues which are essential to               
              the transport mechanism and which form the citrate and malate                  
              binding site(s).  These studies are fundamental to an in depth                 
              understanding of the molecular mechanisms that biological systems              
              utilize to transport molecules across membranes to meet their                  
              metabolic needs.  More generally, these investigations are expected            
              to provide a significant advance in our knowledge about how                    
              transport proteins work.
