Title       : Basin and Range Geoscientific Experiment (BARGE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1994 
File        : a9219939

Award Number: 9219939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Wernicke brian@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9219939  Wernicke         BARGE is an integrated, multi-disciplinary
              investigation of  a region of the earth's continental lithosphere where an
              abrupt  boundary exists between highly extended terrain and a tectonically 
              stable block.  The main research objective of this study is to use  the
              "natural experiment" of a large strain gradient in the  uppermost part of the
              lithosphere to understand how the Moho and  other deep discontinuities respond
              to extension, thus quantifying  how large horizontal strains of the lithosphere
              relate to vertical  motions at various levels, controlled by isostasy.  A
              number of  such regions have been identified by geological mapping in the 
              Basin and Range province.  Of these, the western margin of the  Colorado
              Plateau is the best suited example for accomplishing our  objective.  It has
              the virtues of (1) abruptness; (2) a geologic  setting that indicated a simple
              pre-extensional crustal structure;  (3)  a well-understood large-scale
              extensional kinematic history;  and perhaps most importantly, (4) a large
              inland waterway suitable  for deep geophysical studies, Lake Mead, that
              transects the  boundary in precisely the location where geological studies can 
              place bounds on crustal uplift during extension.  The Principal  Investigators
              are integrating geological and geochronologic  studies, marine multi-channel
              seismic reflection profiling,  coordinated land and marine seismic refraction
              profiling, and  gravity modeling to unravel the kinematic and dynamics of the  
                 lithosphere's response to severe extensional strain.         The main
              objective of the geologic portion of the BARGE  project are nearing completion.
               The primary objective was to  characterize the large-scale pre-extensional
              configuration of the  Gold Butte structural block in the crust through geologic
              mapping,  a petrologic and thermochronometic studies, and paleomagnetic 
              studies of the Proterozoic crystalline basement that comprises the  bulk of the
              block.  The geophysical component of BARGE was fun ded  a year later than the
              geological portion.  Due to unforseen  logistical delays, the geophysical
              experiment will be conducted in  early 1994, nearly a year after the expiration
              of the grant for the  geological portion of the research.  This project
              involves a modest  continuation of geological portion of BARGE with two
              principal  objectives:         1) Additional geologic mapping of the  Gold
              Butte and  neighboring small fault blocks, in particular the uppermost part  of
              the block where major upper crustal fault zones intersect the  high-resolution
              reflection lines; 2) Participation of the PI in the  geophysical experiment,
              including interpretation of results and  preparation of manuscripts for
              publication.  ***
