Title       : Conference on Primordial Immunity to be held in Woods Hole, Massachusetts on May
               2-5, 1993.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1993     
File        : a9219593

Award Number: 9219593
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Beck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail S. Habicht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Acad of Sciences
	      
	      New York, NY  11021    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant will support an international conference on primordial              
              immune mechanisms.  Host defense mechanisms have been evolving                 
              since the first organisms encountered one another hundreds of                  
              millions of years ago.  All multi-cellular organisms face the                  
              necessity of distinguishing between their own cells and tissues and            
              foreign cells and materials in order to deal with such problems as             
              parasites and pathogens.  Primitive species are capable of                     
              recognition and defense as are the vertebrates, and, thus, lessons             
              learned from them can provide a basis for understanding strategies             
              that vertebrate animals have adopted.  Studies of defense systems              
              of primitive animals are yielding new insights into the diverse                
              host defense functions characteristic of all living things.  In                
              addition, invertebrates offer new sources of products and potential            
              therapeutic agents.                                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              Much research has been carried out on immune function in higher                
              mammals as a model for the human immune response.  In contrast,                
              very little is know about immune-like function in the array of                 
              other species living on Earth.  Understanding how a wide range of              
              animals defend themselves can provide us with rational strategies              
              to help preserve the diversity of life.  Recent advances using                 
              techniques of molecular biology and protein chemistry are being                
              applied in identification of products used in self defense and                 
              characterization of immune-like responses in a wide array of                   
              organisms.  This international conference will bring speakers from             
              diverse fields and from around the world to share information and              
              insights into the origins and function of host defense systems.  An            
              international conference focusing on this subject at this time will            
              contribute to progress in this important area.
