Title       : Molecular Analysis of PRP Insolubilization and Wound-inducedExpression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1993     
File        : a9219712

Award Number: 9219712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Tierney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 0000,9109,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The plant cell wall is an important cellular structure that has                
              numerous biological and physical roles during plant growth.  This              
              structure is dynamic and changes as a consequence of growth,                   
              cellular differentiation and interactions with the environment.                
              The long term goals of the proposed research are to determine the              
              function of proline-rich cell wall proteins (PRPs) during plant                
              growth and development and to identify the factors responsible for             
              their controlled expresion.  PRPs are expressed in specific cell               
              types and are induced by wounding in a specific plant tissues.  In             
              addition, these proteins become cross-linked within the cell wall,             
              a process which appears to be stimulated by physical damage.                   
              However, the sequences required for the transcriptional regulation             
              of these genes or the amino acids important for their                          
              insolubilization within the cell wall are poorly understood.                   
                                                                                             
              The specific goals of this award to identify specific regions                  
              within the SbPRP1 and SbPRP2 promoters which are required for the              
              wound-inducible expression of these genes in soybean and to                    
              identify amino acids which play a critical role in the                         
              insolubilization of these proteins within the cell wall.  The use              
              of promoter/GUS in stably transformed plants will allow PIs to                 
              distinguish between sequences which regulate the expression of                 
              these genes during development and in response to physical damage.             
              In addition, Dr. Tierney will be able to investigate which cell                
              types within wounded tissue are capable of responding to the wound-            
              induced signals which ultimately result in SbPRP1 and 2 expression.            
              She will also investigate the specific amino acids which are                   
              important for the insolubilzation of these proteins within the cell            
              wall.  The use of "synthetic" PRPs will make it possible to                    
              identify amino acids capable of forming cross-links within the cell            
              wall, the types of interactions involved, and whether these amino              
              acids are important for insolubilization of these proteins in all              
              cell types.  These studies will also describe the substrates for               
              key enzymes involved in cell wall matrix formation and will serve              
              as a starting point for the identification of these proteins.
