Title       : Membrane Protein Topology in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9219974

Award Number: 9219974
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald J. Tipper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Med Sch Worceste
	      55 Lake Avenue North
	      Worcester, MA  016550002    508/856-0011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 This laboratory has developed a procedure for using beta-                   
              lactamase (beta-1a) for analysis of the topology of transmembrane              
              proteins expressed in yeast.  A C-terminal beta-1a reporter is                 
              fused to N-terminal fragments of target proteins via the P fragment            
              of Killer preprotoxin.  In fusions in which this P-beta-1a reporter            
              is lumenal, processing of P in a late Golgi compartment by the Kex2            
              protease results in secretion of beta-1a.  Analysis of Kex2-                   
              dependent beta-1a secretion, with and without an intervening signal            
              sequence S, provides positive identification of both cytoplasmic               
              (internal) and "periplasmic" (external) fusion sites.  A model for             
              the Ste2 receptor was produced that agreed with predictions.                   
              Corroborative data should result from analysis of the size, N-                 
              glycosylation pattern and protease sensitivity of the intact fusion            
              proteins expressed in a kex2 mutant, or expressed in vitro.  The               
              technique is being used to analyze the topology of Pma1, the yeast             
              plasma membrane proton ATPase, a model for the family of P-type                
              ATPase ion pumps found in all cell types.  Any ambiguities in                  
              deduced topology will be resolved using a sandwich technique, using            
              either beta-1a or P-beta-1a as the inserted reporter.  Analyses of             
              Pma1 function by site-directed mutagenesis have identified many                
              residues important to the conserved cytoplasmic kinase and                     
              phosphatase domains, but have had very limited success in                      
              identifying residues critical to proton channel function.  Our                 
              preliminary Pma1 topology identifies new candidate residues; if the            
              topology is confirmed, the phenotypes of mutants in these residues             
              should clarify the ion pump mechanism.                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              A thorough understanding of protein function (and the ability to               
              use such an understanding to engineer proteins with desired                    
              properties) depends on knowledge of three-dimensional structure.               
              Unfortunately, the very properties of integral membrane proteins               
              that allow their transmembrane segments to interact with the lipid             
              biolayer make it impossible to apply the usual approaches for                  
              purification and crystallization that are normally employed for                
              determining 3-D protein structures.  Thus, structural information              
              on membrane-spanning proteins is particularly difficult to obtain.             
              This is frustrating, because some of the most interesting proteins             
              from a functional point of view are membrane-spanning proteins                 
              (receptors, pumps, channels, etc.).  This project offers a clever              
              approach to the dilemma, which involves topological analysis of                
              membrane proteins through genetic engineering.  The idea is to                 
              construct chimeric mutants of the membrane protein of interest in              
              which the introduced piece has a known proteolytic cleavage site               
              that only gets cleaved if it is facing the lumen of the Golgi.  By             
              determining which constructs undergo cleavage, one can deduce the              
              locations of the transmembrane regions of the protein, and from                
              that deduce 3-D structure.  Although the project focuses on a                  
              specific transmembrane proton pump, the approach can be generalized            
              to a wide variety of biologically important proteins.  Many                    
              downstream biotechnological applications of both the approach and              
              the structural information obtained can easily be envisioned.
