Title       : RNA Processing in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9219408

Award Number: 9219408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charles D. Liarakos                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie W. Ruby   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Mexico Sch of Med
	      Bandelier West, Room 223
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              The introns of eukaryotic precursor messenger RNAs (pre-mRNAs) are             
              removed by splicing.  The long-term goal of this proposal is to                
              understand how one factor, the U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein              
              (snRNP), functions in splicing in the yeast Saccharomyces                      
              cerevisiae. The U1 snRNP has a critical, hierarchic role in intron             
              recognition.  It is the first snRNP to bind to the pre-mRNA.  This             
              binding depends not only on the 5' splice site, but also on the                
              branchpoint region of the intron.  This suggests that these two                
              regions of the intron are juxtaposed at this step.  This hypothesis            
              will be tested by in vitro RNAse protection assays.  Two components            
              of the U1 snRNP, its small nuclear RNA (snRNA) and proteins will be            
              studied.  The function of the SNP1 protein will be investigated;               
              its gene will be mutated in vitro and the effects of these                     
              mutations will be assayed in vivo and in vitro.  The results of the            
              in vitro assays will determine if, when and how the SNP| protein               
              functions in splicing.  The U1 snRNA will be investigated with an              
              in vitro reconstitution assay that will be developed.  Additional              
              factors for U1 snRNP function will be identified genetically and               
              analyzed.  These studies aim to understand fundamental mechanisms              
              in splice site recognition.  These mechanisms are important, for               
              example, for the replication of several viruses, including the                 
              human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
