Title       : Characterization of the Type One Protein Phosphatases of Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1995     
File        : a9219075

Award Number: 9219075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Walker WalkerJ@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9219075  Walker    There are several different types of protein phosphatases in 
              eukaryotic cells.  One class, the type one protein phosphatases  (PP1) are
              thought to be involved in the control of the cell cycle,  protein synthesis,
              membrane functions, and probably many other  biochemical activities.  In most
              multicellular organisms there are  several different isoforms of PP1.  This
              raises several intriguing  questions about the expression, distribution,
              function, and  regulation of these genes and their products.  This proposal 
              focuses on a multigene family encoding PP1 in Arabidopsis thaliana.   The goal
              of this research is to determine the pattern of expression  and relative
              abundance of the PP1 genes and proteins, and analyze  the regulatory subunits
              associated with the different PP1 isoforms.   Analysis of the PP1 genes of
              higher plants will enhance our  understanding of these important regulatory
              enzymes in a broader  biological context.  %%%  Control of cellular growth and
              differentiation is a complex process  that requires the integration of many
              different regulatory  circuits.  A common mechanism by which cellular processes
              are  regulated is through protein phosphorylation and dephosphorylation.   This
              reversible modification can cause activation, inactivation, or  even a subtle
              modulation of biochemical function.  Although protein  kinases have been
              studied extensively, it is evident that protein  phosphatases are equally
              important in controlling the biochemical  circuitry that governs a cell's
              function.  Analysis of the protein  phosphatase genes of higher plants will
              enhance our understanding  of these important regulatory enzymes in a broader
              biological  context.  ***
