Title       : Developmental Regulation of T Cell Differentiation and Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1993      
File        : a9219186

Award Number: 9219186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca D. Adkins radkins@mednet.med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9111,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The objective of the proposed studies is to understand how T cell              
              differentiation and function are regulated during development.  Two            
              different, but complementary approaches will be taken to                       
              investigate this issue thoroughly.  First, the phenotypic and                  
              functional properties of peripheral T cells arising in vivo from               
              defined populations of fetal or adult T cell precursors will be                
              compared.  Chimeric animals will be created in which                           
              differentiation occurs (a) in the adult thymus after intrathymic               
              injection of precursor cells or (b) in the intact fetal thymus                 
              following transplantation under the host kidney capsules.  These               
              experiments will reveal, for the first time, whether the                       
              acquisition of immunocompetence is controlled by developmental                 
              changes in the T cell precursor population. The second approach                
              will be to investigate the mechanisms underlying functional                    
              differences between neonatal and adult T cells.  The roles of                  
              cytokines, cell types, and lymphokine gene expression in the                   
              differential lymphokine secretion patterns of neonatal and adult T             
              cells will be examined.  This will provide novel information on the            
              biochemical and molecular events mediating neonatal                            
              immunoincompetence vs adult immunocompetence.  Taken together,                 
              these studies will provide valuable new insights into the                      
              development of the T cell lineage.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Of central importance to understanding immunity is understanding               
              how the ability to mount an immune response (immunocompetence)                 
              arises and is maintained during development.  There is compelling              
              evidence that developmental changes in the cells that give rise to             
              the array of adult T-lymphocytes are important.  At present, there             
              is no clear understanding of the mechanisms controlling T-cell                 
              developmental changes.  The goals of this project are to determine             
              whether specific developmental changes in T-cell precursor                     
              populations control the acquisition of immunocompetence and to                 
              study the molecular and biochemical events responsible for                     
              functional differences between neonatal T cells which are not                  
              immunocompetent and adult T cells which are.  This research should             
              contribute important new information about the development of the              
              immune system.
