Title       : Classification of Amenable C*-Algebras and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9970840

Award Number: 9970840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guihua Gong ggong@goliath.cnnet.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Liangqing Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Gong/Li

Simple C*-algebras are basic building blocks in the theory
              of C*-algebras. The principal investigators, Guihua Gong and Liangqing Li,
              propose to continue their research on the classification of simple, separable,
              amenable C*-algebras.  They also plan to apply the  classification  results and
              the techniques developed in the classification project to study group actions
              on C*-algebras and differential topology (e.g.  the Novikov conjecture on the
              homotopy invariance of higher signature). 

The passage from a finite to an
              infinite number of degrees of freedom in quantum physics led to the
              mathematical theory of certain infinite dimensional algebras, called
              C*-algebras. A C*-algebra is an algebraic system, similar to that of   numbers,
              with its operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. But
              unlike the multiplication for numbers, the multiplication in a C*-algebra is
              not commutative ---- that is, in general, X times Y  is not as same as Y times
              X.  This important feature  corresponds to Heisenberg uncertainty principle in
              Quantum Mechanics. The simple C*-algebras are those that cannot be broken into
              smaller pieces, and in some sense all C*-algebras are built out of them. The
              investigators propose to work on a complete enumeration (or classification) of
              simple amenable C*-algebras. They expect  that progress on the proposed
              research will result in important contributions to several mathematical fields
              including operator algebras, differential topology, and also to the
              understanding of the infinite dimensional world of quantum physics. 

