Title       : Erodic Properties for 'Almost Hyperbolic' Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1999   
File        : a9970646

Award Number: 9970646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68807              (Estimated)
Investigator: Huyi Hu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yakov B. Pesin pesin@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Hu

This proposed research addresses ergodic properties of "almost
              hyperbolic" dynamical systems.
Here "almost hyperbolic" systems means a smooth
              dynamical systems that is hyperbolic everywhere except for a finite set of
              points.  These systems include "almost Anosov" diffeomorphisms, "almost
              hyperbolic" invariant sets, piecewise expanding maps on the unit interval with
              indifferent fixed points, and invariant sets of expanding maps with indifferent
              fixed points.  "Almost hyperbolic" systems lie on the boundary of the set of
              uniformly hyperbolic systems in the space of smooth dynamical systems.  By the
              results obtained from "almost Anosov" diffeomorphisms on the surface, the
              ergodic properties of such systems may be quite different from that of
              uniformly hyperbolic systems, though the topological properties are similar.  
              For example, these systems may or may not admit SRB measures, and even when
              they do, correlation decay may change from exponential to polynomial.
This
              project stresses existence and properties of SRB measures, rate of decay of
              correlations, and stochastic stability under small perturbations for general
              "almost hyperbolic" systems.

Uniformly hyperbolic systems are the main
              research subjects in smooth dynamical systems since late 60's.  These systems
              display many types of complex dynamic behavior, and whose behavoir are often
              regarded as chaotic.  Ergodic theory concerns understanding the long-term
              behavior of systems.  Now ergodic properties for uniformly hyperbolic systems
              are understood very well, and people are interested in such properties for
              nonuniformly hyperbolic systems.  "Almost hyperbolic" means that hyperbolic
              conditions fail at a finite set of points.  These systems lie on the boundary
              of the set of uniformly hyperbolic systems, and are the simplest nonuniformly
              hyperbolic systems.  Results obtained earlier for some particular systems,
              "almost Anosov" systems in the two-dimensional torus, show that such systems
              may-and sometimes do-exhibit totally different long term behavior.  In this
              project we will study ergodic properties of more general "almost hyperbolic"
              systems.  We are particular interested in orbit distrubitions, rate of mixing,
              and stochastic stability under small perturbation for such systems.

 
              





