Title       : Instabilities in fluid motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9970977

Award Number: 9970977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Friedlander susan@math.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970977
Friedlander

Remarkably little is known about the detailed structure
              of the stability 
spectrum of the Euler equations that govern the motion of an
              inviscid 
fluid. This is the case even though it is a classical problem and
              one 
fundamental to an understanding of turbulent flow. Friedlander will
              
continue to exploit the concept of a "fluid Lyapunov exponent" which
              
provides an effective means for detecting high frequency instabilities in
              
the essential part of the spectrum. Instabilities may also arise in the
              
discrete spectrum and in this situation no general approach is, at present,
              
possible. Analysis of the eigenvalue problem will be given for a specific
              
2-dimensional flow with a "cat's eye" type structure which appears to
              
typify an interesting class of flows containing both oscillatory regions and
              
hyperbolic stagnation points. Friedlander also proposes to extend the range
              
of applicability of a result of Friedlander et al that proves under certain
              
conditions that linear instability in a PDE implies nonlinear instability.
              
Friedlander et al recently proved that in two dimensions any steady flow
              
that is sufficiently "close" to a nondegenerate unstable flow is also
              
unstable. The harder problem of robustness of instability for 3-
dimensional
              flows will now be investigated. A novel type of flow on a 
torus with nonzero
              flux will be investigated using techniques from free 
boundary
              problems.

The issue of stability of liquids or gases presents an important
              example of 
a physical question that may be addressed through sophisticated
              
mathematical techniques. The answers have direct physical interpretations:
              
stable flows are robust under inevitable disturbances in the environment
              
while unstable flows break up rapidly. The question of stability or
              
instability of a fluid flow is fundamental to studies of physical phenomena
              
including those in the oceans and the atmosphere. In the view of many
              
scientists, waves and instabilities lie at the heart of our attempts to use
              
mathematical models for long term weather prediction and to better
              
understand global climate change. However there are important open
              
questions connected with the fundamental equations that underlie all 
models
              for fluid behavior. This proposal seeks the answers to some of 
these
              questions related to fluid instabilities.

