Title       : Meromorphic Solutions of Differential Equations and Algebro-Geometric
               Differential Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9970299

Award Number: 9970299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38257              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudi Weikard rudi@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A recent discovery by F. Gesztesy and the PI reveals a relationship
between the
              KdV equation and the condition that the associated ordinary
linear
              differential equations have only meromorphic solutions. The same
relationship
              exists also for the AKNS system. Both, the KdV equation and
the AKNS system,
              are completely integrable Hamiltonian systems. It is
anticipated that the
              relationship pertains to more general integrable
systems and the major object
              of the project is to establish this. An
important role in this respect is
              played by so called algebro-geometric
solutions of the integrable system under
              consideration which assume the
role of potentials of the associated linear
              equations. The PI plans an
expansion of abelian function theory to include
              functions on singular
algebraic curves since this is required for a complete
              characterization
of algebro-geometric potentials. Algebro-geometric potentials
              associated
with the KdV equation give also the first tractable examples
              of
quasi-periodic, non-selfadjoint differential operators. It is planned
              to
investigate such operators and their spectrum and to develop an
              inverse
spectral theory for them.

Integrable systems and, in particular,
              the KdV equation play an
important role in mathematical physics were they are
              used as models for
various phenomena, e.g., in mechanics, hydrodynamics, and
              nonlinear
optics. Even for systems which are not integrable it is often
              fruitful
to consider them as perturbations of integrable systems.
              Likewise,
inverse spectral theory is a central part of applied mathematics
              since
it is fundamental in areas ranging from quantum theory to
              computer
tomography. Therefore this line of research has enjoyed an
              enormous
amount of attention in the past and will so in the future. This
              project
is part of that endeavor.

