Title       : Planar Algebras and the Structure of Subfactors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a9970511

Award Number: 9970511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447615             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaughan F. Jones vfr@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Jones

  The main aim of this project is to explore the rich
              structure of planar algebras and their relations with von Neumann algebras.
              Planar algebras are best defined as algebras over the planar operad-the operad
              consisting of isotopy classes of planar tangles which are collections of
              disjoint discs inside a large disc connected up by smooth curves called
              strings. It is a remarkable theorem of Popa and myself that, together with
              suitable positivity conditions, a planar algebra is equivalent to a subfactor
              of finite index of a Murray-von Neumann type II_1 factor on a separable Hilbert
              space. The proof has analytic, algebraic and topological aspects and needs to
              be better understood but it is the wealth of examples and potential new
              examples that is the current reason for excitement. The quanum invariants of
              links and three manifolds admit a unified treatment as does the duality which
              allows one to locate critical points in various statistical mechanical models
              starting with the Ising model. The van Kampen diagrams of the theory of
              finitely generated come naturally from planar algebra considerations and
              Connes' cyclic category can be defined very simply as certain annular tangles.
              Bisch and myself discovered an entirely new kind of planar algebra called the
              Fuss-Catalan algebra by exploiting the connection with subfactors. This algebra
              has been used to construct a "new" solvable model in statistical mechanics. New
              algebras using variations of this method are just around the corner.

  The
              aim of this research project is to develop and exploit connections between
              various branches of science related to objects called "planar algebras". A
              planar algebra is a mathematical structure based on diagrams reminiscent of
              electronic circuits. There are inputs and outputs all connected with a system
              of wires that are not allowed to cross and so could be engraved on a surface. 
              Models of statistical mechanics in two dimensions give examples of planar
              algebras and vice versa. Knots in three dimensional space can be projected onto
              the plane and the resulting picture consists of crossings - the inputs-tied
              together by non crossing strings. One obtains as output the theory of
              polynomial invariants of knots which have been used by molecular biologists in
              the study of DNA molecules. Indeed the planar diagrams resemble some of the
              models used to study DNA recombination. It is quite extraordinary that these
              planar algebras are, under the assumption of what physicists call "reflection
              positivity", equivalent to a theory of certain von Neumann algebras which
              themselves are collections of operators in Hilbert space devised by von Neumann
              to be used in quantum mechanics.

