Title       : Quasiregular Mappings and Analysis in Nonsmooth Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a9970427

Award Number: 9970427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $456358             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juha M. Heinonen juha@math.lsa.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9970427
ABSTRACT

This proposal has three parts.  In Part I, Heinonen
              outlines a program for
a study of geometric branched covers between
              generalized manifolds. This
is a joint project with Seppo Rickman. The
              motivation to build such a
theory comes from the attempts to understand what
              metric spaces admit
(possibly branched) Lipschitz or quasisymmetric
              parametrizations in
Euclidean space. In Part II, Heinonen explains how
              branched covers and the
recent advances in analysis on metric spaces could be
              used to approach the
 parametrization problem. In different terminology,
              Heinonen proposes to
characterize locally Euclidean metric gauge by using the
              theory of
quasiregular maps. This is a joint project with Dennis Sullivan. In
              Part
III, Heinonen discusses the problem of the branch set of a
              quasiregular
map. Analytic conditions are searched that would imply a
              given
quasiregular map is a local homeomorphism. This problem is relevant
              to
Part II, and to problems in nonlinear elasticity where deformation
              of
bodies are investigated.  Part III is a joint project with
              Tero
Kilpel"ainen. 

The proposal continues the PI's earlier investigations,
              where discrete
methods in analysis and geometry are being searched that would
              serve in
spaces that are not smooth in the classical sense.  Here the
              word
``analysis'' means the branch of mathematics that developed out of
              the
Calculus; it is the study of continuous changes in infinitesimal
              data,
from which one wants to predict global conclusions.  ``Geometry'' is
              the
study of space, its many forms and varieties, in many possible
              dimensions.
Discrete methods mean the opposite to continuous, or calculus
              methods, and
involve more finite, ``counting'' ideas, such as those done by a
              computer,
albeit in this work still of analytic and geometric flavor. The
              concept of
quasiconformality enters the discussion in the most subtle way:  it
              allows
the space and its formation to be singular (for instance, with kinks or
              roughness) at times and in places, but not everywhere and not all the time.
              There is a certain control in the distortion, which perhaps looked artificial
              to the mathematicians 40 years ago when the first research in the field was
              conducted. Now quasiconformality is a ubiquitous phenomenon in mathematics. 
              From the work of Dennis Sullivan in the late seventies we know that every
              space
that locally looks like a flat space of Euclid has a
              quasiconformal
structure albeit not a smooth structure in general; and this is
              true in
every dimension but four. Nevertheless, also in dimension four, there
              are
conjecturally an infinity of spaces where one cannot do ordinary,
              smooth
analysis, or calculus, but where one can do quasiconformal,
              nonsmooth
analysis. The proposal addresses both the need to have a
              better
understanding of this new calculus in nonsmooth spaces and methods how
              to
recognize spaces that are quasiconformally Euclidean. Although the
              main
questions in the proposal are motivated by a basic quest for
              understanding
the structure of space, the consequent study of singularities
              in
transformations has had applications to material sciences, where one
              wants
to know when a deformed body collapses onto itself under a
              strain.





