Title       : Geometric Function Theory and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9970398

Award Number: 9970398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steffen R. Rohde rohde@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970398
Principal Investigator: Steffen R. Rohde

Abstract:
              Rohde will investigate distortion properties of conformal and quasiconformal
              mappings, using methods from geometric function theory as well as from
              dynamical systems. Quasiconformal mappings are weakly differentiable
              homeomorphisms that are "almost conformal," in the sense that they distort
              angles by at most a bounded factor. These maps generalize conformal mappings
              and arise naturally in geometry, geometric function theory, complex dynamics,
              and PDE. Two specific problems Rohde will investigate are to estimate the
              derivative of a conformal map of a disk that admits a  quasiconformal extension
              to the complex plane and to find bounds for the Hausdorff dimension of
              quasiconformal images of circles (so-called quasicircles). Both questions are
              closely related to Brennan's conjecture concerning the degree of integrability
              of the derivative of a conformal mapping of the unit disk. Rohde will also
              study geometric properties such as porosity or wiggliness of sets in euclidean
              space, together with estimates for their Hausdorff dimension. Such sets appear
              naturally both in complex dynamics and in geometric function
              theory.

Conformal mappings have applications in many areas, both within
              mathematics and outside it. These include control theory, heat conduction,
              fluid dynamics, and complex  dynamics, to name just a few. One standard use of
              coformal mapping is to change coordinates from one region to a simpler region,
              say to a disk, where a problem can be viewed from a new perspective, hopefully
              one in which the solution to the original problem becomes more readily
              apparent. A famous instance were this approach paid huge dividends occurred in
              aerodynamics, where conformal mappings were instrumental in coming up with the
              original design profiles for airfoils. From the standpoint of conformal
              mapping, regions with smooth boundaries have been well understood for some
              time. However, the appearance of fractals in many branches of science led to
              the natural problem of investigating the conformal mapping properties of
              regions bounded by highly nonsmooth, fractal-type curves. The core objectives
              of Rohde's research are, on the one hand, to obtain a deeper understanding of
              fractal curves by means of conformal mappings, and conversely, to study some
              problems about conformal mappings by analyzing  the geometry of regions with
              fractal boundaries

