Title       : Scattering Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9970614

Award Number: 9970614
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej R. Zworski zworski@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9970614

The main interest of the PI is the study of resonances and of the
              wave 
equation. Resonances which are described by complex numbers constitute
              
a replacement of eigenvalues for problems on noncompact domains and they
              
appear naturally in many branches of mathematics and physics. The real part
              
of a resonance describes the energy (or frequency) of a state and the
              
imaginary part its rate of decay. This constitutes a more realistic model
              
than an eigenvalue which provides energy only and assumes eternal existence
              
of a state. A new wealth of phenomena appears and our understanding is still
              
rather fragmentary. Linear and non-linear wave equations describe many
              
physical phenomena often closely related to resonances. In the contexts 
of
              propagation, spectral and scattering theories the PI will investigate 
them
              further. The specific directions include: understanding of the dynamical
              definition 
of resonances and their appearance in the long time behaviour of
              solutions 
of the wave and Schroedinger equations, obtaining lower bounds on
              
the number of resonances in terms of dynamical quantities, developing 
the
              theory of the FBI transformation on non-compact manifolds with  
applications
              to resonances and to the study of propagation for Schroedinger 
equation in
              mind, estimates of resonances at low energies, understanding of 
"quantum
              chaos" in scattering theory.

For a broad range of phenomena, a physical
              state can be described by two
parameters: its rest energy and its rate of
              decay. This information is 
elegantly encoded in a complex number, whose real
              part is the energy and 
the imaginary part, the rate of decay. This
              description of a state, called 
a resonance, appears naturally in mathematics,
              physics and chemistry: from 
the Riemann zeta function to experimental
              scattering data.

The PI studies general principles in the distribution of
              resonances,
their relation to wave propagation, and their behaviour in various
              specific
situations. He is also interested in "quantum chaos", the study of
              which 
raises questions in many areas: from number theory to mezoscopic
              systems 
of physics. The main issues are universal relations between the
              classical 
and quantum views of the world -- one of the yet unresolved central
              themes 
of the 20th century.

