Title       : Research Workshop: HIV/AIDS in Africa: Reviewing the Past, Understanding the
               Present & Charting the Future (to be held in Champaign, IL, July, 1999)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9970196

Award Number: 9970196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezekiel Kalipeni kalipeni@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph R. Oppong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan L. Craddock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the failure of current prevention programs to stem the tide of AIDS in
              Africa, there is a compelling case for devising more complex and integrated
              inter-disciplinary paradigms to guide AIDS prevention efforts in Africa. It is
              within this context and the on-going debates on how best to deal with the
              spread of HIV/AIDS in Africa that this workshop is organized. The objective is
              to examine the past, understand the present, and chart the future of the AIDS
              pandemic in Africa. A small group of researchers intimately familiar with the
              topic of AIDS/HIV in Africa will be involved in the workshop. The group will
              exchange information about contemporary, on-going research and will identify
              future research essential to knowledge advancement in dealing with the AIDS
              pandemic. The workshop will formulate a research agenda, devise a dissemination
              plan to the broader community of concerned academics, and, eventually write a
              state-of-the-art grant proposal leading to new and better research. This
              activity is significant in that it will bring together streams of analysis,
              research and debate that remain largely separated from each other because of a
              reluctance to cross disciplinary boundaries.  The University of Illinois Press
              will publish proceedings of the workshop in book format.
