Title       : Methods of Hankel and Toeplitz Operators in Noncommutative Function Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9970561

Award Number: 9970561
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85798              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir V. Peller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970561
Principal Investigator: Vladimir V. Peller

Abstract:
              V.V. Peller is going to continue to work on Hankel and Toeplitz operators and 
              their applications in different fields of mathematics: control theory,
              prediction theory, approximation theory. It has become clear that it is
              especially important in applications to study Hankel and Toeplitz operators
              with matrix-valued symbols. The development of the theory of Hankel and
              Toeplitz operators with matrix-valued symbols depends on further development of
              noncommutative function theory (the theory of matrix-valued or operator-valued
              functions). On the other hand, many problems arising in noncommutative function
              theory can be solved with the help of Hankel and Toeplitz operators having
              matrix-valued symbols. In particular, V.V. Peller is going to study the
              following topics: spectral characterizations of completely regular vectorial
              stationary processes; characterization of unitary-valued functions of vanishing
              mean oscillation (and other classes) in terms of Wiener-Hopf factorizations; 
              unitary interpolants of continuous matrix functions as well as of matrix
              functions in other function classes; the relationship between Wiener-Hopf
              factorizations and thematic factorizations; similarity to a unitary operator;
              estimates of resolvents; and the existence of nontrivial invariant subspaces
              for Toeplitz operators with matrix-valued symbols.

Hankel and Toeplitz
              operators are certain special classes of operators which have proved to be very
              helpful in many fields of mathematics and for applications in control theory
              and electrical engineering. V.V. Peller is going to continue his research on
              applications of these interesting operators to the theory of functions whose
              values are matrices rather than real or complex numbers. The theory of such
              functions is considerably more delicate than classical function theory because
              the values of such functions do not have to commute; i.e., the order of the
              factors in a product cannot be changed without risk of changing the value of
              the product. On the other hand, such matrix-valued functions are extremely
              important in applications. For example, they appear in a natural way in systems
              theory when one must deal with multiple inputs and multiple outputs. V.V.
              Peller is going to study several important problems that involve matrix-valued
              functions (with technical names such as factorization problems, approximation
              problems, interpolation problems, etc.). The solution of these problems would
              lead in turn to new results on Hankel and Toeplitz operators as well as to
              numerous new concrete applications.

