Title       : Universality and Scaling in Random Matrix Models, Random Polynomials, and
               Quantum Mechanics and Statistical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9970625

Award Number: 9970625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73311              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pavel M. Bleher   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:DMS-9970625
Principal Investigator: Pavel M. Bleher

Abstract:
              Bleher's project focuses on basic problems in the theory of random matrices and
              random polynomials, and on related problems in the theory of quantum chaos and
              statistical mechanics. The unifying theme of these problems is a number of
              different conjectures about universality. The major topics of investigation
              include: (i) universality of the double scaling limit in random matrix models
              near critical and multicritical points, its relation to integrable hierarchies
              and Painleve transcendents, and applications of random matrix models; (ii)
              universality and scaling for random sections of powers of positive line
              bundles, especially SU(m+1)-polynomials and universality of eigenstates
              statistics in the theory of  quantum chaos; (iii) almost periodicity of the
              spectral function  for integrable systems in quantum mechanics, trace formulae,
              and probability distribution of the error function; (iv) the Thouless effect
              and superpolynomial scaling in classical  spin systems with long-range
              interaction.

The concept of scaling and universality is a fundamental
              principle in different theories of modern mathematics and physics, from
              probability theory to the physical theory of quantum chaos, and from
              mathematical analysis to the theory of phase transitions and critical phenomena
              in statistical physics. In rough terms, the concept of universality states that
              many mathematical and physical phenomena display remarkable universal features
              on the scale of very small or very large distances. The major goal of the
              current project is to consolidate the different concepts of universality that
              arise in various contexts and, in particular, to investigate scaling and
              universality in mathematical theories of random matrices and random polynomials
              with a view toward applications to the theory of quantum chaos and to
              statistical physics. This award is jointly funded by the Analysis Program in
              the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Mathematical Physics Program in
              the Division of Physics.

