Title       : F-Theory and G-bundles over Elliptic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2001       
File        : a9970437

Award Number: 9970437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92679              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Friedman rf@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-9970437

Principal Investigator: Robert D.
              Friedman

Abstract:
This project involves the study of holomorphic G-bundles
              over an elliptic curve, where G is a reductive algebraic group, together with
              various generalizations. If G is the complexification of a compact group K, a
              closely related question is the classification of two commuting elements in K
              up to simultaneous conjugation. In joint work with J. Morgan and E. Witten,
              Friedman has classified holomorphic G-bundles over an elliptic curve. The
              relative situation for G-bundles over an elliptic fibration has also been
              studied. The next stage of the project is to work out the relation between
              these constructions, in the case where G is one of the exceptional groups E6,
              E7, E8, and corresponding families of K3 or del Pezzo surfaces. In terms of
              families of commuting elements in compact Lie groups, in joint work with A.
              Borel and J. Morgan, Friedman has given normal forms for commuting pairs and
              triples, and the method extends in principle to handle N mutually commuting
              elements.  

Compact Lie groups are the symmetry groups of nature, and the
              possible such groups have been classified and understood for one hundred years.
              Aside from four infinite series of such groups, there are also a small number
              of exceptional groups. Recently, such groups have become important in particle
              physics, because the possible subatomic particles and their interactions seem
              to be described by such symmetry groups. In particular string theory, which is
              an attempt to unify quantum mechanics with gravity, has suggested that the
              universe is 10-dimensional and that the symmetry group involved is one of the
              exceptional groups. Moreover, in some versions of string theory, the missing 6
              dimensions of the universe are accounted for by a so-called elliptic fibration.
              Thus, the project attempts to study a part of mathematics which is relevant to
              string theory as well as being an interesting piece of mathematics in its own
              right.  

