Title       : Classification Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1999      
File        : a9970403

Award Number: 9970403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Hjorth greg@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

9970403
Hjorth
     Since many mathematical objects arise as the quotients
              of some
concrete space by an equivalence relation, attempts to classify
              such
objects leads naturally to the study of equivalence relations on
              Polish
spaces and the reducibility order between these equivalence relations. 
              In
particular, Hjorth's project addresses structural issues about the
              Borel
equivalence relations in which every equivalence class is countable,
              and
orbit equivalence relations on Polish spaces arising from the
              continuous
actions of Polish groups somewhat more complicated than the
              infinite
symmetric group.  In the first case, there is a poverty of techniques
              for
distinguishing the Borel cardinalities of the quotient spaces, and in
              the
second, he would hope to extend the methods from model theory that
              have
been so wildly successful in the case of the infinite symmetric group.
 
                 In a very rough sense, one might try to divide mathematics into the
part
              that seeks to determine some quantity or equation and the part that
seeks
              simply to understand some abstract class of mathematical objects.
In the
              former part one has many examples, ranging from areas of applied
mathematics
              through to the recent proof of (the inequality comprising)
``Fermat's last
              theorem.''  In the second part one has certain areas in
abstract analysis (for
              instance, the classification of commutative C-star
algebras), or even certain
              parts of topology (the classification of two-
dimensional manifolds), or
              algebra (for instance, perhaps, the Hecke
algebras, which played such an
              important part in Wiles's proof), and the
very abstract kinds of objects that
              can appear there.  Here the intention
is that simply understanding these
              objects can lead to unforseeable advances.
Hjorth's project concerns this
              second kind of mathematics, and it might be
loosely described as concerned
              with which kinds of objects from one
mathematical specialty can in principle
              be reduced to which other kinds of
objects from other subspecialties.
***

