Title       : Some Studies On Non-Uniformly Hyperbolic Attractors and the N-Body Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9970673

Award Number: 9970673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lai-Sang Young   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Paragraph one:

This research proposal consists of two distinct research
              projects. One is on the N-body problem and the other is on the dynamics of
              non-
uniformly hyperbolic attractors. In the first project we propose to
              complete our preliminary analysis on the Hill's region to get a detailed
              
description of the integral manifold of the spatial 4-body problem. We
              further propose to study the topological structure of the integral manifold
              
"after regularization of binary collisions In the second project, we propose
              to study a  class of strongly dissipative non-uniformly hyperbolic
              "
attractors that can be regarded as a natural extension of the Axiom A
              solenoid.
This new class includes the Henon attractor and dissipative twist
              maps as special cases. Our program of study includes derivative growth of
              
"maps, global geometry of the attractor, symbolic dynamics, topological
              entropy and ergodic theory in the direction of SRB measure and "
correlation
              decay. 

Paragraph two:

This research proposal consists of two distinct
              research projects. 
One is on the
N-body problem and the other is on the
              dynamics of a class of non-uniformly hyperbolic attractors. The N-body problem
              is a mathematical 
model that has been used in the long history of celestial
              mechanics to study the motion of  celestial bodies. It possesses ten
              conservation 
laws which impose restrictions on the possible physical
              configurations formed by the celestial bodies involved and the possible
              orientations of 
these configurations in three-dimensional physical space. Our
              first project is a study on these restrictions. This is a long standing
              
mathematical problem with potential applications on the orbit design of
              artificial satellite. The aim of our second project is to understand the
              
geometric structure of the coherent part of a class of chaotic dynamical
              systems. This class of dynamical systems  are arisen from the study 
of
              turbulence and fluid mechanics. Chaotic phenomenon involved in these systems
              are not as well understood as that of the so call "uniformly 
hyperbolic"
              systems. We intend to provide a mathematical analysis that would help to better
              understand  chaotic phenomenon involved in 
these mathematical models and
              their corresponding physical processes

