Title       : Moduli Problems in Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a9970926

Award Number: 9970926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun Li jli@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Jun Li
Stanford University
DMS 9970926

Professor Li will
              investigate problems concerning moduli spaces in algebraic geometry arising
              from theoretical physics.  The project involves the mathematical foundation of
              the notion of virtual topological numbers as used in mathematical physics.  The
              work will follow up recent progress on the virtual enumeration of curves in
              projective manifolds.  In related work, Prof. Li will study Gromov-Witten
              invariants via degeneration. Methods similar to these should yeild
              computational tools to help study mirror symmetries.  Finally Prof. Li will
              also try to generalize Gromov-Witten  invariants to varieties over fields of
              positive characteristic. 

This project is in the important mathematical
              field known as Algebraic Geometry.  This modern view of curves and surfaces,
              generalizes these important concrete geometric objects into very abstract
              algebraic constructs.  The counter-intuitive notion that things become easier
              to deal with when they become more abstract and complicated has been part of
              mathematics for centuries.  In the 20-th century, this idea led to the
              development of algebraic geometry and has produced important new results in
              geometry, number theory, and analysis.  Our increased understanding of the
              tools of algebraic geometry has had practical application in areas from
              security and communication to robotics and manufacturing.  In recent years,
              theoretical physicists and mathematicians realized that the physicists had been
              developing their own form of algebraic geometry for several years.  Professor
              Li's project is to help reconcile the two views and to make the techniques and
              discoveries of both sides available to the other.

