Title       : Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering From
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9970072

Award Number: 9970072
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Griffith Freeman gfreeman@surromed.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The project of Professor R. Griffith Freeman at Truman State University,
              supported by Analytical and Surface Chemistry,  has two primary goals.  The
              first goal is preparation of a new type of surface for surface-enhanced Raman
              scattering (SERS) experiment.  This surface consists of alkanethiolate-coated
              metal nanoparticles, where the metal is either gold or silver.  The use of
              coated nanoparticles allows SERS studies for chemical samples that do not
              exhibit an attraction for the bare metal, but do have an attraction for the
              organic coating.    The second goal is careful use of SERS to study
              interactions occurring at the metal thiolate interface.  The coated
              nanoparticles are analogs of self-assembled monolayers on flat metal surfaces
              and the conclusions drawn  extend to such systems studied in other
              laboratories.  The work is supported as a Research at Undergraduate
              Institutions (RUI) project.

Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is
              used to obtain structural information about molecules that cannot be studied
              using the more typical infrared spectroscopy.  SERS requires that the sample be
              in close physical contact with gold or silver particles of very small size. 
              Professor Freeman and his undergraduate student researchers will coat the small
              silver and gold particles with an organic coating so that more molecules will
              be attracted to the metal surface, and therefore SERS spectra can be recorded
              for these additional molecules.


