Title       : Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics in Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9970590

Award Number: 9970590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $662500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Harris harris@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Charles B. Harris, Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley,
              is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division to examine by femstosecond UV-pump / IR-probe
              methods the dynamics and the initial steps in an otherwise complex series of
              events for a class of one and two electron transition metal oxidative addition
              reactions involving C-H and Si-H bond activation and halogen atom abstraction.
              Quantum chemical calculation will be used to assist in the characterization of
              observed reaction intermediates. The dynamics of some critical elementary
              reactions, namely aromatic ring slippage, metal-mediated ligand isomerization,
              electronic state partitioning and solvent caging will be investigated in
              detail. The roles of solvent molecules and how they modulate these elementary
              reactions will be studied in detail. The experimental results will be combined
              with molecular dynamics simulations on model systems to obtain a microscopic
              picture of the elementary steps in ultrafast times. Experimental results will
              lead to tests and improvements of computational tools.

Reaction dynamics
              underlying complex chemical reactions will be probed. Experimental observations
              will be coupled to theoretical methodologies to grasp bond breaking and bond
              making that represent the very essence of chemical reactions. The research will
              also lead to a better understanding of catalysis. Students and postdoctoral
              associates will become first-rate scientists from their association with both
              experimental and theoretical enterprises.


