Title       : Covering Surfaces and Painleve Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a9970281

Award Number: 9970281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77682              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aimo Hinkkanen aimo@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970281
Principal Investigator: Aimo Hinkkanen	

Abstract: This
              project has two main objectives. The first is to develop a more general and
              flexible form of the Ahlfors theory of covering surfaces, one that applies to
              variable domains. This will be done with particular emphasis on applications to
              complex dynamics and shared-value problems. The idea of the Ahlfors theory is
              to find a modified form of the Riemann-Hurwitz formula for a map which is not a
              proper covering map onto its image, using the length of the relative boundary.
              Unfortunately, the conclusions of this theory as presently formulated are only
              valid for fixed base domains. Hinkkanen plans to consider domains that are
              variable in a suitable sense, incorporating assumptions that arise from
              specific applications. The project's second objective deals with solutions to
              the Painleve differential equations. The aim is to create new methods to
              establish, in a proper setting, the single-valuedness of such solutions and to
              investigate their growth.

Complex analysis, which is the general area of
              mathematics related to this proposal, provides technical and conceptual
              foundations for several fields of applications of mathematics, including many
              in physics and engineering. Specific examples include electrical engineering,
              and the two-dimensional study of the motion of fluids and gases (to which many
              three-dimensional problems reduce, due to symmetries). Complex dynamics
              contains, as a very special case, the study of the dynamical behavior modeled
              by quadratic polynomials, which both directly and via approximation surface as 
              fundamental building blocks in the investigation of numerous dynamical systems
              in physics, biology, and economics. The specific work involved in this project
              is expected to explain how the possible ways of arranging the geometric shapes
              of regions can have a significant impact on the behavior of certain complex
              dynamical systems. In addition, this research addresses global existence and
              growth properties of solutions to a well-known class of differential equations,
              the Painleve equations, which have applications in a wide number of areas,
              differential geometry and mathematical physics prominent among them.
              Particularly notable among such connections is the recent discovery of the
              usefulness of Painleve equations in string theory, a branch of physics that
              seeks to explain the structure of space and matter at a more fundamental level
              than present-day quantum physics.

