Title       : Heat Kernel Analysis on Lie Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9970882

Award Number: 9970882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66458              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Mitchell Jeffrey_Mitchell@baylor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor University
	      Post Office Box 97088
	      Waco, TX  767987088    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Mitchell

This project concerns the study of heat kernel analysis on
              Lie groups and its dependence on the geometry of the group. This is motivated
              
by the philosophy that the heat kernel on a Riemannian manifold is the
              natural analog of the Gaussian on Euclidean space. The techniques 
involved
              draw from the fields of functional analysis, Lie theory, differential geometry,
              and probability theory. A primary goal of the project is to 
examine the
              recently developed notion of "Hermite" functions on Lie groups; Hermite
              functions are analogs of the classical Hermite 
polynomials. Just as the
              classical Hermite polynomials are basic objects in harmonic analysis on
              Euclidean space with respect to a 
Gaussian measure, Hermite functions are
              fundamental in harmonic analysis on Lie groups with respect to the heat kernel
              measure. The 
principal investigator will examine these Hermite functions,
              their relationship to questions in harmonic analysis and representation theory,
              and 
properties of transforms relating function spaces on Lie groups to other
              Hilbert spaces. Specifically, the principal investigator proposes to 
extend
              his recent work by characterizing the asymptotic behavior of Hermite functions,
              investigating their image under the Segal-Bargmann-
Hall Transform, and
              relating the Hermite functions on compact Lie groups and their
              complexifications to the unitary representations of these 
groups.
              Additionally, a goal is to develop a parallel theory for general noncompact Lie
              groups and to investigate the possibility of generalizing 
the classical
              Fourier-Wiener Transform to the group setting. Finally, the principal
              investigator will study the extension of the above 
considerations to include
              the infinite dimensional groups consisting of continuous paths into a finite
              dimensional Lie group.

This research is motivated by mathematical problems
              stemming from quantum physics. In particular, this project has grown out of
              work 
related to quantum field theories. Physicists use quantum field theories
              to predict the behavior of the elementary particles. However, these 
theories
              are in a mathematically primitive state. This project will illuminate
              mathematical structures associated to these quantum field 
theories. As a
              consequence, the results may have an impact on developing rigorous physical
              theories of the subatomic particles.



