Title       : Research on the Classification of Nuclear C*-Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9970223

Award Number: 9970223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84106              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Dadarlat   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Dadarlat

The investigator aims at developing techniques of K-theory
              and local approximation suitable for the classification theory of nuclear
              C*-algebras.  In particular, the investigator will explore new models for the
              KK-groups of Kasparov.  On the analytical side he would focus on local
              approximation properties such as quasidiagonality and its refinements.
The
              basic idea beyond the classification program is that that the simplicity and
              other nonstable K-theory conditions for a nuclear C*-algebra translate to
              certain internal dynamical properties of the algebra. In their turn,  these
              properties lead to surprising rigidity phenomena where an algebra is completely
              determined by its homotopy type or even by its K-theory groups.

C*-algebras
              can be thought as  collections of infinite matrices of numbers displaying a
              rich algebraic and topological structure.  The C*-algebra theory is the
              standard framework for quantum mechanics.  It offers  functional analytic ways
              of expressing and analysing fundamental noncommutative aspects of the
              symmetries of the physical world.  The proposed research will attempt to
              uncover and explain rigidity properties of nuclear  C*-algebras.  This theory
              has deep ramifications in dynamical systems and geometric theory of groups.

