Title       : Orthogonal Polynomials and Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9970865

Award Number: 9970865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mourad E. Ismail ismail@math.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research deals with discriminants of orthogonal polynomials 
and
              energy minimization problems where the equilibrium energy involves 
a
              discriminant. We will study q-deformed and quantized analogues of
              
discriminants which are defined as resultants. This involves developing 
a
              theory of second order q-difference equations for polynomials 
 orthogonal
              with respect to a positive measures whose masses are 
concentrated on the
              union of at most two geometric progressions. 
We will also consider certain
              indeterminate moment problems whose 
solution involves elliptic functions and
              their generating functions 
satisfy a Lame type differential equation. The
              Lame differential equations 
are also generating functions for a family of
              biorthogoal rational 
functions which are related to R-type continued
              fractions, a class of 
continued fractions Masson and I introduced and
              recently arose in 
solving generalized  eigenvalue problems. We also intend to
              study spectral 
theory of second order operator equations involving the
              Askey-Wilson 
divided difference operator. 



We plan to study the
              equilibrium position of a system of particles 
in an external field and find
              explicit formulas for the energy at 
equilibrium. We also intend to determine
              how large the energy gets 
when the number of particles gets large. This will
              be done in 
different one dimensional models. Mathematically this leads to 
a
              theory of the so called deformed infinite dimensional Lie algebras (named after
              Sophus Lie). Another focus will be moment problems where the 
observations
              (moments) do not necessarily determine the 
distribution (the physical law)
              but nevertheless one can find ``best" 
distributions. We are also concerned
              with spectral theory of 
the operators called the Askey-Wilson operators. What
              we are trying to 
achieve is to describe their spectrum, which means describe
              the 
possible states of the  physical system obeying these equations. 

