Title       : Computational Problems over Finite Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9970637

Award Number: 9970637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuhong Gao sgao@math.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project is devoted to two major problems in computations over
              finite fields, namely the problems of (a) factoring polynomials and (b) solving
              large systems of linear equations.  The investigator plans to design new
              efficient algorithms for factoring both univariate and multivariate
              polynomials, using tools from combinatorics, geometry,  and number theory. 
              Large systems of linear equations over finite fields arise in factoring
              polynomials of high degrees as well as in several other important problems
              including computing discrete logarithms in finite fields, factoring integers
              and solving algebraic or differential equations. These systems could be sparse
              (given explicitly) or dense (given implicitly).  The main focus is on efficient
              block algorithms for solving such large systems.
 
The research of the
              project is in the area of computational mathematics and has applications in
              digital communications.  A finite field is a finite collection of objects where
              one can perform addition, multiplication and division in a similar fashion as
              for real numbers. The difference is that finite field operations involve no
              round-off errors at all. It is exactly this important property that makes
              finite fields useful for encoding (and hiding) digital information.  In fact,
              almost all the known encoding  methods for error correction and data security
              are based on algebraic structures over finite fields.  For instance, the US
              Digital Signature Standard (1998) is  based on finite field operations, while
              error correction codes based on  finite fields can be found today in almost
              every household (CD players) and on the outskirts of the solar system (Voyager
              probe).  This project focuses on efficient computations in finite fields and
              has important applications to coding theory, cryptography, and computer
              science.   
