Title       : Research in Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a9970480

Award Number: 9970480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nolan R. Wallach nwallach@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Wallach

This project aims to use the methods of analysis,
              homological algebra and geometry in order to study the structure and
              applications of representations of real reductive groups. In particular the
              principal investigator plans to continue his development of what he calls
              "transfer" between real forms of reductive groups over the complex numbers. A
              new ingredient involves determining explicit multiplicity formulas (analogous
              to Blattner's formula) for restriction of representations of semisimple  groups
              to symmetric subgroups (noncompact). The theory also provides a new method for
              proving the unitarizability of representations that are difficult to analyze
              analytically. This work uses basic invariant theory and computationally
              intensive algebraic geometry. For the latter, Matt Clegg and the author will be
              completing the code for the Groebner array which is now in place. This hardware
              has also been helpful in solving several problems in combinatorics,
              representation theory, and quantum computing.

The relatively inexpensive
              access to fast computational tools has changed the landscape of "pure
              mathematics". In fact, it has blurred the distinction  between pure and applied
              mathematics. Mathematicians can now do experiments involving massive
              calculations to help predict the form of theorems to be proved by mathematical
              reasoning. This proposed research will make use of these tools. It will also
              work to enhance the usefulness of massive calculations whose output can be
              mathematical objects that are described by files that are billions of bytes
              long . Although the basic research aims of this project are outside the scope
              of short term applications the methodology is expected to lead to practical
              applications.  For example, methods to help in deciding which aspects of an
              immense file that describes a complicated object are most important without
              having the ability to read the full file.

