Title       : Conference on Groups and Computation, June 14-18, 1999, Columbus, Ohio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9970136

Award Number: 9970136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Akos Seress akos@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William M. Kantor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970136

A conference on ``Groups and Computation'' will be held on June
              14-18, 1999, at The Ohio State University.  The proposers request funding in
              order to ensure participation by leading researchers from Europe and Australia
              and to assist graduate students and recent PhD recipients.  The main objective
              of the conference is to provide a forum for merging theory and practice of
              computations with groups.  It is expected that this will result in increased
              understanding of the deeper mathematical issues that underlie group
              computations, and that these will have important algorithmic implications as we
              move toward the the next generation of computer architectures.  That this
              objective is likely to be met is evidenced by previous related workshops on
              ``Groups and Computation'' held at DIMACS (in Rutgers University) in 1991 and
              1995.  A primary goal of those workshops was to foster a dialogue between
              researchers studying the complexity of group computations and those engaged in
              the development of practical algorithms.  There were many comments by
              participants, both during  and afterwards, that this goal had been achieved
              beyond the organizers' expectations, and had led to new perspectives and new
              collaborations.  As a direct result, practical versions were devised for
              algorithms initially developed by theoreticians to improve worst case
              asymptotic running times; some of these have been implemented in the major
              computational group theory systems. Providing opportunities for graduate
              students and younger researchers, both as participants and as speakers, was
              another  of the many successful aspects of  previous workshops, and will be an
              important feature of this one as well.

Computational group theory is an
              interdisciplinary field involving the use of groups to solve problems in
              computer science and mathematics.  The conference will explore the interplay of
              research which has taken place in a number of broad areas: symbolic algebra,
              theoretical computer science, group theory, and applications of group
              computation.  In addition to talks on a wide variety of mathematical and
              computer science issues, at past conferences on this subject there have been
              numerous talks on links to statistics, circuit design, digital signal
              processing, and the uses of parallel architectures within this branch of
              symbolic algebra.  The major computational group theory systems employed
              internationally have had impacts on research within mathematics as well as its
              applications; based on previous experience, fast new approaches will come out
              of the proposed conference and will be implemented in these systems.

