Title       : Operator Theory and Complex Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1999        
File        : a9970376

Award Number: 9970376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52475              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nathan S. Feldman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970376
Principal Investigator: Nathan S. Feldman

Abstract:
              Feldman will conduct research in operator theory and its interplay with complex
              analysis. Primary emphasis will be placed on studying special classes of linear
              operators that are close to normal operators, such as subnormal, hyponormal,
              and essentially subnormal operators. Questions regarding various forms of
              cyclicity for cosubnormal and cohyponormal operators will be investigated, as
              will the relationship between cyclicity and the existence of intertwining maps.
              Other topics to be explored include: the existence of hyperinvariant subspaces
              for subnormal operators; "generalized eigenvectors" for adjoints of subnormal
              operators; the principal function for a subnormal operator, and its relations
              with such classes of operators as Toeplitz operators, Hankel operators, and
              self-commutators.

Operator theory is a natural extension of the ideas of
              matrices and linear algebra to infinite dimensions. In simple terms, an
              operator is just an infinite array or matrix of numbers and is used in linear
              problems involving infinitely many unknown variables. Although many intractable
              real world problems are not linear, one can frequently "linearize" a given
              problem to produce a new problem that is both linear and solvable and that has
              a solution which closely approximates -- hence provides valuable information
              about -- the solution of the original physical problem. Perhaps the simplest
              example of this is the idea of the derivative from calculus, which is used to
              approximate a curve by a straight line (something that is linear). In a
              multivariable setting, the precise analogue of the derivative is a linear
              operator. Recognizing how useful and powerful a tool the derivative of even a
              single variable function has become in all areas of science, one can readily
              appreciate how important it is to understand fully the structure of linear
              operators. While some operators can be rather "pathological" in character, the
              subnormal operators that are the objects of study in this project have a great
              deal of structure: they are very natural themselves, and they arise in natural
              ways. Operator theory and linear algebra have had a profound impact on all
              branches of mathematics, physics, and engineering. It is hoped that Feldman's
              research will likewise exert an influence not only on pure mathematics but on
              the applied sciences as well.

