Title       : Stochastic Control and Applications in Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1999       
File        : a9970852

Award Number: 9970852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell H. Fleming whf@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970852
Fleming

This project has two parts.  The first concerns
              risk-sensitive 
stochastic control on an infinite time horizon, with
              applications in 
finance.  Investment control policies are sought which
              maximize 
the long term growth rate of expected utility of an investor's
              
wealth.  Infinite horizon robust control problems are considered as
              
deterministic, small noise intensity limits of risk sensitive 
problems. 
              The second part concerns macroeconomic growth/debt 
models for developing
              economies in which interest and production 
rates are modelled stochastically.
               In the models to be considered, 
capital investment and consumption are being
              controlled.  Among 
the modelling issues to be addressed are appropriate
              limitations on 
borrowing through either hard constraints or penalty
              functions.

This project concerns optimal stochastic control techniques for
              
problems of finance.  One area of application concerns investment 
portfolio
              optimization over long time horizons.  The goal is to 
suggest investment
              control policies that provide good growth of an 
investor's wealth.  This is
              done by optimizing some risk-sensitive 
performance criterion.  Another area
              of application is to 
international finance and debt.  Recent crises,
              especially in Asia, 
have led to questions concerning the causes, how crises
              can be 
prevented and possible early warning signs of vulnerability.  The
              
goal of this research is to develop and analyze stochastic control 
models
              for the growth of developing economies in which interest 
and production rates
              are modelled stochastically.  The model 
performance under optimal control
              policies may provide 
benchmarks to indicate whether actual current account
              deficits and 
foreign debt are sustainable under current policies.

