Title       : Neutron Scattering Studies of Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9970126

Award Number: 9970126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Sokol pes4@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970126
Sokol

This is a condensed matter physics project dealing with the
              low temperature properties of liquid helium, 4He, and mixtures of 3He and 4He.
              The investigation will use neutron scattering methods to study the effect of
              confinement in disordered porous glasses on the properties of helium. If
              interest are (1) the role of disorder and confinement on the superfluid phase
              where previous studies have already shown that the macroscopic changes induced
              by confinement are mirrored in the microscopic dynamics; (2) the effects of
              confinement on the phase separation that occurs in 3He-4He mixtures where
              macroscopic studies have shown that the tricritical point becomes a regular
              critical point; and (3) the structure of the solid phase when confined in
              porous media where preliminary studies have shown that disorder stabilizes the
              bcc phase over a much larger region of the phase diagram than in the bulk.
              Neutron scattering measurements, such as elastic and inelastic scattering,
              provide a powerful probe of the microscopic dynamics of these systems.
              Properties such as the atomic structure, collective excitations, and single
              particle momentum distribution can be readily probed using these techniques.
              The research involves collaborations with workers at the Institut Laue Langevin
              (Grenoble, France), and the ISIS spallation source at the Appleton Rutherford
              Laboratory (Oxford, UK), as well as neutron sources in the US. The research
              provides excellent training for graduate students in a fundamental research
              area using state-of-the-art instrumentation.
%%%
The quantum fluids helium-3
              and helium-4 provide a unique 'laboratory' for the study of strongly
              interacting assemblies of particles obeying Bose and Fermi statistics. Neutron
              scattering measurements, such as elastic and inelastic scattering, provide a
              powerful probe of the microscopic dynamics of these systems. Properties such as
              the atomic structure, collective excitations, and single particle momentum
              distribution can be readily probed using these techniques. This project seeks
              to understand how disordering bulk helium or helium mixtures influences the
              fluids' properties. Disorder is introduced either through the addition of
              impurities, by immersing the fluid in highly porous aerogel or Vycor glass, or
              through thermal fluctuations. Neutron scattering experiments uniquely and
              sensitively show that a number of the fundamental properties of helium are
              changed by the disorder. The research involves collaborations with workers at
              the Institut Laue Langevin (Grenoble, France), and the ISIS spallation source
              at the Appleton Rutherford Laboratory (Oxford, UK), as well as neutron sources
              in the US. The research provides excellent training for graduate students in a
              fundamental research area using state-of-the-art instrumentation.







