Title       : Some Problems in Orthogonal Polynomials and Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9970613

Award Number: 9970613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Geronimo geronimo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970613
Principal Investigator: Jeffrey S. Geronimo

Abstract: 
              Geronimo will study polynomials orthogonal on several subarcs of the unit
              circle in order to determine the analog in that context of the Toda flow
              associated with polynomials orthogonal on finite segments of the real line. He
              will continue to investigate the properties of two-dimensional
              pseudopolynomials orthogonal on the bi-circle and their connection to
              two-dimensional extension problems. This will be related to the factorization
              of trigonometric polynomials in two variables, a topic that has important
              applications in wavelet theory. Geronimo also plans to use intertwining
              analysis to investigate the theory and construction of orthogonal wavelet bases
              in one and higher dimensions. He will use the results obtained to help study
              orthogonal multiresolution analyses for quasicrystals.

Wavelets and
              orthogonal polynomials have proven themselves to be important tools in
              attacking complex, real-world problems such as the analysis and compression of
              images and signals (like those found on the internet), forecasting on the basis
              of fragmentary data, and speech modeling. This is because these mathematical
              objects either have a simple structure (in the case of wavelets) and/or possess
              special properties (as orthogonal polynomials do) that can be exploited to
              decompose complex problems of the types just mentioned into simpler, more
              manageable ones. For instance, a family of wavelets is obtained by scaling and
              shifting one particular carefully chosen function, which makes it extremely
              useful for studying images at various resolutions. Taking advantage of
              orthogonality, on the other hand, is the most practical way to retrieve
              information that has a "prescribed direction." In order for wavelets and
              orthogonal polynomials to be truly useful, however, one must know how to build
              these functions and must understand their properties as fully as possible. The
              object of the basic research described above is to contribute to the
              achievement of both these goals. 


