Title       : Harmonic Analysis and PDE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9970359

Award Number: 9970359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sagun Chanillo chanillo@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal addresses several questions that arise in problems
in Physics and
              Engineering. We describe one of the problems that
we have proposed. A basic
              situation that arises in Engineering problems 
is to construct membranes
              composed out of two materials with different 
densities. We impose additional
              requirements on the membranes
constructed, that is they also have the
              additional property that the first 
eigenvalue be lowest possible. This is the
              requirement that the membrane 
have the lowest tone. Natural questions that
              now arise are (1) Does such an
optimal configuration exist?(2) Is the junction
              region between the
membranes, the so-called free boundary smooth? If not
              smooth what
is the nature of the singularities, i.e. what is the Hausdorff
              dimension
of the singular set. (3) If there is symmetry in the problem does it
              reflect
and impose conditions that the materials have to be so glued as to
              respect 
this symmetry. This problem is also amenable to numerical
              simulation
which we have also carried out, and in part the numerics have
              provided us 
with insight into what sort of rigorous theorems can be
              proved.

     The project really stems from questions proposed to the PI
              by
M. Imai and I. Ohnishi of the Institute of Electro-Communications
in Tokyo
              and K. Kurata of the Tokyo Metropolitan University. The
object is to design
              composites of materials with two different densities
such that the resulting
              composite has the lowest tone. For example one way 
to naively view this
              problem is to patch together two materials in
such a way that the resulting
              composite membrane vibrates in the
slowest possible way out of all possible
              configurations that
can be formed by gluing together the two given materials.
              The first
question is (1) Is there always an optimal configuration
              possible?
(2) Is the interface between the two materials making up
              the
membrane smooth or necessarily are there sharp spikes? (3) If
there is
              some additional symmetry in the shape of the membrane
does it force that the
              materials be glued together in a way
such that this symmetry is to be
              respected? These are basic
Engineering questions that arise in many situations
              where say vibrations
are to be kept to a minimum. Computer studies help, but
              what nails
down with certainty, the description of the optimal
              configuration,
are rigorous theorems about the arrangement of the materials.
              This is
one of many problems in our project which can be summarized by
              saying
that it is the determination of optimal shapes in the design
of
              composite membranes so as to minimize vibrations and if possible
determine a
              explicit recipe(algorithm) that will tell us how
to achieve this optimal
              configuration.

