Title       : Automorphic L-Functions, Endoscopy, and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9970156

Award Number: 9970156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Freydoon Shahidi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	Professor Shahidi will continue his study of the holomorphy of symmetric cube
              L-functions for non-monomial cusp forms on the general linear group on
              dimension two vector spaces. This is the first step in establishing the
              existence of the symmetric cube lift to the general linear group on dimension
              four spaces.  The investigator will also consider the questions of poles of all
              L-functions that are obtained from a method previously established in
              conjunction with R. Langlands.  Also under consideration is the boundedness or
              finiteness of order on finite strips of theses functions.  In a related project
              Professor Shahidi will attempt to increase the applications for Arthur's trace
              formula to the most general cases by establishing new identities satisfied by
              normalized intertwining operators.

	This project involves questions in
              number theory and representation theory.  Historically there have been many
              examples in mathematics where important information about the fundamental
              properties of numbers is encoded in the functions of calculus.  An important
              advance in number theory over the past twenty years has been the increased
              understanding that these examples were part of a very general theory.  The full
              general theory is still quite a mathematical mystery. It is so powerful,
              however, that each time a step toward the general theory is made,  the
              repercussions are felt in all parts of number theory and representation theory.
              L-functions are the functions that often encode the information that number
              theorists need, and the information appears at points called the poles of the
              function. In this project, Professor Shahidi will investigate several methods
              of extracting this information from the function.
