Title       : Analysis and Classification of Differential Equations with Orthogonal Polynomial
               Eigenfunctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a9970478

Award Number: 9970478
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55165              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance L. Littlejohn lance@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI will investigate several problems regarding the analysis
              and
classification of orthogonal polynomials to spectral-type
              differential
equations. The most general of these problems is the
              so-called
BKS(N,M) problem which seeks a classification of all ordinary
              differential
equations of integer order N, up to a real linear change of
              variable, that
has a sequence of polynomial eigenfunctions which are
              orthogonal with
respect to a Sobolev bilinear form involving the M-th
              derivative of
functions. When M=0, this problem is classical with key results
              due to
Bochner and H. L. Krall. Recent progress by Littlejohn, K. H. Kwon and
              D. W.
Lee has been made on second-order equations in the cases M=1 and
              M=2.

These problems in the theory of orthogonal polynomials and
              differential
equations are classical and have been an outstanding challenge
              to
mathematical analysis since 1929. Applications of these problems abound
              in
many areas of mathematics, applied mathematics, physics, and
              engineering.
Indeed, the classical second-order equations having orthogonal
              polynomial
solutions are important in many areas of applied mathematics and
              physics,
including quantum mechanics. Moreover, a complete solution to the
              BKS(N,M)
problem will require an indepth knowledge of distributions,
              difference
equations, moment theory, Lie algebras, complex analysis, and
              operator
theory. The applications of the higher-order examples look very
              promising.
Indeed, each of the examples that we find will have an impact on
              applied
sampling and interpolation theory with applications to engineering
              (theory
of communication and signal processing). Recent improvements in both
              theory
and techniques, by mathematical colleagues throughout the world, lend
              hope
that these difficult problems will soon yield global solutions.

