Title       : Nonlinear Wave Equation Asymptotics and Functions of Bounded Higher Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9970273

Award Number: 9970273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60183              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Jerrard rjerrard@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal focuses on two distinct but related lines of research:
singular
              limits of nonlinear wave equations, and the development of
theory and
              applications of a function space, BnV.
The former problems entail describing
              the asymptotic behavior of certain
families of nonlinear wave equations
              containing a small parameter.
These are mostly well-known equations from
              mathematical physics.
Specific problems include a number of issues related to
              vortex dynamics
in solutions of the Gross-Pitaevsky equation, for example
              dynamics of
vortex filaments in three or more dimensions. The function space
              BnV turns
out to provide a natural setting for this and related problems.
              BnV
consists of functions that, in a precise sense, have
              bounded
n-dimensional variation. The principal investigator will
              investigate
properties of BnV functions with an eye towards applications to
              problems
in partial differential equations and the calculus of
              variations.

We propose to study some questions that include the motion of
              vortex
filaments in certain kinds of superfluids, and related
questions in
              pure mathematical analysis.
The most familiar example of a vortex filament is
              a smoke ring.
Such rings start out small, and as they move, their diameters
              tend
to expand. Simultaneously, they rotate more slowly as their
              vorticity
decreases.  If one could blow a smoke ring in (bosonic) liquid
              helium,
it would exhibit quite different behavior.  In liquid helium,
the
              vorticity can only assume certain values. This in effect should
prevent the
              vorticity along a smoke ring from decreasing, which in
turn should prevent the
              ring from exanding. Thus a vortex filament in
liquid helium is expected to
              propagate without its length increasing and
without the rate of rotation
              changing. Some of the proposed work
involves developing an understanding of
              this filament motion,
starting from basic equations that describe bosonic
              superfluids.
This is difficult, in part because the vortex filaments do
              not
appear in the equations in any explicit way. Other aspects
of the project
              involve studying a class of functions that can
be used to describe these
              vortex filaments and other related
phenomena.

