Title       : Linear and Nonlinear Magneto-Optical Kerr Effect Studies of Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9970058

Award Number: 9970058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1999     
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence H. Bennett lbennett@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward Della Torre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970058
Bennett

The goal of this proposal is to undertake research aimed at
              furthering the understanding of the magnetic structure of advanced
              nanostructural materials, including magnetic thin films and multilayers,
              utilizing primarily linear and non-linear magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE and
              NLMOKE) examinations.  This work is expected to have relevance both to
              magneto-optical data recording and to high-density perpendicular magnetic
              recording media.  Magneto-optical digital information storage uses the Kerr
              rotation of the medium for data readout.  The medium must also have certain
              magnetic characteristics suitable for stable information storage including
              perpendicular easy axis magnetic anisotropy, a square loop, and high
              coercivity.  The advent of the nonlinear magneto-optical Kerr effect introduces
              a new set of research challenges to materials suitable for magneto-optical
              applications.  In particular, the fact that the nonlinear Kerr angle is greatly
              enhanced over the linear angle expands the choice of materials greatly.  With a
              large Kerr angle, other factors in determining the figure of merit can be
              emphasized in identifying technologically prospective materials.

MOKE
              measurements will be carried out on a series of Co/Pt and similar multilayer
              samples with different Pt thicknesses to probe the details of the magnetic
              structure and magnetic aftereffect in a systematic way and to model these
              results.  The research will entail the development and application of new and
              advanced macroscopic hysteresis models for both longitudinal and perpendicular
              recording media, based on the Preisach approach.

MOKE measurements will also
              be performed during the in situ growth of magnetic films and multilayers, in a
              special electrochemical cell we will design and install in our MOKE apparatus. 
              The changes in the magnetic properties of a layer as a function of its
              thickness will be explored using linear MOKE, and the magnetism at the
              interface between the magnetic film and the substrate will be monitored with
              NLMOKE.
***


