Title       : Development of Ultra-High-Flux Synchrotron Radiation Beamlines for Real-Time
               Structural Dynamics Studies of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9970838

Award Number: 9970838
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph A. Akkara                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel D. Brock jdb20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sol M. Gruner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hector D. Abruna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara H. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher K. Ober  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,9181,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970838
Brock
Cornell University will construct a new ultra-high flux
              synchrotron x-ray beamlines (the G-lines) with three experimental stations
              optimized to study dynamically evolving materials, including thin film growth,
              patterned surfaces, electrochemical interfaces, polymers, liquid crystals,
              biomaterials, and systems with novel electronic properties.  The beamlines,
              which will be among the highest flux beamlines in the world, will make use of
              previously unused radiation produced by the Cornell Electron Storage Ring
              (CESR); the NSF-supported high-energy physics ring which feeds CHESS (Cornell
              High Energy Synchrotron Source).  Upgrades planned for CESR in the coming year
              provide a rare window of opportunity to construct new beamlines without
              interrupting the high-energy physics or CHESS x-ray user programs.  Cornell
              University will provide the estimated $2.1M for the underground construction
              needed to house the new beamlines and x-ray stations.

Central to this
              proposal is the recognition that operating an x-ray source, designing, building
              and supporting beamlines, and carrying out frontier research programs in
              materials research requires dedicated multi-discplinary teams with diverse
              talents.  A second motivation is the central campus location of the beamlines,
              which allows a level of training and involvment of all levels of students which
              is otherwise difficult to achieve.  To fulfill the goals of this proposal in a
              cost- and time-effective manner, this project will draw on the combined
              expertise and interests of the Cornell faculty, students and CHESS staff, their
              strong tradition of working in multi-disciplinary teams, and the many special
              experimental facilities at Cornell that create a comprehensive educational
              environment for the study of materials growth, processing, and
              characterization.

The beamlines will form a nexus among the various major
              materials research facilities on the Cornell campus that fall under the
              auspices of the Cornell Center for Materials Research (CCMR).  Newly formed,
              CCMR grew out of the NSF-funded MRSEC (formerly MRL) and now coordinates
              materials research facilities across the campus.  Although the new beamlines
              will be operated separately from the existing CHESS beamlines, CCMR and CHESS
              will work closely to coordinate the technical and scientific operations of
              G-line.  In exchange for its help in construction and support, CHESS will
              utilize some 20% of the station time for its outside user program.

Among the
              benefits accruing from the successful execution of this proposal are (1) The
              creation of a unique educational environment to train the materials-oriented
              synchrotron radiation scientists of tomorrow; (2) The construction of a
              powerful x-ray resource that will result in new insights into the dynamical
              evolution of materials in technologically important areas, and (3) An increase
              in availability of CHESS, a highly successful and over-subscribed national
              facility.

This project is jointly supported by the Division of Materials
              Research and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences), and the Division of Biological
              Infrastructure (Directorate for Biological Sciences).


