Title       : Discrete Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9970433

Award Number: 9970433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry N. Kahn jkahn@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DISCRETE PROBLEMS
JEFF KAHN

The investigator is interested in a diverse set
              of problems in discrete mathematics and related areas.  Topics considered
              include: (1) Partially ordered sets. (This includes new approaches to several
              classical questions about sorting under partial information.  One main theme
              focuses on the behavior of various new parameters, with the intention of
              gaining a global understanding of the mysterious space of linear extensions of
              a poset.)  (2) Random matrices.  (Central here are questions about the first
              dependency among vectors drawn uniformly and independently from the set of
              vectors of a fixed weight in a high-dimensional vector space over a fixed
              finite field.  Recent work of J. Komlos and the investigator settled several
              issues concerning sparse random matrices over finite fields, and it is expected
              that the ideas developed in that work will be relevant to the present
              questions.)  (3) Randomized complexity of graph properties.  (The basic problem
              here is an old conjecture of R.M. Karp concerning the power of randomization in
              decision tree algorithms.  The investigator suggests an approach to this which,
              inter alia, leads to a range of new questions in the classical area of random
              graphs.)  (4) Entropy and the hard-core model. (One main issue here is
              estimation of the critical activity for the hard-core lattice gas model on the
              d-dimensional integer lattice.  It is hoped that this, as well as several other
              problems, can be attacked using an entropy method developed in earlier work of
              the proposer and his student A. Lawrenz.) (5) A percolation problem of
              Kasteleyn.  (Recent work of J. van den Berg and the proposer gives hope of a
              proof of Kasteleyn's simple but powerful correlation conjecture.)  (6)
              Conjectures of Chvatal and Frankl.  (The investigator suggests novel approaches
              to these two notorious old "extremal" problems from the theory of finite
              sets.)

Many of the question addressed here are of interest for computer
              science or statistical physics.  In particular, (1) and (3) are concerned with
              fundamental questions about the intrinsic complexity of (that is, theoretical
              limits on the efficiency of procedures for) basic algorithmic problems such as
              sorting and searching; while those in (4) and (5) deal especially with, roughly
              speaking, the spread of information in physical systems.  All are also of
              interest on purely mathematical grounds: each is centered on one or more
              problems against which current methods have proved woefully inadequate, so that
              significant progress requires significant new ideas.  New approaches are
              proposed for most of the problems considered.  One common theme is the
              application ideas from other areas of mathematics (e.g. entropy, geometry,
              Fourier analysis) to discrete problems.  Conversely, there is the possibility,
              particularly in (4) and (5), of bringing discrete ideas to bear on problems
              which until now have mainly been studied by people in other disciplines.

