Title       : RUI: A 300 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Multidisciplinary
               Structural Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9970016

Award Number: 9970016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey O. Boles jboles@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward C. Lisic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Swartling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9970016


Abstract

	This award supports an acquisition of a 300 MHz
              multi-nuclea NMR spectrometer for multidisciplinary structural studies in the
              Chemistry department at Tennessee Tech University.  The majority of the faculty
              which will benefit from the new instrumentation are of multi-disciplinary
              origin,
i.e., bioorganic, biochemical, bioinorganic, medicinal, and
              environmental. The principal investigators are engaged in multi-disciplinary
              research that involves the synthesis of molecules of biological and fundamental
              importance.  Research areas which require this instrumentation include: 1)
              synthesis of
fluorine-containing molecules, 2) synthesis of indole analogs and
              unnatural amino acids, 3) synthesis of chelating agents for environmental
              remediation, 4)synthesis of new metalloid-containing amino acids 5)study of
              bio-incorporated nuclei via NMR spectroscopy, and 6)synthesis of technetium and
              rhenium complexes.  Research in these areas may lead to techniques that can be
              exploited in a variety of important areas, such as the pharmaceutical industry
              (drug design) and environmental clean-up operations.  It is a known fact that
              both health and environmental problems lie ahead in the 21st century and will
              need to be
addressed.  The atomic level understanding of chemical structure is
              necessary to challenge these hurdles. The most important tool for elucidating
              the structure of compounds studied in these research areas is Nuclear Magnetic
              Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. These studies require analysis of a variety of
              atomic nuclei for proper characterization.  For our purposes, these nuclei
              include hydrogen, carbon, phosphorus, fluorine, boron, silicon, selenium, and
              tellurium.  The requested instrumentation is capable of being tuned to all of
              these nuclei. 

Tennessee Tech is a predominantly undergraduate institution
              that has a rigorous program in undergraduate research. The chemistry department
              sends 10-15 students per year to national and regional meetings where they
              present the results of their research findings. The acquisition of this
              instrumentation is
vital to both the faculty research programs and to the
              department's continued development of this undergraduate multidisciplinary
              research program. Tennessee Tech is located midway between Nashville and
              Knoxville, serving the east-central portion of Tennessee. Most of the
              department graduates plan careers in the medical or biotechnology profession
              and ultimately attend graduate schools, professional schools, industry, or
              medical schools. Most research is carried out by faculty, graduate students,
              and undergraduates.
The department has sixteen full-time faculty members. 

