Title       : Linear and Nonlinear Complex Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9970917

Award Number: 9970917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62723              (Estimated)
Investigator: Enid Steinbart   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970917
Principal Investigator: Enid Steinbart

Abstract: The
              goal of the proposed research is to develop new tools for understanding complex
              differential equations. Steinbart will explore how one can infer fundamental
              qualitative properties of the solutions of certain linear and nonlinear complex
              differential equations directly from the data (e.g., the coefficients) of the
              equations. The properties on which she will focus are the growth of the
              solutions, and the location and distribution of the zeros of the solutions.
              Steinbart is interested in developing and refining analytical tools which can
              be applied to both linear and nonlinear complex differential equations. In the
              case of linear differential equations, she will address some fundamental open
              questions regarding the location of the zeros of solutions for a class of
              second order homogeneous equations that includes Airy's equation and
              Titchmarsh's equation. She will also consider nonhomogeneous linear
              differential equations, the global theory of which has not been thoroughly
              explored. Finally, she will study specific nonlinear equations (e.g., the
              second order equations which define Painleve transcendents) with the intent of
              uncovering relationships between the structure of the equations and the
              qualitative behavior of their solutions. Progress in this direction would allow
              her to take a novel approach to certain problems of great current interest,
              such as a deeper understanding of the relationship between the complex
              nonlinear Painleve equations and completely integrable nonlinear partial
              differential equations.

In this project, Steinbart will apply her unique
              mathematical background to study an important class of differential equations
              in the complex plane. Differential equations are widely used to model physical,
              chemical, and biological systems. In many cases, the model and/or the equations
              which describe the model are so complicated that one cannot determine the
              solution of the equation explicitly. Instead, one tries to approximate the
              solution or else deduce important properties of the solution without actually
              solving the equation. The goal of this research is to contribute to the theory
              of differential equations by uncovering information regarding the behavior of
              the solutions of the equations based on the data included in the differential
              equations themselves. If mathematicians can obtain a deeper understanding of
              the behavior of the solutions of the equations, then applied scientists who
              routinely use them will be able to construct their models more effectively.
              Steinbart will use techniques from complex analysis and from differential
              equations in this project.

