Title       : Some Problems in Nonparametric Regression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1999  
File        : a9970902

Award Number: 9970902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80335              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall Eubank eubank@stat.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with a number of inference problems in
nonparametric
              regression analysis.  Two of the problems being considered
involve the use of
              nonparametric smoothing methodology to assess the
lack-of-fit of certain types
              of parametric models.  The development of such
lack-of-fit tests has been an
              active research area for about the last 10
years.   However, effective methods
              for obtaining analytic assessments of
the relative performance of such tests
              has not, as yet, been determined.
One of the goals of this project is
              derivation of a framework for studying
the relative asymptotic efficiency of
              nonparametric smoothing based tests
using an asymptotic intermediate
              efficiency approach that makes it possible
to extend the concept of asymptotic
              efficiency into the nonparametric, or
infinite dimensional, alternative
              setting.  The other lack-of-fit testing
problem being studied concerns
              nonlinear parametric regression models.
This problem is of particular interest
              since it provides a case where, in
some instances, the usual smoothing
              parameter asymptotics obtain under the
null model and thereby allow for the
              development of asymptotically
distribution free test statistics.  Another
              collection of problems under
consideration is concerned with the derivation of
              suitable variance
estimators and associated heteroscedasticity diagnostics in
              the context of
partially linear models.  Variance estimators are needed here
              for a number
of reasons which include their use in testing hypotheses about
              the
parametric components (e.g., treatment effects) of the model.  A
              final
class of problems under investigation concerns computational methods
              for
boundary correcting smoothing spline estimators.  These problems
              have
implications and applications to the problem of interval estimation
              in
nonparametric regression that are also being explored.

One of the most
              common approaches to statistical analysis involves the
fitting of data by a
              parametric model.  Such models are frequently
developed through consideration
              of the physical nature of a problem under
study which may suggest a
              mathematical relationship or model for the data.
For example, in Biology there
              are mathematical models that have been
proposed for relating growth  (of 
              humans, animals, etc.) to age, while in
Meteorology there are mathematical
              models deriving from physics that
attempt to predict the development of storms
              and weather patterns.  This
project is concerned, in part, with the study and
              development of various
statistical methods for assessing the validity of
              parametric models.  The
methods being considered use flexible data fitting
              techniques known as
nonparametric smoothers to evaluate and compare fits
              obtained from a
proposed or postulated parametric model.  Those smoothes can
              be used to
obtain statistical tests that can, in turn, be used to assess the
              accuracy
of a model in question.  This is particularly important because
              an
incorrectly specified model can have potentially dangerous consequences
              in
that it can produce incorrect conclusions and predictions about the
              process
under study.  In addition to the development of new testing
              methods,
techniques are being developed for the comparison of different tests
              to
determine which type of test performs the best in different situations
              that
might be encountered in practice.  Other problems under study include
              the
development of computationally efficient methods for computing
              certain
types of data smoothers and methods for conducting statistical
              inference
when it may not be possible to completely specify a parametric model
              for a
set of data.  The latter problem arises frequently in practice where it
              may
be reasonable to assume a particular parametric form for a portion of
              the
model corresponding, for example, to presence or absence of cancer in
              a
subject, but there is no obvious choice for a parametric model
              involving
other influential variables, such as the time of a subject's
              evaluations.
