Title       : Estimation and Identification of Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9970998

Award Number: 9970998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur J. Krener ajkrener@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970998
Krener

This research project focuses on the estimation of states and
              parameters of 
nonlinear systems using nonlinear and possibly noisy
              observations.  The 
first question addressed is the existence and convergence
              of nonlinear 
observers using a generalization of Lyapunov functions.  We also
              address 
the development of efficient computational schemes for nonlinear
              filtering 
and smoothing.  The other half of the project is to develop
              effective 
parameter estimation schemes for nonlinear systems, particularly,
              systems 
with polynomial nonlinearities.  We will focus on identifying systems
              
within some model class such as the feedback linearizable systems.  We
              
shall use the properties particular to nonlinear systems such as the
              
presence of bifurcations and harmonic interactions to assist in their
              
identification.

Throughout science and engineering, models of dynamical
              systems are 
used to describe the evolution of real world processes.  Over
              small 
excursions, linear models can be quite accurate but over larger motions
              
one generally must rely on nonlinear models.  The estimation of the state
              
of a linear system from linear observations is a well developed area and
              
effective and computationally feasible methods are well-known. But the
              
theory and methodology for estimating the state of a nonlinear system 
while
              quite extensive is not completely satisfactory. There do exist 
globally
              convergent, computationally feasible techniques for most 
nonlinear systems. 
              Similarly the identification of the parameters of a 
linear system is a mature
              field but the identification of the parameters of a 
nonlinear system is much
              less developed. We are proposing research in 
estimating the state and
              identifying the parameters of nonlinear systems 
using a variety of new
              methods that show considerable promise.

