Title       : Graph Theory and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a9970071

Award Number: 9970071
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54156              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Kleitman djk@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geza Toth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project is devoted to investigating 
(a) crossing numbers of
              graphs and their relationships to other graph 
properties, and
(b) extremal
              problems for geometric graphs.

The crossing number of a graph is usually
              defined as the minimum number of  edge crossings or the minimum number of
              crossing pairs of edges in a drawing of the graph in the plane. These two
              definitions are widely  believed to be equivalent. However, there is no strong
              evidence that this would be the case. The investigator's goal is to clarify
              this question  and to give new estimates for crossing numbers of graphs
              satisfying some special conditions. Some similar estimates turned out to be
              applicable to a number of classical open problems in discrete geometry,
              including the problem of bounding from above (resp. from below) the number of 
              unit (resp. distinct) distances determined by a point set, the k-set problem of
              Erdos and Lovasz etc, and they are also related to some deep questions in
              algebraic geometry. Some existing bounds on crossing numbers  have direct
              applications in the theory of geometric graphs (i.e., graphs  drawn by
              straight-line segments), the other main subject of the present  proposal. The
              investigator plans to develop some general theories for  geometric graphs,
              analogous to the rich and fruitful fields of Extremal Graph  Theory and Ramsey
              Theory for abstract graphs. 
 

 Many basic problems in robotics and in
              computer graphics lead to  deep mathematical questions about arrangements of
              segments in the plane. A system of segments (`edges') connecting n points in
              the  plane is called a geometric graph on n vertices. Traditional graph  theory
              is often incapable of providing satisfactory answers to  questions on geometric
              graphs arising in practical applications.  To address these problems, the
              investigator and his colleagues have developed  some new techniques combining
              combinatorial and topological ideas. As a  by-product, they obtained some
              surprising results to estimate the crossing  number of a graph (network), a
              parameter known to be intimately related to  the minimum chip area required for
              its VLSI layout. The aim of the proposed research is to better understand and
              to improve these estimates by utilizing more involved topological tools. This
              may have  many important applications in discrete and computational geometry
              and in the theory and practice of graph drawing.

