Title       : Whittaker Vectors and the Helgason Conjecture on Riemannian Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9970762

Award Number: 9970762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76252              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Penney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Penney

One of the most fundamental  theorems  in  harmonic 
              analysis  on Riemannian  symmetric spaces is the Helgason theorem which states
              that any harmonic  function  may  be  represented  as  a  Poisson integral 
              over  the Furstenberg boundary.  Here, "harmonic" means that  the  function  is
               annihilated  by  all  of  the  invariant differential  operators  which  have 
              no  constant  term.  For  a Hermitian symmetric space,  there  are 
              generalizations  of  this theorem   which  replace the Furstenberg boundary
              with the Shilov boundary and the invariant  differential  operators  with 
              larger systems   such   as  the  Hua-Johnson-Koranyi  operators  or  the
              Berline-Vergne operators or  the  Lassalle  operators.   In  this proposal  we 
              propose  generalizing the Helgason theory, as well as the Hua-Johnson-Koranyi
              theory, to the  context  of homogeneous Kaehler manifolds.

Harmonic
              functions occur repeatedly in science  and  engineering, in  contexts such as
              heat flow, electricity, wave propagation and particle theory, just to name a
              few.  Many attempts to understand the  fundamental  properties  of  nature  are
               based on ever more complicated spaces.  The solutions to many important
              physical and engineering  problems  on such spaces involve harmonic functions. 
              While the current techniques work reasonably well for  Riemannian
symmetric
              spaces, it it is clear that fundamental advances in the current technology 
              must  be  made  if  the  spaces  become  even slightly   more   complicated.  
              Furthermore,  the  required  new technology  will  certainly  yield  new  
              information   and   new techniques  in  harmonic theory on Riemannian symmetric
              spaces as well. We propose continuing our previous work which is  aimed  at the
              development of this technology. 

