Title       : Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Phenomena in Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2001     
File        : a9970690

Award Number: 9970690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Goldenfeld nigel@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yoshitsugu Oono  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970690
Goldenfeld
This is an award for a theoretical investigation of a wide
              variety of systems of relevance to materials research.  The research impacts
              systems far from equilibrium, biological materials, pattern formation processes
              during phase transitions, and aspects of high temperature superconductivity. 
              In addition, there is special emphasis on the development of analytic
              renormalization group methods and novel simulation tools to bridge the gap
              between microscopic physics and macroscopic behavior.  This project advances
              current understanding in the areas of materials processing and the behavior of
              complicated materials, and the methodology is broadly applicable to systems
              with a complex interplay of length- and time-scales.  By working at the
              intersection of materials science, theoretical physics and applied mathematics,
              students and postdocs associated with this research receive a unique training
              in the applications of renormalization group theory and the development of
              novel computational algorithms.

This is an award for a theoretical
              investigation of a wide variety of systems of relevance to materials research. 
              The research impacts systems far from equilibrium, biological materials,
              pattern formation processes during phase transitions, and aspects of high
              temperature superconductivity.  In addition, there is special emphasis on the
              development of analytic renormalization group methods and novel simulation
              tools to bridge the gap between microscopic physics and macroscopic behavior. 
              This project advances current understanding in the areas of materials
              processing and the behavior of complicated materials, and the methodology is
              broadly applicable to systems with a complex interplay of length- and
              time-scales.  By working at the intersection of materials science, theoretical
              physics and applied mathematics, students and postdocs associated with this
              research receive a unique training in the applications of renormalization group
              theory and the development of novel computational algorithms.
***

