Title       : RUI: Acquistion of a Circular Dichroism Spectropolarimeter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2000   
File        : a9970203

Award Number: 9970203
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Fairman rfairman@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan A. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julio C. de Paula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karin S. Akerfeldt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9141,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9970203


Abstract


	We are requesting funds to purchase a circular
              dichroism (CD) spectropolarimeter.  This instrument is an important tool in
              biochemistry for studying regular structure in proteins and nucleic acids and
              has been used extensively as a tool to help define how proteins fold. 
              This
instrument is also used to study spectroscopic properties of other
              biomolecules, such as light-harvesting assemblies as described in this
              proposal.

	Research in Dr. Fairman's and Dr. Akerfeldt's laboratories
              focuses on the use of synthetic peptides as model systems to study important
              protein structures.  Dr. Fairman's research program involves a study of how
              amino acid sequences dictate the stability and specificity of protein
              structures.  His work uses the coiled coil structural motif, a simple protein
              structural motif involving interactions between alpha-helices, first described
              at the molecular level by Frances Crick and Linus Pauling in the early 1950's. 
              Information gained from these studies will be used to design self-assembling
              polymers towards the creation of new nanoengineering tools.  Dr. Akerfeldt's
              research tries to understand how protein domains cooperate to define functions
              in proteins.  Calbindin d28k is used as a model system to study the cooperative
              interactions of motifs designed to  bind and store calcium.  A reductionist
              approach is applied by synthesizing each individual structural motif,
              characterizing its structure and affinity for calcium, and then reconstructing
              the full activity of the protein by combining these synthetic peptides back
              together.  Dr. de Paula's research involves understanding the mechanism of
              aggregation of the light-harvesting molecules, porphyrin and chlorophyll. 
              These systems are promising nano-sized materials for light-harvesting
              applications.  Dr. White's research involves the study of protein-RNA
              interactions focusing on investigating the interaction between yeast ribosomal
              protein L30 and its RNA transcript, L30 RNA.  The existence of secondary
              structure in peptide fragments of the L30 proteins that retain RNA-binding
              ability will be examined.  CD will be used to study the RNA-protein complex for
              exploring conformational changes upon complex formation.

	In addition to the
              use of this instrument for specific research programs, the instrument will also
              play an important role in the training of students in both the Biology and
              Chemistry Departments at Haverford College.  In the Biology Department, the
              instrument is used in a junior level laboratory course, required of all majors,
              focusing on the study of secondary structure and stability in fibrinogen.  In
              addition, plans are being developed to use the instrument both in a sophomore
              level biochemistry course and a junior level Chemistry laboratory course. 
              Thus, a major goal for the use of this instrument beyond our research is to
              train students in interdisciplinary approaches to science.  This instrument
              will help emphasize a recent commitment by Haverford College to promote
              interdisciplinary education.

