Title       : Curation of Antarctic Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a9970279

Award Number: 9970279
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  1999      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $869018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherwood W. Wise wise@gly.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Janecek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, supports activities of the Antarctic Marine Geology
              Research Facility (AMGRF) at Florida State University. AMGRF, the largest
              repository of Southern Ocean piston cores in the world, has been supporting
              marine geological research and receiving, describing, and archiving cores for
              over 30 years. The AMGRF holdings include more than 20,000 m of cored sediment
              (over 6500 cores). The Facility also archives more than 2000 m of rotary-cored
              material from programs such as the Dry Valley Drilling Project, Cenozoic
              Investigations of the Ross Sea, and the Cape Roberts Project. This unique
              collection of sediments is especially important because of the Cenozoic
              paleoenvironmental record it preserves for the largely inaccessible Antarctic
              continent and surrounding ocean. During the past decade scientific attention
              has focused increasingly on the role of Antarctica in the evolution of global
              Cenozoic climate, especially as it pertains to the global warming
              controversy.

The AMGRF provides numerous functions for the Antarctic and
              Earth Science research communities including:

(1) Technical Service - Core
              descriptions, sampling, and technical support to Principal Investigators
              (including shipboard or Antarctic land-based curatorial operations).

(2)
              Core Curation - Marine piston and gravity cores from USAP vessels and
              land-drilled cores are processed and stored at the Facility

(3) Core and
              Sample Database - An online core and sample database provides investigators
              with basic information about available cores and samples taken from the cores.
              

(4) Research Support - Equipment and space for AMGRF and visiting
              investigators.

(5) Education - AMGRF provides a useful venue for workshops
              and short courses for investigators and training for graduate and undergraduate
              students plus lectures and tours for students of all ages and the general
              public.

This award provides funds to continue, and improve, these research
              support efforts for the benefit of the U.S. and international research
              communities with interests in Antarctic marine geology.

