Title       : Crystalline Order in Classical and Quantum Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9970608

Award Number: 9970608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Kennedy tgk@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970608	
Principal Investigator: Thomas G. Kennedy

Abstract:
              This research will focus on how periodic structures arise in problems such as
              crystallization and sphere packing. One approach to understanding how the
              lattice structure of crystals comes about is to assume that the quantum
              mechanics produces an effective classical interaction between molecules. Then
              one studies the classical problem of how to arrange the molecules to minimize
              this classical energy. Even this classical problem is quite hard, containing
              the sphere packing problem as a special case. This research will use ideas from
              statistical mechanics for frustrated systems to prove the optimal configuration
              for some of these classical problems. A new, simpler proof of the sphere
              packing problem in three dimensions may be possible by these methods. The role
              of quantum mechanics in crystal formation has been investigated in the
              Falicov-Kimball model. Another goal of this research is to understand when this
              model has a periodic ground state and when it does not. The Falicov-Kimball
              model is defined on a lattice, but in nature crystals form in space which has
              no a priori lattice structure. A continuum Falicov-Kimball type model will be
              investigated. In this model the ions may occupy any site in space rather than
              just the sites in some lattice, and then the electrons hop between the ions.
              The goal of introducing and studying this model is to have a quantum 
              mechanical model that (hopefully) exhibits periodic ground states. 


This
              research will focus on how periodic structures like crystals arise. One of the
              most famous of these problems is the sphere packing problem. Given a large
              number of spheres of the same size, what is the best way to arrange them so
              that they occupy the smallest volume. For example, is the way one finds
              cannonballs stacked at a Civil War battlefield optimal in this regard? Although
              this problem is hundreds of years old and quite simple to state, it was only
              solved in the past year. The classical crystal problem is similar. One is given
              a bunch of atoms and a force law between them. The problem is to find the
              arrangement which minimizes the total energy of the atoms. The sphere packing
              problem has important applications to coding theory, and the crystal problem is
              at the heart of understanding how the crystalline structures that one observes
              in nature arise. These problems may also be thought of as optimization problems
              in a large number of variables. This research will develop techniques for
              establishing the solutions of such optimization problems. The problems are all
              difficult because they are frustrated -- the best arrangment for a small number
              of atoms or spheres is not the same as their best arrangment when they are part
              of a larger group. Techniques developed in statistical mechanics to study such
              frustrated systems will be adapted to these problems. Surprisingly, it appears
              that in all these problems the best arrangement is a relatively simple periodic
              one, even though one allows all possible arrangements, however complicated.
              This award is jointly funded by the Analysis Program in the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the Mathematical Physics Program in the Division of
              Physics.


