Title       : Valuations and Oriented Matroids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9970525

Award Number: 9970525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46001              (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Lawrence lawrence@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "Valuations and Oriented Matroids"



Abstract:  Oriented matroids are
              combinatorial objects which reflect incidence relations among convex hulls of
              subsets of finite sets in Euclidean space.  For functions on families of convex
              sets, the property of being a valuation has been found to be very useful.  The
              combination of these two ideas should result in a fruitful study of many
              interesting open problems in combinatorial geometry.  The notion of a "linearly
              varying" function on uniform oriented matroids provides a means of combining
              the two ideas.  Examples of linearly varying functions include the number of
              "k-sets" in a configuration of points, the number of k-faces of a simplicial
              convex polytope, and the number of crossings in a rectilinear drawing of the
              comlete graph with n vertices.  The investigator will study the extremal
              properties of linearly varying functions on uniform oriented matroids, with the
              expectation that substantial knowledge about these and other linearly varying
              functions will be obtained.  Additionally, the investigator will explore the
              possibility of extending the notion of linearly varying functions to oriented
              matroids which are not necessarily uniform.

     An example of a problem in
              combinatorial geometry is the following.  Suppose n points in the plane are
              given, and no three are on a common line.  If all of the line segments joining
              these points two at a time are drawn, how many crossings must there be? When n
              exceeds 10, no one knows what the least possible number of such crossings is. 
              An abstract framework for studying this and other problems of combinatorial
              geometry in two and higher dimensions is provided by the notion of an "oriented
              matroid."  Oriented matroids were first described about twenty-five years ago,
              simultaneously by several different mathematicians, and their use has been
              fruitful.  The investigator intends to use this abstract framework in
              conjunction with another fruitful idea, that of a "valuation," with the
              expectation of solving some problems in this area.  Solutions of problems in
              combinatorial geometry often lead to better algorithms for computational
              geometry, and occasionally to improved designs for computer chips.

