Title       : Representations of Finite Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9970030

Award Number: 9970030
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Everett C. Dade dade@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DADE, 9970030

The main goal of this project is further research into 
a most
              promising conjecture about group characters. The complex 
irreducible
              characters of a finite group G separate 
naturally into blocks with respect to
              any prime p dividing the 
order of G. Each such character has a defect, which
              depends only 
on the power of p dividing the degree of that character. 
In
              1992 the principal investigator of this project formulated a conjecture
              
relating the number of characters with a fixed defect in a fixed 
block of G
              to the numbers of characters with the same defect in 
related blocks of
              certain p-local subgroups of G. This conjecture, 
if true, would imply several
              other important conjectures about 
blocks of group characters. Furthermore, a
              very strong form of it 
would hold for all finite groups G if it held whenever
              G is 
simple. Since the finite simple groups have been classified, this
              
gives some hope of proving a number of major conjectures about 
characters
              of arbitrary finite groups by verifying this one 
strong conjecture for all
              blocks of finite simple groups. This 
verification for any given group
              involves a long, delicate calculation. 
It has been carried out in detail by
              several people for a large number of 
individual simple groups and a few
              infinite families of such groups. So 
far it has always proved to be correct.
              We hope it will continue to do 
so.

Groups in mathematics grew out of the
              notion of symmetry. We regard 
the symmetries of any object in physics,
              chemistry or mathematics as 
transformations of that object onto itself
              preserving all relevant 
properties of the object. Then the composition of two
              such symmetries is 
again a symmetry of the object. So is the inverse of any
              symmetry. In 
mathematical terms, this means that the symmetries form a group.
              This 
symmetry group is an important invariant of the object, and is much
              
studied. In quantum mechanics, differential geometry and algebraic number
              
theory the relations of this group with other invariants of the object are
              
often expressed using representations of the group by complex matrices, 
one
              for each element of the group, which behave under multiplication as 
the
              corresponding group elements do under composition. When the group is 
finite,
              such representations are completely determined by their 
characters, which are
              the functions mapping each group element into the 
trace of the corresponding
              matrix. The relations between finite groups 
and their characters have
              fascinated mathematicians for over a hundred 
years. While many of the rules
              governing such characters are known, 
examination of examples suggests that
              other rules exist. There are many 
conjectures about such rules, but they
              tantalize us by remaining beyond 
our powers of proof.

