Title       : Dynamics of Nonlinear Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9970319

Award Number: 9970319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206851             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Mallet-Paret jmp@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose studying fundamental qualitative properties of various classes
of
              nonlinear dynamical systems, as they arise from differential equations.
In
              particular, our emphasis is devoted to lattice dynamical systems (that
is,
              spatially discrete systems) and differential delay equations.
              Questions
related to the existence of equilibria of lattice systems which
              exhibit
spatial patterns, traveling wave solutions which are asymptotic to
              such
patterns, anisotropic (crystallographic) pinning of such waves, and
              related
stability properties, will be studied. We also propose to study such
              systems
with time delays (cyclic systems), and to observe the emergence of
              patterns
resulting from a singular perturbation structure. A significant
              portion of
the proposed research involves the development and implementation
              of new
tools and techniques, as well as the extension of existing techniques
              of
dynamical systems to new situations.

We are developing new mathematical
              techniques in order to analyze differential
equations which arise as models in
              various areas of science.  A wide range of
scientific disciplines is
              represented, including biology, chemistry, electrical
circuit theory, image
              processing, and material science. While this is a very
broad scope of inquiry,
              the specific problems to be studied exhibit features
in common -- spontaneous
              formation of patterns, self-sustained fronts and
oscillations, regulation by
              internal feedback (often with time delays) --
which can be analyzed with some
              of the basic tools of dynamical systems theory.
It is expected that the
              resulting the mathematical advances arising from these
studies will increase
              the knowledge of, and will provide insight into both the
abstract theory of
              dynamical systems, and the scientific areas of inquiry.


