Title       : RUI: Applications of Operator Theory to Random Matrix Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1999       
File        : a9970879

Award Number: 9970879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95525              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estelle L. Basor ebasor@calpoly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9970879
ABSTRACT

Asymptotic properties of determinants for different
              classes of operators 

that depend on a parameter have been important in
              several branches of 

physics and mathematics. In random matrix theory such
              determinants yield 

formulas that compute many fundamental statistical
              properties. For 

example, the distribution function for a linear statistic,
              (or a certain 

kind of random variable) in the classical Gaussian Unitary
              Ensemble is 

described by a Fredholm determinant of a convolution operator.
              Other 

ensembles of random matrices and other statistical objects give rise
              to 

more complicated operators. In the orthogonal and symplectic ensembles,
              

matrix-valued symbols of operators naturally occur, while non-smooth
              

random variables lead to operators with singular symbols. In all the above
              

cases the asymptotic expansions are generalizations of the Strong Szego
              

Limit Theorem to various classes of operators. 



Many physical
              systems possess such complicated behavior that exact 

predictions become
              impossible. Two billiard balls that are set into motion 

close together on
              an irregularly shaped billiard table may have very 

different paths. The
              energy level of a particle of a compound nucleus in a 

slow nuclear reaction
              also has complicated unpredictable behavior.

Random matrix theory provides
              mathematical models that allow a simulation 

of the energy levels of the
              particle or the energies of the billiard balls.

One of the goals of the
              subject is to understand the statistical behavior

of the energy levels. Here
              is an example. Suppose we add all the 

energies together. Does the
              distribution of the sum of the energies change 

depending on our initial
              assumptions about our models? 

For a large class of models, the answer is
              no. The 

distribution of the sum of energies, after appropriate
              normalization is 

bell-shaped. These results agree with experimentally
              

acquired data and illustrate the universality of the theories. 


