Title       : Geometry of Operator Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9970369

Award Number: 9970369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timur Oikhberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract
Oikhberg

The PI plans to continue his work on several aspects of
              geometry of operator spaces. One line of work deals with separable extension
              properties. Here the most intriguing problem is whether K (the space of compact
              operators on a separable Hilbert space) is complemented in every separable
              operator space containing it (this is a "non-commutative" version of a
              classical result of Sobczyk).  A related issue is giving a complete description
              of separable locally reflexive operator spaces which are completely
              complemented in every separable locally reflexive operator superspace (an
              operator space counterpart of Zippin's characterization of the space of
              convergent sequences). Another direction of research is the study of maximal
              operator spaces (quotients of duals of commutative C*-algebras). The PI plans
              to determine the cardinality of the set of n-dimensional subspaces of maximal
              spaces, as well as the structure of n-dimensional subspaces of the dual of a
              2n-dimensional commutative C*-algebra (in the spirit of Kashin's work).
              Possible applications of the proposed research include better understanding of
              the structure of function spaces, of the space of operators on a Hilbert space,
              and Banach space geometry in general (extensions of local reflexivity).

One
              of the key mathematical tools of quantum mechanics is replacing scalars
              (numbers) by operators on a Hilbert space (they can be thought of as infinite
              matrices). Further exploration in this direction led to the development of the
              theory of C*-algebras, and, later, to the introduction of the notion of
              operator space (also called "non-commutative" or "quantized Banach space"). 
              One can view an operator space as a Banach space with additional structure,
              induced by its embedding into the C*-algebra B(H) of bounded linear operators
              on a Hilbert space H. The investigation of operator spaces  has advanced very
              rapidly over the last ten years, combining ideas and techniques from Banach
              space theory and the theory of C*-algebras. It has already produced answers to
              some long-standing problems of Operator Theory. The proposed research deals
              with two themes: the existence of non-commutative analogs of classical Banach
              space results; and the use of Banach space methods in the operator space case.
              If successful, this research will advance our understanding of connections
              between Banach and operator spaces, and potentially, enhance our knowledge of
              physical phenomena.


