Title       : Modular Algebraic Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1999      
File        : a9970301

Award Number: 9970301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George J. McNinch mcninch.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McNINCH, 9970301


The project will investigate various aspects of the
              modular
representation theory of groups, with special emphasis on the
              rational
representations of semisimple algebraic F-groups defined and
              split
over the prime subfield with p elements. One component of the
              project
involves consideration of the semisimplicity of representations of
              FG,
where G is an arbitrary group.  Under suitable constraints on
              a
representation, (e.g. requirements that the dimension not be too large
with
              respect to p) recent results permit one to deduce
semisimplicity. Along these
              lines, the project will study the
semisimplicity of certain tensor operations
              (generalizing the tensor
power, exterior power, and symmetric power) applied
              to appropriately
constrained semisimple representations, as well as certain
              "converse
theorems."  When H is the finite group of rational points of
              a
semisimple algebraic group G over a finite field, the project will seek
to
              obtain vanishing results for cohomology groups of H with
coefficients in
              irreducible FH-modules whose dimension is suitably
bounded in terms of p; such
              vanishing results for first cohomology
follow from some known semisimplicity
              results.  The project will
extend some investigations of the author concerning
              H. H. Andersen's
tilting module filtrations; one aim is to obtain Andersen's
              sum
formula for all primes p in the setting of "Howe dual pairs."
Analogies
              between various sum formulae -- the classical result of
Jantzen, the recent
              work of Andersen, and some recent work of Jantzen
on non-restricted
              representations of the Lie algebra of G -- will be
considered. Some explicit
              constructions of irreducible representations
for double covering groups of
              symmetric groups will be sought; by
analogy to the familiar interplay between
              the general linear group and
the symmetric group, it is hoped that the simple
              algebraic Spin group
can be exploited to obtain some insight for the desired
              constructions.






