Title       : Calderon-Zygmund Operators in Non-Classical Situations: Weighted Norm
               Inequalities with Matrix Weights, Operators on Non-Homogeneous Spaces and
               Analytic Capacity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9970395

Award Number: 9970395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fedor L. Nazarov fedja@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Serguei Treil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Volberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970395
Principal Investigators: Fedor Nazarov, Serguei Treil,
              Alexandre Volberg

Abstract: The first part of the project deals with the
              theory of matrix weights; the second is concerned with the theory of Calderon
              -Zygmund operators on nonhomogeneous spaces. The primary motivations for and
              applications of the first part stem from the theory of stationary random
              processes; namely, from the study of multivariate processes, which dates back
              to work of Kolmogoroff and Wiener. The theory of matrix weights has many
              connections with both finite dimensional geometry and noncommutative harmonic
              analysis. The second part of the project is closely related to problems of
              geometric measure theory, analytic capacity, partial differential equations,
              and image processing. The PIs have managed to free the theory of
              Calderon-Zygmund operators of an unnecessary homogeneity assumption,
              historically one of the cornerstones of that theory. So far their research has
              led to many new results in the theory of regularity of multivariate random
              processes. It has had an impact on geometric measure theory as well. For
              example, their methods yield an alternative (and rather more streamlined)
              approach to Guy David's solution of the famous Vitushkin's conjecture that
              unrectifiable one-dimesional sets have zero analytic capacity.

A central
              part of modern harmonic analysis deals with "singular operators" of one type or
              another. Such operators are pervasive in the scientific landscape: they turn up
              in mathematical physics, probability, engineering, image processing, etc. The
              expression "singular operator" can take many different meanings, but whatever
              its precise meaning within a given context, the term almost always reflects the
              fact that only subtle tools can be applied to the investigation of such
              operators. They are resistant to probing by "brute force" methods. In
              particular, one needs to employ techniques that are sensitive to certain
              intrinsic cancellations in order to gain control over the singular behavior.
              So-called Calderon-Zygmund theory appeared in the early 1950s as a first means
              of coping with singular operators of the type under scrutiny in this project.
              The PIs broaden this theory in two directions. First, they allow the number of
              degrees of freedom enjoyed by the operators to increase, thus exposing a whole
              new kind of cancellation. Second, they make a rather bold move by disgarding
              one of the basic and, it was earlier thought, indispensible assumptions of the
              theory. In light of discoveries by the PIs, this assumption (known technically
              as the homogeneity of the underlying space) seems now to be completely
              superflous. The PIs' approach has already had several significant consequences:
              solutions to several long-standing problems, streamlined proofs for other
              important but difficult results, and the general feature of making complicated
              arguments much shorter and more lucid.


