Title       : Quadratic Forms, Division Algebras, and Elliptic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9970374

Award Number: 9970374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49398              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Jacob jacob@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9970374

This project studies the structure of certain noncommutative
              algebras in detail.  Technically, they arise as maximal orders in division
              algebras, but they can also be understood as being generated by a finite number
              of elements together with a finite number of relations.  For example, the usual
              polynomials are generated by the variables (in degree one) with the relations
              saying that the variables have commutative multiplication (i.e. xy  = yx).  In
              fact, some of the motivating examples for this project, the Sklyanin algebras
              in degree 3, have properties very similar to the usual polynomials in three
              variables (except being noncommutative) and therefore give what is called a
              "quantum plane".  The Sklyanin algebras were introduced by Sklyanin in his work
              on the Yang-Baxter Equation and the quantum inverse problem, and their theory
              has been extensively developed during the past decade using the tools of
              noncommutative geometry.

This project blends modern techniques from number
              theory, algebraic geometry, and K-theory. The mathematical problems in this
              project were motivated originally by physics problems for which there are no
              visual geometric pictures. This project will develop ways to transform these
              "noncommutative" geometry problems into better understood and more classical
              "commutitive" geometric problems. Geometric problems have long been encoded in
              a mathematical construction called an algebra.  An algebra can be described by
              equations. The equations describing important geometric algebras are often
              known only "in theory", but the techniques used in this project can determine
              the equations explicitly.  Moreover, these equations can then be directly
              related to the curves which were used in defining the original algebras.  Using
              this information, the analysis of many noncommutative ("quantum") questions can
              be reduced to commutative questions producing the visualizations that help
              produce answers.

