Title       : Function Theory in Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9970439

Award Number: 9970439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaojun Huang huangx@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970493
Principal Investigator: Xiaojun Huang

Abstract: The
              Principal Investigator proposes in this project to work on a number of problems
              in the area of several complex variables and Cauchy-Riemann geometry. These
              problems are interesting and important not just from the point of view of
              complex analysis, but also from the perspective of differential geometry,
              nonlinear analysis and PDEs, classical dynamics, and mechanics. More
              specifically, Huang wishes to further the present understanding of various
              rigidity phenomena in several complex variables. This includes the
              classification of holomorphic mappings between balls in different complex
              spaces. He would like to understand the local holomorphic invariants of a
              certain class of real submanifolds of complex spaces, the so-called the Bishop
              manifolds. He intends to continue his previous work on the regularity of CR
              mappings between real analytic   hypersurfaces and his investigation of
              invariant metrics, including their applications to the study of dynamical
              properties of holomorphic mappings.

Complex numbers and functions of complex
              variables have become, since the 19th century, indispensable tools in many
              areas of mathematics and in its application to other areas of science and
              engineering. Indeed, the solutions of many problems in the applied sciences
              could ultimately depend on an improvement in these complex analytic tools and a
              better understanding of their basic properties. For instance, engineers working
              in planar aerodynamics must contend with the interplay between vertical and
              horizontal speeds. It is now well understood that if one takes the simple step
              of combining these two speeds into a vector and then representing that vector
              as a complex number, many aspects of the aerodynamic flow become much easier to
              visualize, with the result that many problems become easier to solve.
              Similarly, in materials science the standard method for treating
              multidirectional stresses in a uniform way is to represent them as complex
              numbers or, in more complicated situations, as complex functions. It then turns
              out, for instance, that the direction of the propagation of cracks in materials
              is mysteriously related to the properties of certain equations associated with
              these complex numbers or functions. Results of the research to be carried out
              in this project could lead to the discovery of new properties of solutions of
              these very equations, which would then translate to a deeper understanding of
              the related mechanical properties of materials.

