Title       : The Probabilistic Method
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9970822

Award Number: 9970822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173179             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel H. Spencer spencer@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970822

The investigator will continue his study of The Probabilistic Method,
              a legacy of the late Paul Erdos that remains in a very active stage.  The
              original, and still basic, applications are to discrete mathematics when one
              wishes to prove the existence of an object having certain properties.  Very
              roughly, a random  object is appropriately defined and it is shown that the
              random object has the desired properties with positive probability.  The
              methodology strongly intersects with the use of randomness in Theoretical
              Computer Science, the interaction going both ways.  If a random algorithm can
              be proven to have positive chance of success then the existence of a success is
              guaranteed.  Further, the output of  random algorithms is very much of interest
              for its own sake.  As the random object evolves there are certain critical
              regions, dubbed threshold functions, where the probability of events move
              rapidly from near zero to near one.  Using methods from mathematical logic the
              investigator attempts to describe the possible threshold functions for all
              events expressible in a given logical language.

Randomness is now recognized
              to play an important role in many computer algorithms.  The investigators
              particularly study packing algorithms.  How  can a set of partially overlapping
              requests - for bandwidth, takeoff slots or whatever - be handled to satisfy the
              maximal number of requests?  With the random greedy algorithm the requests are
              taken in randomly shuffled order and then each is approved if not conflicting
              with previous  approvals.  Oftimes this natural and easily implemented
              algorithm can be  shown to give near optimal results though analysis of it has
              proved to be particularly subtle.  A second, though related, area is in
              percolation effects.  Large systems are (often) nonlinear - they undergo a
              phase transition (liquid  to gas, low crime to high crime) which is qualitative
              as well as quantitative in a surprisingly short period of time.  With the
              appropriate scaling the  investigator shall spread out this transition so as
              better to understand  the phenomenon.

