Title       : Applications of Monge-Kantorovich Theory and Michell Trusses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9970520

Award Number: 9970520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97161              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wilfrid Gangbo gangbo@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970520
Principal Investigator: Wilfrid Gangbo

Abstract: In
              1904, in his remarkable paper on the limits of economy in framed structures,
              Michell attacked the following difficult problem: given an equilibrium system
              of forces (loads and reactions) with specified points of application, and given
              an elastic material with allowable range for its uniaxial stress, to design a
              truss in the plane with bars of the given material such that the given forces
              produce axial stresses within the allowable limits, while the total volume of
              material used for the bars is as small as possible. Michell's problem and its
              many variants and extensions have attracted a lot of attention in the last few
              years among engineers as well as mathematicians. In the coplanar case, Michell
              formally proved that, in the optimal layout, bars are arranged along the lines
              of principal strains of a displacement that arises as a Lagrange multiplier.
              These lines form an orthogonal system of coordinates in the plane. Any optimal
              design satisfying these conditions is called a Michell truss. Gangbo plans to
              study geometrical and topological properties of supports of optimal stresses.
              Techniques for studying this problem are similar to those that apply to the
              Monge-Kantorovich problem. Gangbo also plans to make use of the
              Monge-Kantorovich theory, which has recently been recognized as a powerful tool
              for constructively studying the semigeostrophic shallow water problem, which is
              a three-dimensional free boundary problem. 

The Michell truss problem was
              originally motivated by the desire to engineer a structure built of beams
              capable of supporting a specified array of forces, and to do this with maximum
              economy by using the least quantity of a given elastic material. Of course,
              while trying to be as efficient as possible, one must still produce a design
              that ensures a safe structure. Gangbo's interest is to determine good models
              for the design of such least-volume frames. The determination of the endpoints
              of the bars of the frame is the most difficult part of this problem. The second
              part of the proposal consists in studying shallow-water flow, meaning flow in
              which the vertical length scale is small in comparison to the horizontal length
              scale (e.g., the flow of ocean currents). If one collects data at a given time,
              one hopes to predict how that data will evolve over time. For instance, if one
              measures the pressure of the water today, one would like to forecast its
              pressure tomorrow. In the geostrophic model, pressure is an important quantity
              to know. For instance, one can infer the speed of the water from its pressure.
              Gangbo will use the so-called Monge-Kantorovich theory, which has recently
              surfaced as a powerful tool in various fields of mathematics.  


