Title       : Understanding and Control of Metal-Organic Contacts and Transport in Organic
               Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9970663

Award Number: 9970663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis J. Rothberg LJR@chem.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1517,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An understanding of current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of organic devices
              such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) is important if these devices are to
              attain their potential for display engineering.  Improvements in contacts and
              bulk transport are required.  The flexibility to modify contacts in a
              controlled fashion will be important for incorporating new polymeric
              transparent electrodes or stable high work function metals into organic
              devices.  The most critical remaining problems in organic devices, and
              particularly in light-emitting diode technology, are related to charge
              injection and transport physics.  Stability is thought to be the primary
              limitation in device operating lifetime.  The variety of device applications
              rely on a deep understanding of  I-V characteristics of organic light-emitting
              diodes, and  increased understanding  may guide the systematic manipulation of
              materials.  Current-voltage characteristics will be measured in both
              emission-limited and space charge limited injection regimes.  In the high field
              regime electroluminescence, photoluminescence, Raman and current-voltage
              characteristics will be measured.  A theoretical study of I-V characteristics
              of emission limited contacts will be carried out.  The high-field stability of
              polarons and the field dependence of mobility in disordered electronic polymers
              will be investigated.  This project may be relevant to the development of
              dipolar interlayers to reduce operating voltages of organic devices and permit
              stable metals to be used as contacts.
