Title       : Blowup Algebras of Ideals and Modules, and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a9970504

Award Number: 9970504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernd Ulrich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ULRICH,  9970504

The first part of the project aims at understanding blowup
              algebras of 
ideals, which include Rees rings and associated graded rings. One
              of the 
main objectives is to characterize the Cohen-Macaulayness of these
              
algebras in terms of reduction numbers. The principal investigator also
              
intends to describe blowup algebras by means of the equations defining
              
them. This is closely related to determining the equations of the image of
              
a rational map between projective varieties. The second part of the 
project
              concerns Rees algebras of modules and their applications. One of 
the
              questions deals with the defining ideal as well as the 
Cohen-Macaulayness and
              normality of varieties of commuting matrices. In 
essence, this is a problem
              about Rees algebras of certain modules of 
projective dimension two. Another
              question concerns the Gauss image of 
projective varieties and local analogues
              thereof. Phrased in terms of Rees 
algebras of modules, the objective becomes
              to establish a lower bound for 
the analytic spread of the module of
              differential forms. 

Rees algebras of ideals are algebraic objects that
              describe the 
blowup of a variety along a subvariety. Although blowing up is a
              
fundamental operation in the birational study of varieties, an explicit
              
understanding of this process remains an open problem. The aim of the
              
project is a detailed investigation of the algebras that arise in this
              
context. In addition, the wider class of Rees algebras of modules will be
              
studied, with a view towards various applications to algebraic and
              
geometric problems.

