Title       : Nonlinear Waves in One-Dimensional and Multi-Dimensional Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9970310

Award Number: 9970310
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70711              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suncica Canic canic@math.uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research proposal is on the study of solutions
              of
one-dimensional and multi-dimensional systems of conservation laws.
In
              spite of an extensive experimental and numerical exploration of problems
that
              are governed by MULTI-DIMENSIONAL conservation laws, there is no theory
that
              would describe properties of nonlinear waves that arise as solutions of
these
              problems. Recent results by the PI and co-worker Keyfitz indicate that
for a
              large class of two-dimensional problems, including standard equations
              of
compressible flow, an analysis of their self-similar solutions leads to
              many
results that are shared by the entire class of problems. They include an
              existence and uniqueness theorem that holds in the region where the flow is
              supersonic, and a description of possible singularities that may arise at the
              boundary where the flow changes from supersonic to subsonic. To complete the
              analysis, a theory of free-boundary problems for the positions of transonic
              shocks is needed. Preliminary results in this vein are encouraging, and the PI,
              plans to continue research in this direction. Tools of study include analysis
              of free-boundary problems for which a degenerate elliptic equation of novel
              type has to be solved, and asymptotic analysis of singularities. When
              completed, the results of this project will contribute to solving open problems
              in the field of multi-dimensional wave interactions and shock reflection
              problems, which include an existence theorem for oblique shock reflection by a
              ramp, bifurcation criteria for two-dimensional elementary waves, and the
              correct function space for a general existence theory that will capture
              possible singularities in the solution. In ONE-DIMENSIONAL conservation laws
              several novel phenomena, recently discovered by the PI, call for further
              exploration and understanding. They include nonexistence of classical weak
              self-similar Riemann solutions and the presence of bounded amplitude, high
              frequency, oscillatory solutions replacing the classical ones. Using
              compensated compactness methods these solutions were shown to satisfy the
              system of conservation laws in a measure-valued sense. Understanding what
              causes nonexistence, and what is the physical meaning of the oscillations, is
              one of the goals of  this research project.

Conservation laws are
              mathematical equations that describe processes central to
technology, such as
              high-speed flows, supersonic jets, as well as flows through
porous media which
              arise in environmental engineering and reservoir simulation.
Understanding the
              structure of solutions of conservation laws is crucial for a
successful
              simulation of these phenomena. The main difficulty lies in the fact
that
              solutions to conservation laws admit ``shock waves'', which correspond to
the
              sudden, abrupt changes in the flow properties. Shock waves influence
              the
stability of high-speed flows, and are crucial in the simulation of oil
              recovery. In addition, based on the recent PI's findings, multi-dimensional
              conservation laws admit ``singularities'' in the solutions that have not yet
              been theoretically understood and which are difficult to resolve numerically.
              Their presence influences the outcome of the simulations. This project proposes
              an original approach towards understanding these singularities. Even more
              generally, in this project the PI proposes an organized approach towards the
              development of a general theory that would describe the structure of solutions
              of multi-dimensional conservation laws such as the equations that describe
              high-speed flows. Because the methods used to study one-dimensional
              conservation laws cannot be generalized to more than one space dimension, this
              research area is wide open. However, since almost all processes in technology
              are multi-dimensional, the development of such a theory is an imperative. In
              addition to the research aspects of this proposal, aspects of the work
              involving nonlinear conservation laws have been used successfully by the
              investigator in graduate student education, and continuation of this effort in
              similar directions is proposed.



