Title       : Multivariable Operator Theory and Several Complex Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9970518

Award Number: 9970518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71394              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norberto Salinas norberto@kuhub.cc.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970518
Principal Investigator: Norberto Salinas

Abstract: As
              the main activity of this project, Salinas  plans to continue his research in
              specific areas of multivariable operator theory. These include: analytic
              (Hilbert and Frechet) submodules and quotient modules of the Bergman space over
              a (smoothly bounded) pseudoconvex domain in n-dimensional complex space; the
              spectral picture and C*-algebraic properties (such as essential normality and
              type oneness) of the n-tuples induced on modules of this type by bounded
              holomorphic mappings of such domains that are smooth up to the boundary; the
              smoothness of the corresponding induced extensions; Toeplitz C*-algebras over
              pseudoconvex domains with nonabelian transverse symmetries (such as generalized
              Reinhardt domains), the calculation of the K-theory of such C*-algebras, and
              the relationship between the smooth KK-theory and smooth relative
              quasidiagonality. He also intends to consider a new geometric phenomenon;
              namely, points of infinite curvature in the "numerical range" of a given
              operator T that produce points in the generalized representation spectrum of T.
              Salinas also plans to investigate the smoothness of certain operators of second
              order on smoothly bounded pseudoconvex domains where the Bergman projection is
              not globally regular.

The goal of this project is to explore and to exploit
              the important interplay between two rich and time-honored areas of mathematics,
              operator theory and the theory of functions of several complex variables. A
              newly emerging focal point of mathematical interdisciplinary activity, this
              area is brimming with excitement. From a purely mathematical point of view, it
              was naturally advantageous to foster the cross-pollination because it would
              increase the number of tools that operator theorists and complex analysts alike
              have to attack fundamental problems in their respective subdisciplines, but the
              success of the marriage has exceeded all expectations. From a more practical
              and concrete vantage point, the combination of the two fields is significant
              because of the expanded potential it offers for applications to both
              theoretical and experimental physics, as well as to engineering. For example,
              operator theory and the theory of several complex variables have already been
              used successfully in control theory as a crucial part of the development of the
              software that automatically lands the space shuttle. The activities of Salinas
              aimed at creating alternative teaching methods for use by blind instructors and
              his continuing role in the evolution of scientific 8-dot Braille add value to
              the project in the area of human resource development.

