Title       : Motives, Motivic Cohomology and Values of Zeta-Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9970333

Award Number: 9970333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Lichtenbaum Stephen_Lichtenbaum@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Lichtenbaum will attempt to show that the category of mixed motives
              previously constructed by him and T. Goodwille satisfies all the properties one
              expects of a category.  For example, he expects to show that the category has
              an object that corresponds to the Tate motive. Professor Lichtenbaum will also
              study special values of zeta functions. In earlier work, he had conjectured
              certain formula describing the behavior of the zeta function of varieties over
              finite fields at integral values in terms of generalized Euler characteristics.
               These generalized Euler characteristics are associated (hypothetical) motivic
              cohomology complexes of etale sheaves. He will refine these ideas by replacing
              etale cohomology with a "Weil coholomology" based on recent ideas of P. Deligne
              and J. S. Milne.

This project in the mathematical area known as algebraic
              geometry.  Starting from the beginning of the century, mathematicians have been
              translating much of 19-th century analytic geometry into a more and more
              algebraic setting.  The result is a complicated but powerful method for
              studying curves, surfaces and other geometric objects.  This modern approach to
              geometry allows mathematicians to use geometric technique and intuition is many
              more situations. This geometric point of view has led to major advances in such
              diverse other fields as number theory, modern analysis, and mathematical
              physics. Professor Lichtenbaum's work concentrates some of the basic objects in
              this abstract approach to geometry.  As he continues to uncover the properties
              of these objects, algebraic geometry will become even more valuable as a tool
              in other parts of mathematics and physics.

