Title       : Research in Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1999       
File        : a9970956

Award Number: 9970956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongming Ding DINGH@SLUVCA  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Louis University
	      3634 Lindell Blvd, 3rd Floor
	      St. Louis, MO  631083395    314/997-2241

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ding

The project consists of several major components of research
              in harmonic analysis.
First, the Principal Investigator will study the
              spherical transform of functions on symmetric spaces, in particular, he will
              define and study the spherical multipliers and spherical multiplier
              transformations.  Secondly, the Principal Investigator will study heat kernels
              of bounded symmetric domains.  He will find a uniform, explicit formula for
              heat kernels of all bounded symmetric domains. Next, the Principal Investigator
              will continue his investigation on the N-widths of spaces of holomorphic
              functions on bounded symmetric domains.   Finally, the Principal Investigator
              will continue to study analytic continuation of Bessel functions and
              holomorphic discrete series representations of automorphism groups of Hermitian
              symmetric spaces. 

In summary, all of these four projects are parts of
              ANALYSIS ON SYMMETRIC SPACES, a growing area of mathematical research. Calculus
              and classical mathematical analysis, developed in the seventeenth century, have
              been foundations of modern mathematics, physics, science,
engineering and
              advanced technology. Because of its importance, analysis on symmetric spaces
              
has applications in such disciplines as multivariate statistics, quantum
              mechanics, and even 
molecular chemistry. In last ten years, the Principal
              Investigator has been woking on this area, and has obtained some important
              results. Base on results of previous research and new developments in this
              area, more results are expected to come.


