Title       : A DIC/Fluorescence Microscope for the Cummings Life Science Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9970185

Award Number: 9970185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53796              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin S. Glick bsglick@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              				AWARD ABSTRACT - 9970185

	Light microscopy has long been an essential
              tool for biologists, but recent technological advances have greatly enhanced
              the power of this approach. Improvements in lenses, light sources and general
              microscope design have dramatically enhanced image quality, and have allowed
              for the visualization of structures that were too small or too faint to be
              detected using earlier instruments. Differential Interference Contrast (DIC)
              microscopy enables intracellular structures to be observed with unprecedented
              clarity. Because image contrast is generated by differences in refractive
              index, living cells can be viewed without staining or other manipulation.
              Fluorescence microscopy has traditionally been used with fixed cells, and while
              this method remains extremely valuable, the introduction of Green Fluorescent
              Protein (GFP) as a research tool has opened new vistas for performing
              fluorescence microscopy with living cells. 
	Because of these advances, a
              number of research groups in the Cummings Life Science Center at the University
              of Chicago are finding increasing applications for DIC and fluorescence
              microscopy. Many of these studies involve routine observations that
              nevertheless require very good optics. Examples include microscopy-based
              genetic screens of yeast cells, and the visualization of secretory granule
              biogenesis in protozoa. This award will fund the purchase of a DIC/fluorescence
              microscopy system to be housed in the Cummings building. The system will
              include: (a) a Zeiss Axioplan 2 DIC/fluorescence microscope; (b) a Kodak
              MDS-120 digital camera; (c) a PowerMac G3 computer; and (d) Improvision's
              OpenLab image capture software. This system will be suitable for operation on
              two levels. For routine observations, the microscope will be operated
              exclusively by manual controls. For photography, the microscope and digital
              camera will be controlled with a computer. Hence, the new microscopy system
              will provide sophisticated capability while allowing for great flexibility.
              
	This facility will enable the research programs of the Cummings groups to
              expand in new directions. Cummings researchers employ model systems to explore
              fundamental questions in genetics, cell biology and developmental biology.
              These groups train a large number of undergraduates, graduate students and
              postdoctoral fellows, who will benefit from unrestricted access to a
              high-quality microscope. For these reasons, the new microscopy facility will
              help the University of Chicago to maintain its status as a premier research and
              teaching institution in the biological sciences. 


