Title       : Mixed Bose - Fermi Superfluids and Fermi Liquid Transport in the Presence of
               Disorder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9970817

Award Number: 9970817
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeevak M. Parpia jeevak@ccmr.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Parpia
9970817

This low temperature physics research project seeks to create
              conditions under which He-3, a Fermi superfluid and He-4, a Bose superfluid
              coexist, interpenetrate and interact with each other. Such a coexistence and
              interpenetration of two distinct superfluid species does not occur in the bulk.
              The properties of Aerogel, a dilute space-filling glass impurity allow this new
              state of matter to be examined. In addition the project proposes to initiate
              the measurement of flow of normal 3He in aerogel. When the aerogel is
              sufficiently dense, the 3He should display characteristics similar to those
              observed in quantum transport in electron systems, while in the dilute limit,
              the flow should display a crossover from the Drude to Poiseuille flow behavior.
              
These phenomena are important both from the fundamental physics viewpoint as
              well for potential applications. Flow generation and measurement techniques as
              well as the knowledge gained from the measurements will have applications in
              many fields. Graduate students receive training appropriate to careers in
              academia, industrial R & D, and the financial sector. Their familiarity with
              technical areas, ability to innovate, and to integrate new technology is highly
              sought after. 
%%%
This low temperature research project concentrates on the
              effects of a very dilute glass (aerogel) on 3He. The aerogel introduces
              disorder into the 3He and allows another superfluid, 4He, to penetrate inside
              the core of the 3He superfluid. The project will look for coexistent
              superfluids and for interactions between the two distinct 4He and 3He
              superfluids. The esearcher will also examine in detail the effect of disorder
              on the flow of a quantum fluid. Why is this work at such an extreme low
              temperature important for the Nation? Quantum mechanical interference in
              electronic superconductors can be used to image weak magnetic fields, for
              example from activity in the brain. Quantum mechanical interference between two
              different species of superfluids has never been studied and could lead to new
              applications. The techniques needed to induce and measure flow in the quantum
              and conventional regimes as well as the understanding gained will have
              applications for flow in porous media. Areas such as oil field recovery, the
              management of aquifers, as well as the flow of biological fluids could benefit.
              Graduate students receive training appropriate to careers in academia,
              industrial R & D, and the financial sector. Their familiarity with technical
              areas, ability to innovate and manage a project from start to finish, as well
              as to integrate new technology is highly sought after.
***

