Title       : A Thermal Imaging system for Ecological Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1999    
File        : a9970209

Award Number: 9970209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Jane Saunders                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64915              (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Bakken lsgsb@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diana K. Hews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Lima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John O. Whitaker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Amlaner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3085

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Title: 	A Thermal Imaging System for Ecological Research
Award
              Number:	9970209

Award Abstract

New instruments advance biology by letting
              us see what was previously hidden.  The new thermographic imaging technology
              has the potential to do for population biology and physiological ecology what
              the microscope did for microbiology.  This rugged, easy to use instrument
              allows animals and their surroundings to be viewed by the thermal radiation
              emitted by surfaces at normal temperatures.  Undisturbed animals can be
              located, identified and observed when otherwise hidden by night or camouflage,
              their skin (and indirectly, body) temperature measured, and their thermal
              environment mapped in detail.  The quantity and quality of data are improved
              while disturbance to the animal is reduced.  The group sharing this instrument
              will use it for a variety of studies of fundamental biological processes and
              develop applications in conservation biology, such as the following
              examples.
Thermal mapping - A small animal inhabits a thermal environment that
              often varies by 10 - 20C over a distance of centimeters. This degree of detail
              cannot be represented by current techniques for thermal mapping.  Thermography
              can map the thermal environment at an unprecedented centimeter-level
              resolution.  By using well established techniques of remote sensing, satellite
              navigation, and computer mapping we will study interactions between the
              behavior, thermal environment, and population ecology of small animals in
              thermally stressful environments, e.g. desert lizards and arctic
              birds.
Thermal physiology-Telephoto thermal images of animals can estimate
              body temperature and regional heat loss rates.  This is valuable for study of
              the poorly understood periodic arousals of hibernating bats.  Arousals deplete
              body fat reserves and may thus decrease winter survival.  Remote-controlled
              time-lapse thermography of clusters of hibernating bats can identify arousing
              bats and monitor their activities without disturbance.  We can thus study
              undisturbed hibernation behavior as well as the effects of human
              disturbance.
Detection and tracking-Thermography is especially effective for
              detection and tracking of normally cryptic animals.  For the first time we can
              track large numbers of undisturbed bats and locate their hibernacula, roosting
              sites, and feeding sites.  Similarly, we can now track cryptically colored
              shorebird hatchlings in Arctic environments.  We will also use thermography to
              detect the thermal radiation emitted by recently incubated eggs to locate the
              camouflaged nests of grassland birds with more efficiency and less disturbance
              than present methods.  The precise location of nests, roosts, hibernacula and
              other important sites will be recorded with a precision GPS satellite
              navigation system. Together, these instruments promise to revolutionize our
              understanding of the demography of many species, including those of special
              concern because of declining populations.


