Title       : Topics in Discrete Probability and Stochastic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9970901

Award Number: 9970901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274271             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Aldous aldous@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970901

The behavior of large discrete random processes can sometimes be
              studied in terms of a limiting random continuous-space process.  This ``weak
              convergence" methodology is applied in several areas.  Stochastic coalescence
              deals with the merging of particles into larger and larger clusters according
              to some rate kernel.  The particular case of the additive rate kernel, which
              has a rich structure relating to continuum random trees, is being investigated
              in detail.  A novel process combining coalescence with immigration and removal
              and which appears to have an interesting phase transition is also being
              studied.  In a different direction, there is increasing interest in Markov
              chain Monte Carlo methods for reconstructing phylogenetic trees (indicating
              relationships between biological species).  Some toy models for sampling from
              target distributions on tree-space are studied via the weak convergence
              methodology.

The general area of research concerns large systems with random
              aspects to their behavior.  As such systems become larger, their behavior gets
              more difficult to analyze, either via mathematical theory or via computer
              simulation.  But in some cases it is possible to overcome this difficulty by
              relating the behavior of sufficiently large finite systems to that of some
              fixed infinite-size system.  This methodology is being applied in two areas.
              One area is refining analysis of models of random clustering of mass, a topic
              of interest in many areas of science (e.g. polymers in physical chemistry,
              condensation of raindrops in clouds, and formation of galaxies in the early
              universe).  The other area is the analysis of performance of algorithms for
              reconstructing relationships between biological species, specifically in how
              performance scales with number of species.

