Title       : Imaging and Optical Processing with Entangled Photons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a9970657

Award Number: 9970657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahaa E. Saleh besaleh@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malvin C. Teich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander V. Sergienko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970657
Saleh
The use of nonclassical entangled light is proposed for the
              investigation and development of a fundamentally new approach to optical
              imaging. The process of spontaneous parametric downconversion using a
              laser-pumped nonlinear optical crystal readily creates entangled-light beams,
              which comprise highly correlated entangled-photon pairs. Previously, we
              examined the intrinsically nonclassical nature of such beams and we used them
              to carry out high-accuracy metrology. We propose to examine the potential of
              this largely untapped area of optics for novel object imaging and analysis
              applications.

The proposed imaging configurations involve the spatiotemporal
              detection of the entangled photons. which is conveniently performed with
              readily available single-photon-sensitive charge-coupled-device cameras and
              avalanche-photodiode detectors. In entangled-photon imaging, the members of
              each entangled-photon pair are split into two separate optical paths. Each path
              is individually configured in terms of its optics. The strength of this
              approach resides in the strong space and time correlations of the pairs -
              measurements performed on one member of an entangled-photon pair are rapidly
              reflected in correlation measurements with its partner photon. As an example of
              the unusual properties of such systems, this feature permits the insertion of
              an optical element into the path of one of the photons to be manifested in the
              unaltered partner's path when evaluated in coincidence. Thus, one path can
              contain the sample object while the other path can contain optical elements
              such as lenses and apertures to manipulate the image. This can be useful in
              biological imaging, for example. where it is not always feasible to insert
              sizable optical elements into the optical path illuminating the sample.
              Moreover, one can illuminate an object with one optical wavelength while
              illuminating the optical elements with a different wavelength, thus permitting
              a unique dual-wavelength-imaging configuration. Furthermore, this configuration
              can be extended to include broadband downconver-ted light, yielding
              correlated-photon multi-spectral imaging possibilities. We have carried out
              preliminary experiments supporting the features of some of these
              notions.

Experimental and theoretical investigations or several forms of
              entangled-photon imaging are proposed. Unifying principles and intrinsic
              limitations, such as the sensitivity and resolution, of imaging with entangled
              light will be elucidated. An expression for the optical transfer function will
              be derived using realistic assumptions regarding the image detection time and
              photon flux incident on the sample. Experiments will be conducted to assess the
              single-photon-sensitive intensified charge-coupled-device camera, which is part
              of the imaging system. Following this, several experimental arrangements will
              be investigated, particularly the demonstration and performance evaluation of
              single-wavelength, and possibly dual-wavelength configurations, as indicated
              above. Our overall goal is to establish the merits of, and demonstrate the
              operation of, a highly novel and useful entangled-photon imaging system
              suitable for a variety of applications in the physical and biological
              sciences.
***


