Title       : Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Biomolecular
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9970194

Award Number: 9970194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Brenna jtb4cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl A. Batt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mariana F. Wolfner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Tanksley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kresovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9970194

Abstract


Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization
              Time-of-Flight (MALDI-TOF) mass spectrometry is an analytical chemical
              technique that excels at characterization of large biomolecules such as
              proteins, DNA, or sugars. These compounds are the critical mediators of
              biological function and define health and diseased state.  As the genes of
              various organisms, including humans, is sequenced, there is a pressing need to
              rapidly analyzed new proteins and assign functions to them.  The MALDI-TOF
              instrument represents one of the most sensitive and rapid means for determining
              structure of proteins and DNA, and permits researchers to correlate
              physiological state of organisms with the appearance of various proteins. 
              Proteins and DNA are mixed with certain chemicals, deposited on a metal
              surface, and dried.  The dried chemicals surround the protein or DNA and the
              sample is placed in the MALDI-TOF instrument.  A very short but
intense laser
              pulse is directed onto a surface and is absorbed by the chemicals but not the
              protein or DNA.  The energy deposited in the chemicals effectively ejects the
              protein or gene into the gas phase with a
positive charge.  The MALDI then
              measures the time required for the protein or DNA to travel 2 meters and hit a
              detector.  The flight time is measured and converted to mass.  For additional
              information as to structure, the charged protein or DNA sometimes dissociates
              spontaneously or can be dissociated by collision with a neutral gas soon after
              desorption.  The masses of pieces of the molecule can be measured and used to
              establish the molecule's identity.  Once a protein or gene has been analyzed in
              this way,
its structure can be compared to a comprehensive database to
              establish its identity.  Information from collisional dissociation can also be
              used to establish whether a protein has been modified after its initial
              synthesis by addition of sugars, phosphate groups, or other compounds.  Complex
              biological molecules such as sugars can also be analyzed by with the MALDI
              instrument taking advantage of its capability for collisional dissociation.
              


