Title       : Topics in Dilation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9970347

Award Number: 9970347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56439              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. McCullough sam@math.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970347
Principal Investigator: Scott A. McCullough

Abstract:
              McCullough plans to investigate several related problems in functional analysis
              and operator theory. A common theme is the dilation of operators and the
              concomitant lifting of intertwining maps -- commutant lifting, as it is called
              -- and the special cases of interpolation of  Nevanlinna-Pick and Caratheodory
              type. Nevanlinna-Pick kernels, also known as NP kernels, were introduced by
              Agler as a natural generalization of the Szego kernel. Examples include the
              Dirichlet kernel, kernels nearly equal the Szego kernel on a multiply connected
              domain, and the kernels over the ball for Fock space. Dilation and commutant
              lifting results that parallel classical results hold for these kernels,
              including commutant lifting for bundle shifts over a two-holed domain. A number
              of issues for NP kernels and multiply connected domains remain unresolved. All
              function theoretic objects over a multiply connected domain can be described in
              terms of theta functions. From the trisecant identity, in combination with with
              knowledge of the zeros of theta functions, it follows that for any given scalar
              valued Nevanlinna-Pick problem over an annulus it suffices to consider just two
              kernels, which are explicitly determined from the data. Theta functions will be
              used to investigate additional problems over the annulus and more general
              multiply connected domains. The extremal elements (roughly what an algebraist
              would term projective elements) of an Agler family of operators are the natural
              objects to which to lift or dilate generic members of the family. Families for
              which the extremals are C*-closed, such as the families of contractions,
              isometries, and subnormal contractions, are particularly nice from a model
              theoretic viewpoint. This is not the case for the hyponormal contractions nor
              for the numerical radius contractions, where the extremals are a proper subset
              of the family but the C*-closure of the extremals is the entire family. A good
              measure of the divergence of the extremals from their C*-closure does not yet
              exist.

A common mathematical problem that arises in physics and engineering
              is to determine whether certain partial information is consistent with a
              favorable whole. For instance, certain seismographic information indicates the
              presence of oil reserves, while other seismic data are not pertinent to the
              question. Similarly, in the design of an electrical circuit there are often
              several competing design criteria from which one must select the relevant ones.
              These problems can also be viewed as representing given information in a nice
              way as a part of a larger, more coherent whole. McCullough will investigate new
              stategies for imbedding the "partial" into the "whole," and conduct a search
              for a cohesive theory unifying many different applications. This will be done
              in the framework of the mathematical field known as operator theory. The
              underlying mathematics is quite similar to that used in digital technology and
              automatic controlers such as autopilots.

