Title       : Eigenvalues for Vibrating Plates and for Thin Film Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9970228

Award Number: 9970228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58843              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Laugesen laugesen@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9970228
ABSTRACT

The research will attempt to establish the folowing
              three conjectures.
  (a) That the fundamental tone of a vibrating clamped
              plate under 
lateral tension is minimal for the circular plate, given fixed
              area. 
Mathematically, this involves minimizing the first eigenvalue of
              the
biLaplacian amongst plane domains of given area, with both Dirichlet 
and
              Neumann boundary conditions imposed. Symmetrization methods will 
be
              employed.
  (b) That steady states of "thin fluid film" type partial
              differential 
equations can be linearly stable in certain situations, but in
              other 
situations can be unstable and tend to film pinch-off or blow-up. Trial
              
function and differential inequality techniques will be used to prove 
the
              in/stability results.
  (c) That the first moment of an equilibrium unit
              charge distribution 
in the plane, about its electrostatic centroid, is
              maximal for a line 
segment. A "double *-function" will be developed to attack
              this problem.
The methods to be applied to these problems are mathematical,
              though each 
problem has physical meaning.

     Problems of vibration,
              fluids and charges have been studied for 
hundreds of years.  Today they
              remain challenging and important, as 
scientists grapple with new and old
              materials on extreme scales and under 
extreme conditions.  The history of
              20th century science shows, though, 
that progress on practical problems often
              depends on the methods and 
insights developed in basic research. The problems
              addressed in this 
proposal have been chosen for their potential to provide
              such insights. For 
example, the conjectured answers to problems (a) and (c)
              are "obvious" - the 
puzzle (and challenge) is that no-one can explain
              logically why these 
answers are correct. Finding such a logical explanation
              is sure to profitably 
enhance our understanding of and capabilities with
              problems of vibration 
and charge distribution. More specifically, the first
              problem in the proposal 
deals with choosing the shape of a thin vibrating
              rigid plate so as to 
minimize the lowest resonant frequency. Experiments
              performed over 
100 years ago suggest the circular plate is the one with
              lowest frequency, 
but there is still no theoretical explanation for this. The
              next problem 
concerns the equations that model thin lubricating films of
              viscous oils. 
These equations are nonlinear, meaning familiar superposition
              principles 
(adding two solutions to get another solution) do not apply.
              Nonlinear 
problems are at the forefront of mathematical analysis, and this
              research 
aims to understand how it is that nonlinear effects create
              stability, 
instability and pinch-off in thin fluid film equations. The third
              problem 
considered in the proposal is a simply-stated but still-unsolved
              problem 
arising from the theory of electrostatics, to do with how electrons
              arrange 
themselves on a conductor under their mutual repulsion.

