Title       : Nonlinear Evolution Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9970308

Award Number: 9970308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64853              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustavo Ponce ponce@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator will focus on several
representative problems
              connected with partial differential
equations arising in wave propagation and
              fluid mechanics.
In recent years there has been a significant progress on
              
the study of qualitative behavior of solution to nonlinear
dispersive
              models. The relation between dispersive and nonlinear effects 
has motivated
              several remarkable works. As a consequence our understanding
of several
              phenomena in nature is now more complete.
However, several essential question
              remain open. 
For example, an existence theory (local and global) for the
              Cauchy 
problem for several systems of Schr\"odinger type arising in both
              
mathematics and physics is unavailable. This is due to the fact that
              
classical methods can not be applied. Thus one has to develop other approachs
              
which rely heavily on techniques and ideas in harmonic analysis. In
              collaboration 
with C. E. Kenig and L. Vega, the principal investigator plans
              to 
continue the development of Fourier Analysis for this fundamental area of
              nonlinear PDE's.
 
 The wave propagation in diverse mediums and the
              interaction of 
different kind of waves can be modeled by complicated systems
              of 
partial differential equations. These systems involve many
              variables
which depends of the particular physical setting of the problem. In
              many cases,
these systems are too complicated to be treated with reasonable
              accuracy,
thus one has to consider approximated models. The vality of these
              approximations 
is essential to further study of the physical phenomenon. One
              has to give 
precise conditions under which the qualitative behavior of the
              solution of
these approximated models captures the features of the physical
              setting. 
It is here where the theoretical study of these solutions become
              essential. 
Thus, one starts with special solutions and its properties,
              stability, long time behavior
, ill posedness, etc. In situations where these
              theoretical results are unavailable one 
needs to start the study with some
              numerical simulations

