Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Subelliptic Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2002    
File        : a9970660

Award Number: 9970660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244695             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Michael Christ mchrist@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970660
Principal Investigator: F. Michael Christ

Abstract:
              This research will focus on problems in harmonic analysis, subelliptic partial
              differential equations, and spectral theory. A circle of problems related to
              the interplay between curvature, finite type conditions, Lebesgue-space norm
              inequalities, precise smoothing properties of Radon-like transforms,
              oscillation, sizes of images of mappings, and sublevel sets will be
              investigated. Those aspects of partial differential equations to be
              investigated concern subelliptic operators, and the d-bar Neumann problem for
              smoothly bounded domains. Long-term goals include a deeper understanding of
              global regularity and irregularity, and of analytic hypoellipticity. The
              possible relevance of a certain metric in phase space to these issues will be
              further studied. Lastly, the existence of absolutely continuous spectra for
              Schroedinger operators with slowly decaying potentials, and the asymptotic
              behavior of generalized eigenfunctions in dimensions greater than one will be
              explored. Multilinear analysis will be applied to this problem, and space-time
              estimates of an as yet undetermined nature will be sought.

Fundamental
              physical laws are often formulated in terms of partial differential equations.
              The mathematician's task is to analyze such equations and their solutions,
              which generally cannot be computed explicitly, and moreover to develop general
              techniques useful in such analyses. The harmonic analyst, in particular, seeks
              to combine dual time/space and frequency analysis to gain insight into issues
              such as the possible singularities of solutions or eigenfunctions, how such
              singularities reflect the structure of the underlying differential equation or
              linear operator, and what properties of the operator 
influence singularities
              or asymptotic behavior. In particular, curvature in various guises plays an
              important role for hyperbolic partial differential equations, and for geometry
              in complex space. This research project focuses on a number of interrelated
              fundamental questions concerning harmonic analysis and its applications to
              partial differential equations and to spectral theory, in which curvature and
              time/frequency analysis play leading roles. The aim is to develop basic methods
              of analysis, through the investigation of several concrete problems, that may
              lead to a better understanding of underlying mathematical phenomena and,
              ultimately, of any physical laws that the mathematics 

