Title       : Extremal and Probabilistic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1999       
File        : a9970404

Award Number: 9970404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85029              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bela Bollobas bollobas@msci.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Extremal and Probabilistic Combinatorics


The PI plans to continue his work
              on the interplay between extremal and probabilistic combinatorics. One of the
              modern trends in extremal combinatorics is the study of extremal and
              probabilistic aspects of  general properties and large families of
              combinatorial structures.  The PI is one of the main advocates of this trend,
              and several of the  main results due to him and his collaborators. The
              substantial theory  that has emerged so far continues the theory started fifty
              years ago,  but goes way beyond the classical achievements. The aim is to
              determine  the fine structure of a hereditary property of graphs (or
              hypergraphs)  that is minimal for a given lower bound on the rate of growth.
              The hope  is to obtain characterizations that are precise enough to lead to
              good  estimates of the generalized chromatic numbers of random graphs. The 
              methods to be employed are an exciting blend of intricate extremal arguments
              and probabilistic methods based on the Erdos-Stone theorem,  variants of
              Ramsey's theorem, Szemeredi's regularity lemma, and  concentration of measure
              inequalities. The PI will collaborate with  Thomason, Brightwell, Leader,
              Scott, Balogh, Weinreich, and others on  the project. The PI will work on
              several other related projects:  with Riordan on invariants and polynomials of
              colored graphs and fat  graphs, with Balister and Stacey on percolation, with
              Arratia and Sorkin  on problems related to sequencing, and with Borgs, Chayes,
              Kim and Wilson on phase transitions in random combinatorial structures.

The
              problems to be studied by the PI are major problems of extremal  and
              probabilistic combinatorics. In addition to their intrinsic  significance, the
              problems are relevant to questions in computer science, statistical physics,
              and DNA sequencing.

