Title       : RUI: Structural, Morphological and Magnetic Characterization of Exchange Coupled
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9970789

Award Number: 9970789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276838             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew J. Celinski zcelinsk@mail.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Camley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970789
Celinski

This is a combined experiment and theory project which an
              area of major interest in magnetic multilayers. Layered magnetic materials are
              of great current interest in part because of their applications in magnetic
              storage devices, and in part because of fundamental questions about the
              relation between the structure of the thin layers and their magnetic
              properties. The project focuses on the influence of interface morphology on the
              magnetic properties of the composite structure. This is a complex problem
              because there are many different types of interfaces and the structural
              interface properties may be quite different from the magnetic interface
              properties. The research will investigate the magnetic and structural
              properties of Fe/Pd/Fe and Fe/Ag/Fe multilayers. These can be grown with a
              variety of well-characterized interfaces, and depending on growth conditions
              can exhibit terrace widths varying from a few nanometers to a micron. A key
              measurement tool is the use of ferromagnetic resonance to determine magnetic
              interface quality through measurements of the linewidth. An important
              application of the results will be to correlate magnetic and structural
              interface quality with the size of the giant magnetoresistance in the layered
              materials. This research will be carried out at a primarily undergraduate
              institution. Students participating in the project receive excellent training
              with state of the art instrumentation, which prepares them for careers in
              industry or for continued research at the graduate school level.
%%%
The
              research project will be conducted at a primarily undergraduate institution and
              involves the synergist collaboration between an experimentalist and a theorist.
              The principle investigators will study magnetic metal multilayers which the
              giant magneto resistance effect (GMR) now commercially employed in computer
              hard drives. The objective is to learn how the structural morphology of the
              metal multilayers influences their magnetic properties. Students participating
              in the project receive excellent training with state of the art
              instrumentation, which prepares them for careers in industry or for continued
              research at the graduate school level.
***


