Title       : Uniform and Exponential Asymptotics with Applications to Orthogonal Polynomials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9970489

Award Number: 9970489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy M. Dunster dunster@math.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9970489

In this proposal a number of projects will be undertaken.  As
              one
of the main areas of research, uniform asymptotic theories involving
              a
coalescing turning point and pole, developed earlier by Dunster, will
              be
used in the study of non-classical orthogonal polynomials (with an
              emphasis
on the Meixner, Pollaczek and Charlier polynomials).  These
              earlier
asymptotic theories will also be used in the study of certain
              singularly
perturbed boundary value problems arising from population biology. 
              Also in
this proposal Dunster intends to sum certain classical uniform
              asymptotic
Airy function expansions (involving a large parameter and a turning
              point)
into convergent representations.  The new results would then have
              an
immediate application to Bessel functions of large order and
              Legendre
functions of large degree. A central and unifying component of the
              proposed
problems is the development of explicit and realistic error
              bounds.

More generally, this proposal is based on the approximation of
              the
so-called special functions. Special functions are solutions of
              certain
equations which appear in many areas of physics, engineering
              and
mathematics.  This is a very classical branch of mathematics that
              has
already contributed much to our understanding of the physical
              world.
Numerical and theoretical results concerning special functions are
              still of
great importance in virtually all of the physical sciences. Morever,
              during
the past decade there have been a series of new and exciting ideas
              leading
to significant improvements in the accuracy of asymptotic methods,
              such as
the so-called "exponential asymptotics" pioneered by the
              mathematical
physicist Michael Berry. In this project Dunster intends to use
              and extend
these ideas in a number of directions. One aspect of the proposal
              is to
obtain approximations which are valid for a wider range of variables
              than
obtained previously.  An immediate advantage of these more
              powerful
approximations is that there is greater flexibility in their use
              in
numerical applications, as well as having important
              theoretical
implications.


