Title       : Geometry of Banach Spaces and Operator Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2001     
File        : a9970350

Award Number: 9970350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Johnson johnson@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gilles Pisier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposers will investigate problems in the theories of Banach 
spaces and 
              operator spaces. The main emphasis will be on the linear 
and nonlinear 
              structural properties of Banach spaces and their non-
commutative analogs, the
               so-called "operator spaces". The main 
objects of study are Lipschitz
              functions  between Banach spaces and 
their differentiability properties,
              completely bounded linear maps, 
similarity problems for homomorphisms on
              operator algebras and 
various properties of non-commutative
              L_p-spaces.

Banach space theory, which is at the core of this proposal,
              studies 
notions of  "distance" which are not necessarily Euclidean on both
              
finite and infinite dimensional vector spaces. It forms the basis for 
both
              Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry and the analytic 
geometry of infinite
              dimensional function spaces,  such as, for 
example, the space of continuous
              numerical functions on an  interval, 
or more complicated classes of
              functions. From the beginning, the 
ideas at the root of Quantum Mechanics
              have had a major impact on 
mathematics,  stimulating the study of operators
              and their spectrum 
instead of numerical  functions. Very recently, these
              ideas have led 
to the new field of "Quantized Functional Analysis" or
              "Operator 
Space Theory" and this development has led  to the solution of
              
several major problems as well as opened new avenues of  research.
              
Analogously, the nonlinear geometry of Banach spaces also is a 
rather 
              recent development which is likely to have considerable 
impact in geometrical
              analysis in both the finite and infinite 
dimensional settings. The principal
              investigators are playing a 
leading role in these developments.

