Title       : An Automated DNA Sequencing and Genotyping Facility for Studies of Ecology,
               Systematics, Evolution, and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9970113

Award Number: 9970113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120234             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Harrison rgh4@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Kern Reeve  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly R. Zamudio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan N. Danforth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
(DBI-9970113)


	Among population biologists, behavioral
              ecologists, conservation biologists, and systematists, there is increasing
              demand for molecular (DNA) markers that can provide information on mating
              systems, population structure, genealogy, and phylogeny.  It is also becoming
              clear that extremely large data sets will often be required (1) to provide
              definitive answers about the forces that shape genetic change over time and
              space and (2) to achieve a clear understanding of relationships among
              individuals within species and among species or higher taxa.  Automated DNA
              sequencing and genotyping have now improved to the point that they clearly can
              enhance the efficiency and productivity of research programs in ecology,
              evolutionary biology, conservation biology, systematics and behavior.  Funds
              will be used to purchase an automated sequencer for a multi-user facility that
              will serve a large community of biologists within these disciplines.  These
              biologists are part of four distinct units at Cornell University, but all
              contribute to what is arguably one of the premiere graduate programs in
              organismal biology in the country.  The multi-user facility will not only
              provide access to cost-effective DNA sequencing and genotyping for faculty,
              students, and postdoctoral associates, but will markedly improve the training
              of students and catalyze interactions among scientists with diverse taxonomic
              and disciplinary interests.




