Title       : Topics in Quantum Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a9970509

Award Number: 9970509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66075              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Rieffel rieffel@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Rieffel

I propose to develop and apply a theory of quantum metric
              spaces. My point of departure will be the ideas of Alain Connes concerning
              quantum Riemannian manifolds. My emphasis will be on extending to quantum
              spaces, in the operator algebras setting, the notion of the Gromov-Hausdorff
              distance between metric spaces. I expect to apply this theory to the many
              situations already in view in the physics and mathematics of quantization where
              one has a sequence of quantum spaces which appear to be converging to another
              space, either quantum or classical. In most such situations of which I am
              aware, the present notions of convergence are either just heuristic, or quite
              weak. I believe that a quantum Gromov-Hausdorff convergence can often be
              applied to give a stronger form of convergence. Examples range from
              approximation by finite dimensional algebras such as frequently occurs in
              Berezin-Toeplitz quantization, to approximation of quantum field-theory models,
              especially those of integrable systems, say by lattice models, all the way to
              the hypothesized "M-theory" of string theory and its (hypothesized)
              approximation by "Matrix theory".

Our nation's technological and economic
              success has at its foundation the mathematical models of the world around us
              which scientists develop in order to understand how to use the flood of data
              which flows from the laboratories of the experimental scientists. But human
              beings and computers can only deal with finite collections of numbers at a
              time.  Thus in applying these mathematical models it is almost always necessary
              to approximate the infinite variability of our world by finite collections of
              numbers. It is then crucial to understand how valid any given approximation is.
              With respect to individual calculations this matter has received extensive
              study. But less study has been made of how complex models as a whole can be
              approximated well by simpler models as a whole. Relatively little is known
              about such "global" approximations in the case of the models of quantum
              physics, which is the part of physics which governs chemical and biochemical
              reactions, the functioning of semi-conductors, and many other key technologies.
              I propose to extend to the quantum realm one form of global approximation,
              called Gromov-Hausdorff distance, which has in recent years proved to be quite
              powerful in the classical realm for dealing with certain broad classes of
              mathematical situations. I expect to apply this global approximation method to
              better understand how to effectively approximate various models of quantum
              phenomena of current interest.


