Title       : Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a9970991

Award Number: 9970991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3819501            (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel L. Tabor tabor@nucott.physics.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970991
Tabor
This is a proposal for support of the experimental nuclear
              physics group at Florida State University.  The proposed research is to be
              carried out at the FSU Tandem/LINAC accelerator facility and at other
              laboratories around the U.S.  Improvements at the FSU facility, including new
              high-efficiency 'clover' detectors, a radioactive 14C beam and an intenxe,
              highly polarized 7Li beam will be valuable for investigations of the high-spin
              structure of s-d shell nuclei far from stability to test microscopic and
              macroscopic nuclear models, for exploring octupole collectivity in actinide
              nuclei, and for studying the structure of neutron-rich mid-mass nuclei.  The
              polarized 7Li beam provides an excellent way to explore how the shape and
              internal structure of a loosely bound nucleus affect scattering and transfer
              processes, especially the couplings to the continuum which are so important in
              halo nuclei.  Our developments in resonant particle decay spectroscopy
              instrumentation will permit high resolution studies of the alpha decay
              properties of light nuclei to explore mirror states, cluster structure, and
              widths of astrophysical interest.  The FSU Tandem/LINAC and associated
              instrumentation are well suited to precision fast-beam laser spectroscopy of
              few electron ions to test relativistic and higher order QED effects in atomic
              structure calculations.

We propose to take advantage of the new capabilities
              at the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory after the upgrade,
              including the compact beam sweeper magnet which FSU is helping build, to
              examine proton and neutron multipole matrix elements in exotic nuclei and to
              probe the momentum distributions of 'halo' nuclei.  Experiments are planned
              using Gammasphere and Euroball to investigate the quenching of pairing
              correlations and possible other dramatic phase changes at ultra-high spins. 
              Our group has the primary responsibility for constructing the two Ring-imaging
              Cherenkov detectors for the PHENIX experiment, which is optimized to study the
              interior of hot dense nuclear matter formed in relativistic heavy-ion
              collisions, and plans to be involved in 'mining' the data for signatures of
              quark-gluon plasma. Members of our group plan to exploit the new generation of
              electron accelerators and detectors for precision studies of the nucleon and
              light nuclei using the (e,e'p) reaction at Jefferson Lab, MIT-Bates, and the
              Mainz Microtron. Our group has been directly involved in the construction and
              commissioning of the CEBAF Large Acceptance Spectrometer at Jefferson Lab and
              is now involved in the e1 experimental program to study the electroproduction
              and decay of systems containing strange quarks to add to the understanding of
              fundamental two-particle interactions.



