Title       : Multidimensional Multiwavelets and Time-Frequency Decomposition Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9970524

Award Number: 9970524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78747              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher E. Heil heil@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970524
Principal Investigator: Christopher E. Heil

Abstract:
              This project will pursue two main themes. One portion of the research will
              address one of the most difficult open problems in wavelet theory; namely, the
              development of a general framework for the construction of nonseparable
              orthogonal wavelets and multiwavelets in higher dimensions. The starting point
              is the recent time-domain characterization by the PI of the accuracy conditions
              for multidimensional multiscaling functions under an arbitrary dilation matrix.
              Combined with insights from self-similarity and iterated function systems, this
              suggests the possibility of weak substitutes for the factorizations that play
              the key role in one-dimensional constructions.  The second portion of the
              research concerns frames in Banach spaces, especially Gabor or windowed Fourier
              frames. Issues for Gabor systems arising from the interaction between algebra
              and analysis will be addressed, and Gabor frame decompositions will be applied
              to analyze pseudodifferential and other operators, utilizing the principle that
              Gabor frames provide unconditional decompositions for the class of function
              spaces known as the modulation spaces.

This project addresses the
              mathematics underlying the processing and analysis of signals, such as images,
              music, and speech, but also more abstract types of signals. A signal can be
              processed by first breaking it down into simple, basic units and then
              manipulating those units in several different ways. This can be done in a
              nonredundant fashion, where each basic unit is independent of the others and
              contains one essential part of the total signal, or it can be done in a
              redundant way, where the information contained in different basic units
              overlaps. Nonredundant decompositions ("bases") may provide the most compact
              representation of a signal, whereas redundant decompositions ("frames") allow
              reconstruction of the signal even if some of the basic units are lost in
              transmission. The objective of this research is to construct and apply both
              types of decompositions in various settings. Wavelet bases in higher dimensions
              are especially suitable for the analysis of images. Gabor frames are related to
              decompositions that have been used throughout mathematics, quantum mechanics,
              and signal processing, and will be applied in this project to the analysis of
              operators, or transformations, of signals.

