Title       : A New Wavelet Packet Based Approach to Efficient High Speed Controller Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9970105

Award Number: 9970105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Soura Dasgupta dasgupta@engineering.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns a new wavelet packet based design methodology for
              efficient implementation of digital controllers operating at very high sampling
              rates, but for reasons of compactness fabricated on VLSI chips with limited
              surface area. In VLSI technology there is a tradeoff between the chip surface
              area, A, the number of computations, N,  that this chip can perform and the
              time, T, taken to effect these computations.  In general under suitable
              normalizations AT2 = N.  In a control setting, under fixed sampling rate and a
              given controller this tradeoff limits the number of bits that can be processed
              over each sampling interval.  Consequently, finite word length (FWL) effects
              come into play, and fast sampling restricts the overall implementational
              accuracy.  A motivating example where this happens is the stabilization and
              control of semiconductor laser arrays whose coherent phase locking dynamics are
              open loop unstable.  Stable locking would permit the use of such arrays in a
              number of important applications.  The underlying dynamics are in hundreds of
              MegaHertz.  Yet physical robustness requires a controller chip surface area
              that compares with the small surfaces on which these arrays are
              fabricated

The methodology we propose involves wavelet packet based
              techniques that exploit spectral disparities in different subbands of the input
              to a desired controller, to minimize FWL effects caused by signal, as opposed
              to coefficient quantization, while maintaining a desired chip surface area. 
              This will be done through the judicious use of multirate techniques, under the
              assumption of floating point computations.  The basic idea is to recognize that
              to achieve the said level of quantization accuracy,  higher energy signals must
              be assigned higher number of bits.  Our approach requires that the controller
              input, be split into several subbands.  Since the subband signals have smaller
              spectral support than the original controller input, each can be processed at
              smaller sampling rates.  Each such signal is then processed at different bit
              resolutions by different controller parts, according to the level of energy
              that the subband contains.  The controller part is then recombined at the
              original sampling rate.  The net effect is improved resolution in the control
              input, without increasing the chip area. The goal is to minimize overall
              quantizer induced distortions, by selecting the resolution assigned to each
              subband signal, and the manner in which band splitting is performed.  The idea
              is essentially similar to subband coding, that has led to substantially
              improved data compression in signal processing.  We argue that the improvement
              should be even more substantial in control setting, show that the technical
              issues in the controller design context are very different than in the subband
              coding literature, and formulate some precise technical problems that the
              proposed research is directed toward.  Finally, some of the techniques to be
              developed as part of this otherwise theoretical research will be validated on
              an experimental laser array control test bed available at this University


