Title       : Relaxation, Coherence, and Optical Control of Time-Dependent Molecular
               Condensed-Phase Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9970918

Award Number: 9970918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Cina cina@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jeffrey Cina is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical research in the area of coherence
              and optical control of time-dependent condensed-phase molecular systems.  Cina
              seeks to develop a comprehensive theory of ultrashort-pulse propagators that
              will facilitate the simulation of a wide variety of time-resolved nonlinear
              optical experiments and provide a useful tool for the further development of
              optical control of molecules and solids.  Various types of relaxation processes
              that influence the rate of electron- and energy-transfer within and between
              molecules will also be investigated.  Specific relaxations to be investigated
              include those exhibiting coherent changes in the electronic ground state; those
              featuring large-amplitude size or shape changes in the electronic ground state;
              and those involving long-range superpositions between classically
              distinguishable intra-molecular or host-medium configurations.  The proposed
              work will use a combination of formal analytical theory and computational
              simulation, and will involve a direct collaboration with the several
              experimental groups.

Ultra-short pulses of laser light provide a powerful
              means to place matter into unusual states, far from thermal equilibrium.  These
              states may have unusual chemical or material properties quite different from
              those of condensed matter in its more normal states. The work under this grant
              involves theoretical studies which explore the properties of these unusual
              states as well as how they may be prepared and how they may be detected.  The
              work is being carried out in close and direct contact with people who are
              making related experimental studies. In this way, the understanding coming from
              the theoretical work is being applied, in the near term, to the analysis and
              interpretation of experimental data. 
