Title       : Simulation and Theory of Crystal-Melt Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a9970903

Award Number: 9970903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian B. Laird blaird@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Brian Laird is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
              Chemistry Program to continue his research on the simulation and theory of
              crystal-melt interfaces.  Laird's prior work in this area has been focused on
              the solid-liquid interface for idealized hard sphere systems.  The proposed
              continuation will extend this work to more realistic systems such as metals and
              metal alloys and to systems with orientationally dependent interactions. 
              Density-functional theory in conjunction with formal statistical mechanics will
              be used to: 1) calculate the interfacial free energy; 2) predict the solute
              segregation at the interface for mixtures such as metal alloys; and 3) predict
              the structure and dynamics for solid-liquid interfaces of molecular systems. 
              Since there is a significant lack of experimental data in this area of
              research, the simulations will provide "experimental" data with which to
              evaluate and develop analytical theories for such systems.

In order to fully
              understand such technologically important phenomena as crystal growth,
              homogeneous nucleation, equilibrium crystal shapes or equilibrium solute
              segregation, it is necessary to have detailed information on the microscopic
              properties of the interface between a crystal an its melt.  Unfortunately,
              there is nearly a total lack of experimental data on such systems making these
              studies difficult.  Thus, computational methods such as the computer simulation
              techniques proposed by Laird go far beyond their usual roles in the
              interpretation of experimental data and become important data upon which to
              base analytical theories for these important processes.
