Title       : RUI: Acquisition of an Image Analysis System for Multidisciplinary Research in
               Biology and Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9970186

Award Number: 9970186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61091              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Winning bio_winning@online.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Kass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Angell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jamin Eisenbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Pernecky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9141,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract - 9970186
This multi-user group award funds the acquisition of
              equipment at Eastern Michigan University (EMU) for the digitalization of images
              from electrophoretic gels, the accurate quantification of the DNA, RNA, and
              proteins in those gels, and the production of high quality figures for the
              dissemination of results.  EMU has facilities that support research in most
              aspects of molecular biology, including cell biology, genetics, developmental
              biology, immunology, and microbiology.  Prior to this award, however, there was
              no rapid, economical method for quantitative and qualitative analysis of DNA,
              RNA and protein.  The new equipment will not only allow such quantitative and
              qualitative analysis, but the versatility of the equipment will also allow
              investigators to develop alternative methodologies to radioisotope detection of
              macromolecules.  This is a very important consideration, given the increasing
              participation of undergraduate students in research at EMU. 
The principal 
              investigators from the departments of Biology and Chemistry who will use this
              equipment comprise a multidisciplinary group with research interests in the
              fields of developmental biology, ecology, molecular evolution, immunology, cell
              biology, and microbiology.  The major research projects that will utilize this
              equipment include: a) an investigation of receptor function in early amphibian
              development, b) a study of the genetic parentage of a hybrid cattail, c) an
              analysis of the evolutionary history of interspersed DNA elements in rodents,
              d) an examination of immunosuppression by an animal papillomavirus, and e) a
              study of the structural organization of eukaryotic detoxification enzyme
              cytochrome P450.  In addition to supporting faculty research, this instrument
              will enhance the training of undergraduate and Master's level students in the
              application of molecular biology tools in a wide variety of fields.  Thus, the
              equipment will have a profound impact on the research infrastructure of the
              EMU.  

