Title       : RUI: Diffuse Emissions from Clusters and Superclusters of Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9970761

Award Number: 9970761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Boughn sboughn@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

AST 99-70761
Boughn

Models of the formation of rich clusters of
              galaxies predict that from 10 % to 70 % of the initial mass of the galaxies has
              been tidally stripped away and now resides in the intracluster medium.  The
              optical light from the stellar component of the stripped matter provides a
              tracer of this mass and could, depending on the epoch at which it was stripped,
              provide a map of the dark matter in the cluster.  This project is to observe
              the diffuse, intergalactic light in several clusters of galaxies.  All of these
              clusters have mass estimates deduced from galaxy velocity dispersions using the
              virial theorem, from X-ray profiles using hydrostatic equilibrium, and from
              observations of gravitational lensing of background galaxies.  The measurement
              of diffuse light will provide an additional constraint on the distribution of
              mass in these clusters as well as confirmation of the stripping hypothesis.  In
              addition, the brightness of intracluster light strongly constrains the dwarf
              star content of the dark matter.  The question of the low mass star content of
              dark matter has arisen because of the discovery of microlensing by low mass
              objects in the halo of the Milky Way.   The previous observations of the core
              of the rich cluster Abell 2029 have revealed what could be a tidal stripping
              event near the cluster center.  If this interpretation is correct, there is an
              excellent opportunity to study one of the most important processes in the
              evolution of clusters and it will be studied in more detail with high angular
              resolution observations of the tidal nebula, as well as with spectroscopic
              observations of the primary embedded galaxy and the nearby galaxies.

The
              diffuse emission to be detected in the intergalactic regions of superclusters
              of galaxies is not the optical light from stars but rather the X-ray emission
              from hot, ionized gas.  It has been clear for some time that the preponderance
              of baryonic matter in the universe must be in the form of ionized gas.  If this
              gas in superclusters is at the virial temperature then it should emit
              bremsstrahlung X-rays.  Diffuse 10 keV energy emission from the plane of the
              local supercluster has been detected its nature will be investigated.  The
              interaction of this gas with the CMB is also expected to be the source of a
              Sunayev-Zel'dovich (SZ) effect in the Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB)
              radiation.  The expected signal is just at the sensitivity limit of the Cosmic
              Background Explorer (COBE) satellite's DMR radiometers, but should be
              detectable with the new MAP and PLANCK satellite observatories.  The
              feasibility of such observations will be investigated by modeling both Galactic
              contamination to the CMB radiation and the random fluctuations in the CMB.  
              There is also involvement in a project to detect X-ray emission from the nearby
              Shapley supercluster using the RXTE X-ray satellite and the prospects for
              detecting the SZ effect in that cluster will be investigated.

