Title       : Time-Frequency Analysis and Multilinear Singular Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9970469

Award Number: 9970469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christoph M. Thiele thiele@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970469
Principal Investigator: Christoph M. Thiele

Abstract:
              The purpose of this project is to develop further the theory of multilinear
              singular integrals. This research started with the discovery by Michael Lacey
              and the Principal Investigator of the boundedness of the bilinear Hilbert
              transform on various L^p spaces. Their approach to this work, which answered a
              long-standing question of Alberto Calderon, exploited methods of time-frequency
              analysis similar to those found in Lennart Carleson's and Charles Fefferman's
              proofs of almost everywhere convergence of Fourier series. More recent results
              in this area include boundedness of the maximal truncated bilinear Hilbert
              transform, boundedness of the bisublinear maximal operator, and certain uniform
              estimates for the bilinear Hilbert transform, which yield a new proof for the
              boundedness of Calderon's first commutator. Research topics for this project
              include, but are by no means limited to, an extension of the aforementioned
              results from bilinear to multilinear singular integrals, as well as from the
              one-dimensional setting to higher dimensions.

This project lies in the field
              of analysis, which has been a central area of mathematics ever since the
              emergence of rigorous mathematics in the last century. More precisely, the
              project focuses on localized Fourier analysis, a theory that is readily
              described to any musician. In the same way that a musical score describes an
              intricate composition by breaking it down into its elementary units, notes that
              have specified location, duration and frequency, localized Fourier analysis
              synthesizes complicated mathematical functions from elementary pieces, each of
              which is a relatively simple function that has its characteristic time,
              duration, and frequency. It should come as no great surprise, therefore, that
              localized Fourier analysis has been applied so successfully in the automated
              processing of acoustic data. The specific topics in this project arose from and
              will have impact on the study of nonlinear problems in partial differential
              equations, a branch of mathematics with ever growing importance in engineering
              and the physical sciences. In particular, solutions to the problems under
              investigation could have implications for such concrete areas as data
              compression, signal processing, and medical imaging.


