Title       : Arithmetic of Elliptic Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1999        
File        : a9970382

Award Number: 9970382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph H. Silverman jhs@math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970382

Dr. Silverman will conduct research on the arithmetic of elliptic
              curves. He will do a theoretical analysis of a new algorithm for solving the
              discrete logarithm problem on elliptic curves and give optimizations for the
              various parameters required by the algorithm.  
He will study lower bounds for
              the canonical height on elliptic curves and prove a Lehmer-type bound for
              non-reciprocal points.  He will investigate the relationship between the
              Frobenius trace values of an elliptic curve and the rank of the curve so as the
              study the variation of the rank in families of curves and give a probabilistic
              quantitative justification for Mestre's method of producing elliptic curves of
              high rank.  All of these projects will significantly advance our knowledge of
              the arithmetic theory of elliptic curves, an area of mathematics which is of
              widespread interest in its own right and because of its applicability to number
              theory and other areas of mathematics.

The proposed research project  fits
              into the general framework of understanding the number theoretic properties of
              elliptic curves.  This theory has been extensively studied for a long time,
              both for its intrinsic beauty and its applicability to other areas of number
              theory and mathematics. In recent years, the full power of modern arithmetic
              and algebraic geometry have been brought into play, with excellent results. 
              All three main projects will answer important theoretical and practical
              questions concerning the arithmetic of elliptic curves and will spur further
              research in this field.

