Title       : The Advia 120 Automated Hematology Analyzer for Complete Blood Cell Counts on
               Normal and Mutant Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9970161

Award Number: 9970161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Muriel T. Davisson mtd@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              


9970161

Abstract

The Jackson Laboratory (TJL) is well recognized as
              a world leading mammalian genetics research institution. A major focus of
              research at TJL is the development of mouse models for the study of basic
              biologic systems. Sixteen of the 36 investigators at TJL use hematological
              analysis in their research and only have available a Model ZBI Coulter Counter,
              circa 1960. Funds provided by this award will be used to purchase an Advia 120
              automated hematology analyzer. This benchtop instrument will perform over 50
              different whole blood cell parameter measurements in under a minute. The Advia
              120 comes with veterinary software, which includes 3 preset mouse strain
              settings. The instrument automatically isolates the different blood components
              - white blood cells, red blood cells, platelets, and reticulocytes - then a
              laser is used to detect, quantitate, and characterize these cells. In addition
              to total counts and percentages, the Advia 120 produces cytograms and
              histograms on the cellular components of each sample.

The mouse has a long
              tradition as a model organism for  understanding mammalian genetics and
              developmental biology. The ability to create specific induced mutations through
              gene targeting technology has  made the mouse an even more powerful research
              animal. Almost half of the researchers at TJL are studying mouse mutants with
              inherited conditions in which the hematologic system is affected. The Advia 120
              will allow TJL scientists to expand the scope of their ongoing research
              projects because of the rapid generation of over 50 whole blood parameters. The
              Advia will be used to collect data on new spontaneous mutant mice, specific
              existing known mutant mice with blood cells affected, aneuploid mice, bone
              marrow reconstitution studies. The comprehensive blood profile it provides will
              allow a more thorough examination of mutant mice than is possible with the
              current technology at TJL and enable investigators to gain a better
              understanding of the mammalian hematologic system. In addition, avenues of
              research that are currently impractical can be explored. Finally, the
              instrument will enable researchers to identify new models for hematologic
              research by screening TJL's large holdings of mice with hematological
              abnormalities and provide a mechanism to dissect the causes and the interaction
              with other non-hematologic genetic anomalies. The instrument will be housed and
              maintained by the Flow Cytometry Scientific Service and made available to all
              researchers at TJL.

