Title       : Polynomials in Analysis and Analytic Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9970659

Award Number: 9970659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carlos Berenstein                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor E. Pritsker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Polynomials are present in nearly every area of mathematics. They have
always
              been and are likely to remain one of the central topics in Analysis,
in
              particular. The major goal of this proposal is to study several
              vital
polynomial problems in Classical Analysis and Analytic Number Theory,
              by
using the methods of Complex Function Theory, Potential Theory
              and
Approximation Theory as a unifying approach. We have recently made a
              number
of significant advances in the areas spanning from sharp inequalities
              for
products and factors of polynomials, and Markov, Bernstein, Nikolskii
              type
inequalities, to orthogonal polynomials, Faber polynomials,
              Bieberbach
polynomials and Bergman kernel methods in approximation of
              conformal
mappings. The considered problems represent a nice blend of a few
              subjects,
with applications in numerical approximation and symbolic
              computation. We
have also introduced new methods, related to potential theory
              with external
fields, in a long-standing problem on integer Chebyshev constant
              (integer
transfinite diameter) and integer Chebyshev polynomials.

The
              methods and results of the proposed research help to solve very basic
and
              important problems, such as factoring polynomials in the most efficient
way,
              approximating functions by polynomials and studying the properties of
certain
              special polynomial families. Approximation problems considered here
provide
              tools for numerical ways of finding conformal mappings, which in
turn have a
              number of interesting applications in engineering, physics and
other sciences.
              Many special types of polynomials, such as orthogonal
polynomials, are
              extensively used in various branches of natural sciences
and in computations.
              This wide range of applications furnishes a strong
motivation for numerous
              deep and comprehensive studies of polynomials, and
for our project, in
              particular.

 

