Title       : Algebraic Geometry Over Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9970618

Award Number: 9970618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert Baumslag gilbert@groups.sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexei Miasnikov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970618 

The study of plane curves and their higher-dimensional analogues
              such as surfaces, is a highly developed subject of great general interest to
              mathematicians.  The objective of this proposal is to continue with the
              development of an analogous subject, termed algebraic geometry over groups,
              which applies specifically to group theory.  A number of new ideas have arisen
              which allow us to not only develop a general theory for groups, akin to that in
              algebraic geometry, but also to look at various classes of groups in a new way.
               In particular there are groups which in a sense are the counterpart to curves,
              so-called one-relator groups, which can now be studied from a very different
              vantage point.  In addition, techniques from computational group theory come
              into play as well and we plan on exploiting them also, in the tenure of this
              proposal.


The notion of symmetry is familiar to most of us.  For example,
              wall-paper patterns, the beautiful arrangements of naturally occurring
              chrystals and the floor tilings of many old churches are but a few examples of
              symmetry. Mathematicians have invented a highly abstract object, called a
              group, which allows them to capture and measure symmetry.  The general
              investigation of such objects, called group theory, has been carried out with
              this in mind.  This theory has applications to much of modern mathematics as
              well as to physics, chemistry, biology, to the theory of computing, to
              cryptography as well as to our physical world of three and four dimensions.  It
              is to the further development of this general theory of these groups that this
              proposal will be devoted.

