Title       : Interplay of Algebraic Groups, Finite Groups, Lie Algebras, Quantum Groups, and
               their Representations and Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9970603

Award Number: 9970603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83640              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zongzhu Lin zlin@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The cohomological varieties for finite groups over fields of
characteristic
              dividing the order of the groups reflect many important
cohomological and
              topological properties of the groups.  But these
cohomological varieties are
              not naturally realized in contrast to the
cohomological varieties of
              restricted Lie algebras, which are realized as the nilpotent cones of the Lie
              algebras up to finite maps.  The proposed research will construct a realization
              of the cohomological varieties for finite groups of Lie type in terms of the
              cohomological varieties of the corresponding Lie algebras.  Using the actions
              of algebraic groups on the cohomological varieties of restricted Lie algebras,
              the support varieties of modules for finite groups can be computed.  An
              important task is to establish the relation between finite groups and
              restricted Lie algebras. Other areas of research includes studying relations
              among representation theories of algebraic groups, Lie algebras, finite groups,
              and quantum groups from the aspects of cohomology theory. 


Groups, Lie
              algebras, and quantum groups are mathematical objects that
arise from geometry
              and physics as symmetries, fields, and operators. They have broad connections
              to other areas of mathematics and other disciplines outside mathematics.  The
              investigator's special interest is to meld the representation and cohomological
              theories of these objects and to study their inter-relations.

