Title       : Permutation and Linear Representations of Groups with Applications to Monodromy
               Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9970305

Award Number: 9970305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Guralnick guralnic@math.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970305

The investigator and his colleagues will study primitive permutation
              groups and the study of maximal subgroups of almost simple groups with
              particular regard to applications in arithmetic algebraic geometry, number
              theory, finite fields, Galois theory and probabilistic properties of finite
              groups.  Coverings of curves in both characteristic zero and positive
              characteristic will be studied by translating various properties of the cover
              into properties of the corresponding arithmetic and geometric monodromy groups.
               Automorphism groups of curves in positive characteristic will be investigated
              using sophisticated group theory -- especially the theory of primitive
              permutation groups and properties of finite simple groups.  The investigator
              intends to reduce many of the questions to the case of almost simple groups and
              investigate the almost simple groups.  Recent examples suggest that in positive
              characteristic, a special role will be played by Chevalley groups in that
              characteristic.   In joint work with Shareshian, symmetric and alternating
              groups acting on curves in all characteristics will be studied. This has
              already led to very detailed information about coverings by generic curves of a
              given genus -- a problem first studied by Zariski.  The analog of the
              Guralnick-Thompson conjecture  regarding composition factors of covers of by
              genus g curves in characteristic zero will be investigated.  Detailed
              probabilistic and asymptotic properties of finite groups will be investigated
              using detailed information about the subgroup structure of almost simple
              groups. Algebraic groups will also be investigated from this point of view. 
              Results on algebraic groups often shed light on the finite case, and one can
              often use results in one setting to obtain similar results in the other
              setting.

The activities supported in this proposal should  shed some new
              light on automorphism groups of curves in positive characteristic as well as
              curves with special properties (e.g., curves with few points or many points or
              the median value number of points).  The investigator hopes to move closer to
              the complete classification of exceptional polynomials over finite fields
              (essentially bijective polynomials) which will have consequences in coding
              theory and cryptography.  The probabilistic group theory aspects of the
              proposal should lead to improvements in computational methods in group theory. 
              In particular, these methods should allow for probabilistic means of
              determining when random elements from a  finite group generate a proper
              subgroup as well as identifying  the group generated by a collection of
              elements.  Another goal of the project is to classify coverings of generic
              genus g curves in characteristic 0 and to find the correct analog in positive
              characteristic.  The techniques needed for this should prove useful in many
              sorts of covering curve problems.

