Title       : Saddlepoint Methods in Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9970785

Award Number: 9970785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald W. Butler walrus@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970785

The first project has three parts. (I) Laplace-type approximations
              are developed for many of the matrix argument special functions including the
              important Bessel and hypergeometric functions.  These functions arise in MANOVA
              settings and determine the noncentral distributions for the majority of test
              statistics as well as the sample eigenvalues.  Often it is the moment
              generating function (mgf) of the noncentral distribution that is specified in
              terms of the special function; in this case the mgf can be approximated and
              then inverted using a saddlepoint approximation. (II) Saddlepoint
              approximations are used in computing reliabilities and failure rates of
              complicated stochastic feedback systems.  System applications include various
              passage times in random walks, queues, multistate survival models, and some
              stochastic epidemic models.  The methods allow for very accurate determination
              of the transient behavior of the systems including many important performance
              characteristics useful in system design. (III) Saddlepoint methods are
              suggested for the stable laws to approximate all of these distributions and
              densities.  This development should make it easy to implement Bayesian
              computation using stable error laws as needed in financial mathematics.

The
              second project consists of three parts. (I) Very accurate approximations are
              proposed for some classes of special functions.  These special functions arise
              in all areas of the physical sciences and were created by mathematicians
              because they repeatedly arise as the solutions to important scientific problems
              and also because they are extremely difficult to compute.  In the field of
              statistics, these functions determine the power and performance of many
              commonly used statistical tests in multivariate analysis.  Computation of these
              functions requires immense amounts of computing time even in our modern
              computing environment.  The proposed approximations are simple, explicit,
              highly accurate, and should be useful in all the physical and engineering
              sciences. (II) General methods of approximation are given for the performance
              characteristics of complicated stochastic systems including various queuing
              systems, survival models, and stochastic epidemic models.  Such stochastic
              systems and networks underlie all areas of science and include models for
              computer system networks, ecosystems, production management methods in
              manufacturing, and reliability testing.  This second portion of the project
              develops methods for assessing these performance characteristics which, in
              turn, allow for the practical consideration of system design. (III) Some
              methods for statistical inference in financial mathematics are proposed. In
              this area, certain probability distributions, referred to as the stable
              distributions, are known to be very useful in modeling financial returns. 
              Unfortunately these distributions are still extremely difficult to compute and
              existing routines for their computation are not very accurate.  This proposal
              suggests some very simple and highly accurate approximations that should make
              such analysis routine and easy.


