Title       : Existence and Blow-Up of Solutions to Systems of Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1999       
File        : a9970623

Award Number: 9970623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Lindblad lindblad@math.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lindblad's  research concerns  basic mathematical questions for systems 
of
              nonlinear wave equations which include several important equations in physics,
              for instance, in classical field theory and continuum mechanics as well as in
              classical physics, e.g. Einstein's equations, the Yang-Mills equation and the
              equation of nonlinear elasticity. These basic questions are:
(i) Do we have
              local existence and uniqueness of solutions 
   in a certain class? 
(ii) Do
              we have blow-up of solutions?  (e.g. black holes in general relativity)
(iii) 
              What is the long time behavior of solutions?
More specifically, Lindblad is
              working on two projects.  One with Demetri Christodoulou on  proving the
              well-posedness for a class of problems that occurr in fluid dynamics and
              general relativity, in particular proving the well-posedness for the free
              boundary problem of the surface of a fluid in vacuum. Another project is to
              study how regular initial data needed to ensure the existence of a local
              solution to nonlinear wave equations, in particular constructing
              counterexamples to local existence.
 
These two problems are related to the
              question of whether the fundamental equations in physics have global solutions.
              Solution to these questions could have important consequences. For instance, it
              is conceivable that one could use the knowledge obtained from the solutions of
              Einstein's equations to permit the use of gravitational waves to observe the
              Universe. To solve these problems Linblad and his collaborators are developing
              completely new techniques that could be useful for studying many other problems
              as well, e.g. the properties of the interface between two fluids. Such a result
              would have industrial applications.



