Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Semiflexible Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9970589

Award Number: 9970589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhen-Gang Wang zgw@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970589
Wang
This grant supports theoretical research on the statistical
              mechanics of polymers.  The use of flexible chain models for polymers, e.g.,
              the freely-jointed chain model, the bead-string or its continuous version of
              the gaussian model, have contributed considerably to our current understanding
              of the dynamic and thermodynamic properties of polymers.   Many polymer
              systems, especially biopolymers such as DNA and actin filaments, and main-chain
              liquid-crystalline polymers, require that the stiffness of the polymer chain be
              taken into account explicitly.  A number of fundamental issues will be
              addressed in the static and dynamic properties of semiflexible polymers.  These
              include: (1) understanding the single chain dynamics of a semiflexible polymer;
              (2) understanding the conformation and dynamics of a semiflexible chain in a
              nematic field, with a focus on multiple hairpins; and, (3) understanding the
              phase behavior, fluctuations and instabilities in nematic semiflexible polymer
              solutions.  

While the main focus of this work is understanding of the
              fundamental physics of semiflexible polymers, the results will also be highly
              relevant in engineering applications.  For example, the study of chain dynamics
              includes calculating the stress of a polymer under various steady flow
              conditions and the stress relaxation for a deformed chain.  These results will
              enable us to predict the constitutive behavior of polymer melts and solutions
              in steady flows as well as their viscoelastic properties.  Likewise, one of the
              problems to be addressed in this research, namely the banding instability in
              sheared multi-chain liquid crystals, has important consequences in the
              processing of these materials such as in fiber drawing and injection
              molding.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical research on the statistical
              mechanics of polymers.  The use of flexible chain models for polymers, e.g.,
              the freely-jointed chain model, the bead-string or its continuous version of
              the gaussian model, have contributed considerably to our current understanding
              of the dynamic and thermodynamic properties of polymers.   Many polymer
              systems, especially biopolymers such as DNA and actin filaments, and main-chain
              liquid-crystalline polymers, require that the stiffness of the polymer chain be
              taken into account explicitly.  A number of fundamental issues will be
              addressed in the static and dynamic properties of semiflexible polymers. 
              

While the main focus of this work is understanding of the fundamental
              physics of semiflexible polymers, the results will also be highly relevant in
              engineering applications.  For example, the study of chain dynamics includes
              calculating the stress of a polymer under various steady flow conditions and
              the stress relaxation for a deformed chain.  These results will enable us to
              predict the constitutive behavior of polymer melts and solutions in steady
              flows as well as their viscoelastic properties.  Likewise, one of the problems
              to be addressed in this research, namely the banding instability in sheared
              multi-chain liquid crystals, has important consequences in the processing of
              these materials such as in fiber drawing and injection molding.
***


