Title       : A Scanning Electron Microscope for Studies in Developmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9970149

Award Number: 9970149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1999     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129654             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Martienssen martiens@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marja Timmermans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ueli Grossniklaus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Hengartner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the acquisition of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) that
              operates under conventional high vacuum as well as variable pressure mode.  The
              instrument will by used by at least seven research groups at the Cold Spring
              Harbor Laboratory to study the developmental genetics of plants and animals. 
              Projects that will use the microscope include the analysis of leaf and meristem
              development in maize and Arabidopsis; analysis of the Arabidopsis flower and
              ovule development; the developmental genetics of cell death in the nematode C.
              elegans; developmental biology of GTPase signaling in Drosophila; and the
              analysis of morphological changes associated with the development of learning
              and memory in the Drosophila brain.  The SEM is essential for these
              studies.
The Plant Group at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory is engaged in a
              systematic search for new mutations in Arabidopsis using gene trap transposon
              mutagenesis.  The SEM will provide a means to rapidly characterize these
              mutations in terms of morphological changes as well as changes in cell shape or
              specification.  In addition the SEM will be used for training graduate students
              and postdoctoral fellows, and in the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course in
              Arabidopsis molecular genetics, which has a wide impact on the plant field, and
              in the DNA Learning Center at CSHL.  The ease of use of the variable pressure
              SEM, compared to conventional SEMs, allows samples to be visualized within
              minutes of dissection without the need for extensive sample preparation, and
              the automated settings and the standard operations in 'Microsoft Windows'
              format means that users can be quickly trained.  Therefore the impact of this
              microscope on research and education at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory will be
              substantial.

