Title       : Division Algebras and Invariant Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a9970213

Award Number: 9970213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $348305             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Saltman saltman@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SALTMAN 9970213

Professor Saltman proposes to study questions concerning
              
division algebras and invariant fields. In the area of division 
algebras,
              he will study questions that all involve ways of describing 
these objects.
              One series of questions concern special, so called 
semidirect product,
              division algebras with 
arbitrary ground field. He is asking whether they are
              
even more special cyclic algebras. Another series of questions 
in involve
              considering general division algebras with special 
ground fields, in this
              case function fields of curves over p-adics, 
and asking whether they are
              cyclic. The second area of study of 
Professor Saltman, invariant fields, will
              also have two strands. 
The first series of questions concern trying to use
              Galois cohomology 
to show certain of these fields are nonrational. The second
              
series of questions involve simply studying these invariant fields 
and, for
              example, investigating division algebras with these 
invariant fields as
              center.
 
Division algebras are simple objects that have been studied 
for
              over a hundred years. The basic idea is to consider 
finite dimensional vector
              spaces with a product that is well behaved. 
That is, the product is
              associative and, as in the real numbers, 
every nonzero element has an
              inverse, but the product is 
noncommutative (i.e. a times b is not b times a).
              
It turns out the these objects embody deep properties 
of their centers
              which are the more familiar ``fields'' like the 
rationals or the reals.
              Describing all division algebras with 
a fixed center is really saying
              something deep about the arithmetic 
of this center. There are ``generic'' or
              very general division 
algebras whose properties in some ways reflect the
              properties 
of all division algebras. Their centers are, however, hard to
              understand 
so called invariant fields. One can directly study these invariant
              fields 
and thereby understand more about division algebras. 
One can use, as
              tools in this study, a whole array of 
mathematics including algebraic
              geometry, Galois cohomology, 
and algebraic K-theory. 

