Title       : Complex Dynamics, Parameter Space, and Immersive Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9970576

Award Number: 9970576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98668              (Estimated)
Investigator: Estela A. Gavosto gavosto@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The main mathematical goal of this proposal is the
study of parameter space for
              polynomial diffeomorphisms
in the complex domain. In particular, the PI will
              
consider the complex Henon map. The Henon map is the 
simplest model of
              sophisticated dynamics in two higher
dimension dynamics. With the aid of the
              holomorphic 
structure, complex dynamics can help bridge the
              separation
existing between theoretical real dynamical systems
              and
experimental dynamical systems. The proposer plans to
continue studying
              the structure of attracting orbits.
She will also study the analytical and
              geometrical 
properties of the dynamics that occur in the vicinity of
              
certain types of bifurcations for complex maps.
The dynamics  close to some
              types of bifurcations
is  rich and varied. Strange attractors, infinitely many
              
basins, and cascade of horseshoes are coexisting and they
are still not
              well-understood. Gavosto will  study these
issues using a combination of
              analytic tools from several 
complex variables and  immersive mathematical
              visualization 
techniques. The PI and collaborators will continue to 
develop
               computer visualization tools based on structured 
sets of textured surfaces.
              These tools allow real time 
interaction with complicated sets of higher
              dimensional
data.  The PI  will incorporate undergraduate and high
              school
students as research assistants in the visualization of data 
from
              research projects in complex  dynamics, mathematical 
biological models, and
              crystal engineering. 

The subject of dynamical systems models the evolution
              of
phenomena that change over time. Numerous algebraic equations
which have
              no solutions on the real numbers can be easily solved 
in the complex numbers.
              Along the same lines, the study of 
dynamical systems using complex numbers
              adds degrees of freedom 
(space dimensions)  and permits the visualization of
              hidden 
structures. Theoretical and computational progress in
              dynamical
systems will permit the decoding of intricate patterns and
chaotic
              behavior in a variety of applications. The development
of technology in the
              last decade has produced an explosion of data. 
The accurate and relevant
              visualization of large sets of 
data presents many challenges in the
              mathematical and physical
sciences. New visualization tools will be very
              useful to help 
bridge the gap between disciplines. The outreach activities
              
involving high school students and teachers in this project will
provide a
              way to integrate the community into the development of
science and in the
              understanding of its consequences.
As used in this project, technology is an
              exceptional medium for
introducing students early in their studies to new
              areas of
research in math and science. For these reasons, the project is
              expected 
to have a broad multidisciplinary impact not only in the sciences
              but also
possibly in the way the sciences are taught at the High School level
              and above. This project is jointly funded by the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities and the Division of Mathematical Sciences of the Directorate of
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences.




