Title       : Free Boundary Problems in Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9970522

Award Number: 9970522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Friedman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In free boundary problems one seeks to determine a solution of PDE system in 
a
              domain, as well as the boundary of the domain itself; naturally a
              
supplementary condition is imposed which connects the unknown boundary (the
              
"free boundary") to the unknown solution.  This condition arises from the
              
physical laws which underlie the model.  Some general theories developed as
              
researchers tried to resolve special free boundary problems.  For instance,
              
the theory of variational inequalities evolved from the study of contact
              
problems in elasticity and from solidification problems.  The present project
              
is ongoing work, primarily in two areas:  (1) Propagation of cracks, where
              the 
PDE is a solution of the biharmonic equation, with zero traction along
              the 
crack, and the crack'9s tip propagate in time in accordance with mode I
              or 
mode II of fracture mechanic laws; (2) A system of two reaction-diffusion
              
equations for the pressure of tumor cells and nutrient concentration within
              
an evolving tumor, with a conservation law at the boundary.  The objective is
              
to derive existence, uniqueness, stability and qualitative properties. 
              
These are new types of free boundary problems not covered by present
              theories.

The results of the first project will lead to better understanding
              of how 
cracks propagate in elastic material, a problem which is becoming
              increasingly 
important in the wiring of circuit boards and in aging airplane
              panels, for 
example.  The second project deals with simple tumor models that
              mathematical 
biologists have developed in recent years.  Our research will
              provide some 
understanding of how the size and shape of the tumor will evolve
              in time.




