Title       : Automated DNA Sequencer and dHPLC Heteroduplex Analysis for Molecular Evolution
               and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9970256

Award Number: 9970256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Clark c92@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Billie J. Swalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas S. Whittam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen W. Schaeffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 9970256
Funds will be used to purchase an Applied Biosystems Prism 377
              automated DNA sequencer and a Transgenomics WAVE high performance liquid
              chromatograph (dHPLC) to be shared by developmental and molecular evolutionary
              geneticists in the Institute of Molecular Evolutionary Genetics (IMEG) at Penn
              State University. These instruments will be used to establish a flexible,
              efficient, and cost-effective sequencing and genotyping facility. The strategy
              will employ a stratified sequencing approach, using dHPLC to identify fragment
              differences and automated sequencing of distinct fragments. The stratified
              approach is a rapid and proficient method for assessing DNA polymorphism in
              population-sized samples.

The four principal investigators will use these
              instruments in a set of overlapping projects that integrate developmental and
              evolutionary genetics in a wide range of organisms. The projects include:
              Molecular variation in genes associated with adaptive evolution (Andrew Clark).
              Sequence analysis will be used to explore variation in the regulation of genes
              encoding metabolic enzymes in Drosophila. In addition, combined analysis of
              functional variation and DNA sequence polymorphism will be performed to
              characterize and quantify the molecular evolution of antibacterial defense in
              Drosophila and maternal-zygotic gene expression in early development;
              Organization of nucleotide diversity in the third chromosomal inversions
              (Stephen Schaeffer). Comparative DNA sequence analysis will be used to
              determine the interplay of selection, drift, and linkage in determining
              observed patterns of genetic variation in the classical third chromosome
              inversions of D. pseudoobscura; Genetic regulation of early development and
              associations with interspecific differences in body plans (Billie Swalla). This
              project is investigating the evolution of body plans by identifying the genes
              responsible for morphological differences between closely related species of
              ascidians in the genus Molgula. Molecular phylogenies will be determined and
              candidate developmental genes that may be responsible for morphological
              evolution will be examined in hemichordates and urochordates and; Genetic basis
              of experimental evolution of virulence (Thomas Whittam). Molecular methods
              render the evolution of virulence amenable to direct study in the laboratory.
              Following a regime of experimental evolution in a microbial host-parasite
              system, this project will compare ancestral and derived strains of Legionella
              and identify specific nucleotide substitutions at known virulence-associated
              loci used to exploit protozoan hosts. In addition to these major projects,
              creative use of dHPLC and DNA sequence and fragment analysis is outlined by an
              additional eight minor users who are active members of
              IMEG.























