Title       : Problems in Operator Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9970693

Award Number: 9970693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84326              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald W. Hadwin don@math.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970693
Principal Investigator: Donald W. Hadwin

Abstract:
              This project includes the study of a generalized notion of composition
              operators based on unital endomorphisms of unital algebras of operators having
              a cyclic separating vector. This general notion unifies the analytic and
              measure-theoretic approaches, and it leads naturally to the study of a large
              collection of interesting new classes of operators. The project also includes
              attacks on Kadison's similarity problem from several different angles: one from
              a purely algebraic approach based on Pisier's new ''factorization'' results;
              another using invariant operator ranges involving a situation where the
              definition of the homomorphism is fixed but where the C*-algebras vary; and a
              third in terms of the hyperreflexivity problem for von Neumann algebras.
              Another part of this project includes a study of invariant subspaces. Here
              existence results will be based on new ideas of Haagerup, and stability results
              will extend previous joint work with John B. Conway. The project also includes
              a study of certain reduced free products of matrix algebras generating type III
              factors. Finally, the project includes further work on reflexivity and
              hyperreflexivity and approximate operator theory.

The theory of operators on
              Hilbert space is a part of mathematics that generalizes to infinite dimensions
              the basic ideas of matrix theory and elementary linear algebra. The growth of
              this subject was stimulated by and has applications to the study of integral
              and differential equations, quantum mechanics, and control theory. More
              recently, operator theory has interacted directly with many other important
              areas of both pure and applied mathematics. The general goal of operator theory
              is to understand the structure of various classes of operators and collections
              of operators. The proposer plans to study this structure theory from various
              points of view. Since operators are infinite objects, in some sense it is
              impossible to understand completely what they are. It is therefore natural to
              study "approximations" of operators, just as we approximate numbers in terms of
              finitely many decimal places. Unlike the situation with numbers, where there is
              only one notion of "distance," there are many different notions of "closeness"
              for operators. The principal
investigator plans to continue his extensive work
              on various approximation schemes, including certain distance formulas and a
              recent concept, free entropy, which is a type of approximation based on finite
              matrices. Another natural way to study operators is by breaking them into
              component parts and studying each of the parts separately. In finite dimensions
              this amounts to considering various decompositions of matrices, most notably
              the century-old Jordan canonical form. Unfortunately, it is very difficult to
              show that infinite-dimensional operators can always be broken into appropriate
              smaller parts. Indeed, this is the famous "invariant subspace problem," one of
              the most intriguing unsolved problems in all of mathematics. The proposer has
              new ideas for attacking this problem as well as the related problem of
              determining, given that an operator can be decomposed into smaller pieces, the
              extent to which every nearby operator is similarly decomposable.

