Title       : Problems in Analysis Related to Lattice Points and Singularities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9970899

Award Number: 9970899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Akos Magyar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970899
Principal Investigator: Akos Magyar

Abstract: The
              proposed research will deal with several problems in harmonic analysis
              emphasizing techniques from analytic number theory and singularity theory. The
              objects of study are related to wave equations, to Fourier integral,
              restriction and maximal operators and to eigenfunctions of pseudo-differential
              operators on compact manifolds. The first set of problems are of a discrete
              nature in the sense that properties of integer lattice points are crucial to
              them and are exploited by methods for exponential sums such as the
              Hardy-Littlewood method. The underlying space is the flat torus or its dual,
              the set of lattice points itself. Similar problems are considered in the
              settings of a smooth manifold, the usual "curvature" conditions replaced by
              assuming only that the objects are typical (generic) elements of the family.
              Techniques of singularity theory are brought into play to establish decay
              properties of the corresponding oscillatory integrals.

In more general
              terms, this project focuses on problems of analysis that stem from partial
              differential equations of fundamental importance in nature; namely, the
              Schrodinger equation governing the evolution of states of physical systems at
              microscopic scales and the wave equation describing the propagation of light
              and acoustic waves. The project aims especially at those situations where
              purely analytic techniques seem to be inadequate and deeper understanding can
              be achieved only by incorporating methods and results from different fields of
              mathematics, analytic number theory and singularity theory to name just two.
              Classical harmonic analysis has been a very succesful mathematical tool for
              describing the aforementioned physical phenomena but is completely effective in
              rather restricted circumstances. The proposed project is part of a vast program
              that has been implemented over the past three decades to enrich the classical
              theory and to extend its range of applicability

