Title       : Complex Variables Analogues of Hilbert's Seventeenth Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9970024

Award Number: 9970024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78615              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. D'Angelo jpda@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970024
Principal Investigator: John P. D'Angelo

Abstract:
              D'Angelo's project will continue his investigation of a complex variables
              version of Hilbert's seventeenth problem (due to Catlin and D'Angelo) and give
              applications of it to complex geometry, analysis, and algebra. He proposes to
              derive corollaries of the Catlin-D'Angelo isometric imbedding theorem for
              holomorphic bundles, and to extend the result to certain degenerate metrics.
              This work bears directly on the problem of classifying proper holomorphic
              mappings between balls in different dimensions. The complex variables version
              of Hilbert's seventeenth problem already proved has the following consequence.
              Suppose one is given a polynomial on complex Euclidean space that does not
              vanish on the closed unit ball. This polynomial must then be the denominator of
              a rational proper mapping (reduced to lowest terms) between balls, but the
              target dimension needs to be chosen sufficiently large. Thus restricting the
              target dimension constrains the complexity of a proper map between balls. Work
              of Faran gives further evidence of this. D'Angelo seeks to prove a general
              theorem providing a sharp bound for the degree of a proper rational mapping
              between unit balls in different dimensions. This will provide evidence for a
              more general conjecture about CR mappings between CR manifolds of different
              dimensions.

In his famous address to the International Congress of
              Mathematicians in 1900, David Hilbert posed a series of research problems that
              have greatly influenced the development of mathematics in this century. Artin
              solved Hilbert's original Seventeenth Problem around 1925 by proving that a
              polynomial in several real variables whose values are nonnegative must be a sum
              of squares of rational functions. The natural analogue of this result for
              polynomials of several complex variables does not hold. Given the importance of
              complex variable theory in physics, engineering, and pure mathematics, it is
              natural to consider other facsimiles of Hilbert's problem for complex
              polynomials. In recent years, D'Angelo discovered that such analogues play a
              crucial role in the study of objects known as "proper mappings" between balls
              in different complex dimensions. D'Angelo and Catlin later established a
              version of Artin's theorem in the complex setting. Its application to proper
              mappings enables one to understand the role of the unit sphere in higher
              dimensions and thus furnishes a multidimensional tool for the study of
              electrostatics, diffusion, and fluid flow. More recently, Catlin and D'Angelo
              have proved a major result that generalizes their earlier theorems by casting
              them in an abstract framework, the framework of so-called holomorphic vector
              bundles. The proof gives an unexpected application of the Bergman kernel
              function (a part of analysis) to a problem in algebra, as well as a geometric
              reinterpretation of Hilbert's problem. The result may have considerable
              significance for the parts of modern mathematical physics (such as string
              theory and supersymmetry) where holomorphic vector bundles play a large role.
              D'Angelo is the 1999 winner of the Bergman Prize, and this work is mentioned in
              the citation. D'Angelo's current proposal suggests various extensions of and
              applications for these ideas.

