Title       : The Chlamydomonas Genetics Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9970022

Award Number: 9970022
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1042500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth H. Harris chlamy@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald E. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1106      LIVING STOCK COLLECTIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is an excellent model
              system for studies of photosynthesis, flagellar biogenesis and function, signal
              transduction, and other aspects of cell biology.  The Chlamydomonas Genetics
              Center serves as the central repository to receive, catalogue, preserve and
              distribute wild type and mutant cultures of C. reinhardtii and other
              Chlamydomonas species in which extensive genetic analysis has been done, and as
              the resource center to disseminate information on this important model organism
              to the international scientific community.  The Center also maintains and
              distributes molecular reagents useful for research on Chlamydomonas, including
              genomic and cDNA clones of Chlamydomonas nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial
              genes.  Genomic and cDNA libraries will be added during the next proposed
              funding period.  A comprehensive database accessible through the World Wide Web
              provides descriptions of all cultures in the collection, historical information
              and reference material on genetic loci and mutant alleles, genetic and
              molecular maps, DNA sequence data, an address directory, and an extensive
              bibliography.  The Chlamydomonas Genetics Center web page
              [http://www.botany.duke.edu/chlamy/] coordinates the database, the
              bionet.chlamydomonas newsgroup, and on-line strain orders, and provides links
              to other sites on algal research, photosynthesis, and related topics.
