Title       : The Young Analysts Meeting of the Southeast and the Southeastern Analysis
               Meeting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9970541

Award Number: 9970541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wing Suet Li li@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970541
Principal Investigator: Wing Suet Li

Abstract: The
              purpose of the conferences that are held under the title "Young Analysts
              Meeting of the Southeast (YAMS) and the Southeastern Analysis Meeting" is to
              provide a forum for young mathematicians to gather and exchange information
              about recent discoveries in mathematics, with a focus on analysis in general
              and functional analysis in particular. It is the goal of YAMS to introduce the
              next generation of analysts in the southeastern region of the U.S. -- graduate
              students, postdocs, junior faculty -- to the existing community of operator
              theorists and functional analysts in that part of the country, thereby
              establishing contacts that will be of help to members of the younger generation
              in their mathematical development. The duration of a typical YAMS conference is
              five or six days. The program is normally built around a principal speaker, who
              delivers a series of five or six hour-long lectures. Talks by ten senior and
              ten junior invited speakers of lengths 40 and 30 minutes, respectively, fill
              out the program. The YAMS organizers make special efforts to attract recent
              Ph.D.s and graduate students as participants in the conferences. Their hope is
              that YAMS will provide a unique opportunity for graduate students and more
              experienced researchers alike to gain valuable exposure to some of the exciting
              advances in the operator theory/operator algebras field. 

The Southeastern
              Analysis Meeting (SEAM) has been held annually at numerous venues in the region
              for the past fifteen years, in most cases with the help of partial support from
              the NSF. The purpose of the meeting is to encourage the interchange of the
              latest developments and ideas in various areas of analysis, with special
              attention directed to the mathematical development of junior faculty and
              graduate students.

