Title       : Materials Characterization with Nonlinear Surface Acoustic Wave Pulses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a9970241

Award Number: 9970241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244499             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans A. Schuessler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970241 
Schuessler

This research concerns the propagation of high amplitude
              surface acoustic waves in solid materials and the development of a novel method
              for the characterization of materials based on the properties of such
              materials.  The manifestation of nonlinear phenomena depends on the nonlinear
              elastic moduli of the solid, which are sensitive to the appearance of different
              defects in the material.  The nonlinear moduli are therefore expected to give
              information suitable for materials characterization.  In this work the third
              order nonlinear moduli will be determined for several materials by fitting the
              solutions of the nonlinear evolution equations of the nonlinear acoustic wave
              propagation to experimentally measured waveforms. Contact-free laser methods
              will be used for exciting and detecting the surface acoustic waves.  The
              experiments will serve to test recent theoretical predictions concerning
              unusual properties during the propagation of such waves.  These include
              nonlinear distortion of the wave shape, generation of high frequency spectral
              components, formation of a shock front with subsequent nonlinear attenuation of
              the energy of the wave and, under certain conditions, the formation of
              solitons.  This project will contribute a new method for the characterization
              of thin films and coatings of superhard materials, as well as to the study of
              the visco-elastic behavior and anisotropy of materials.  The results of this
              work will have an impact on different fields such as materials science,
              acoustoelectronis, nonlinear acoustics, the theory of nonlinear waves, and
              seismology.
%%%  
Mechanical and elastic properties of solids are important
              characteristics reflecting their microscopic structure.  Therefore the
              development of new versatile and informative methods to measure these
              quantities is one of the ongoing tasks of materials research.  The objective of
              this project is to study the non-linear propagation of surface acoustic waves
              in solid materials and to develop a novel method of materials characterization
              based on the properties of such nonlinear waves.  This research will test
              existing theoretical models that purport to describe such waves and will allow
              to quantify the influence of such phenomena as fatigue and crack formation on
              the elastic properties of materials.  This research will also contribute to the
              development of a technique for the characterization of diamond and diamond like
              films and coatings, to the elastic and other properties of crystalline
              materials.  The results of this work will have an impact on different fields
              such as materials science, acousto-electronics, nonlinear acoustics, theory of
              nonlinear waves, and seismology.  An important feature of this project is the
              integration of research and education through the training of students in novel
              methods of materials science and related research areas.

   


