Title       : The Application of Wavelets in Computer Aided Design and Manufacture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9970083

Award Number: 9970083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranga Narayanaswami ranga@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              	This grant provides funding for the innovative application of wavelets in
              computer aided design and manufacture.  Specifically, the research will address
              the use of wavelets for tool path planning in numerically controlled machining
              of complex free form surfaces, surface reconstruction in reverse engineering
              applications, developing interactive sculpting interfaces, and process
              monitoring in machining.  Wavelets are a mathematical tool for hierarchically
              decomposing functions.  They allow a function to be described in terms of
              coarse overall shape and finer detail.  This property of wavelets permits
              multi-resolution analysis and is fundamental to the approach used in this
              research.  The research involves the identification of the appropriate class of
              wavelets for each application, and the development of tools and techniques to
              manipulate them.   Performance measures include the generation of gouge free
              tool paths and uniform chip loads in numerical controlled machining, accuracy
              and fidelity of reverse engineered models, ease of use and intuitiveness of the
              sculpting interface, and reliability and discriminatory power in process
              monitoring.
	If successful, the results of this research will improve both
              design quality and the quality of the machined product.  It is expected that
              the accuracy of machined parts will improve, particularly in the case of
              complex free form surfaces.  Part design is expected to improve because of more
              intuitive design interfaces, and design time will be reduced because of
              enhanced conceptual design capability.  Prototypes and models can be quickly
              produced through reverse engineering, and machining processes can be
              efficiently monitored.

