Title       : RUI: A High Resolution Study of Discrete Radio Sources in the Nearby Spiral
               Galaxies NGC 4321 and NGC 4258
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a9970868

Award Number: 9970868
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott David Hyman hyman@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1207,1217,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT


AST-9970868
Hyman, Scott David

Radio maps of very high
              resolution (less than 5 seconds of arc) and sensitivity will be synthesized
              from multiple years of interferometric data taken with the Very Large Array
              (VLA) radio telescope.  These radio wavelength maps will be used to study star
              formation in the nearby spiral galaxies NGC 4321 and NGC 4258.  The radio maps
              will be synthesized from a large and unique data set of observations of these
              galaxies at two wavelengths.  These observations were originally made to
              monitor the development of recent radio supernovae (SNe). By combining these
              numerous observations, maps will be made that, for the first time, have
              sufficient resolution and sensitivity to detect a large sample of discrete
              radio wavelength emission sources associated with star formation in the
              galaxies NGC 4321 and NGC 4258. Four other nearby spiral galaxies (NGC 6946,
              NGC 89 1, M5 1, and M8 1) will be studied.  Radio observations are essential
              for understanding star formation since the radio wavelength radiation do not
              suffer from extinction by interstellar dust as does the optical wavelength
              radiation. Extragalactic observations are important since the emission from
              sources in our own Galaxy are severely hampered by source confusion and
              distance ambiguities.
The discrete sources to be studied include: 1) regions
              of recent star formation indicated by the presence of thermal, ionized hydrogen
              (HII regions); 2) supernova remnants (SNRs); and 3) possible emission from
              intermediate-age SNe. The six galaxies that will be studied are prime
              candidates for studying star formation because of their high star formation
              rates evidenced by recent SNe, historical SNe, and numerous, large HII region
              complexes. The results of the research will further our understanding of
              current star formation and will yield information on the distribution of
              initial stellar masses formed (the initial mass function), the rates and
              efficiencies of star formation from parent molecular clouds, and the role of
              SNe and SNR shock waves in promoting star formation in these
              galaxies.

Catalogs of the properties of the detected HII regions will be
              compiled. Size, luminosity, and radial distribution functions will be derived,
              and comparisons will be made with studies at other wavelengths.  Visual
              extinctions will be determined from the radio and available optical maps and
              then compared to those deduced previously using Balmer decrements.  The radio
              properties of detected SNe and SNRs will be determined, and comparisons will be
              made with the properties of known radio SNe and SNRs.  The results of all
              measurements, as well as their statistics, will be compared to the data from
              other galaxies, and compared to measurements of Galactic sources and to
              predictions by current models of star formation, SNe, and SNRs.

This
              research will involve students at Sweet Briar College, a small undergraduate
              women's college, with collaborative support of personnel at the Naval Research
              Laboratory, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory, and the Infrared
              Processing and Analysis Center of the California Institute of Technology.  The
              Division of Astronomical Sciences at the National Science Foundation provides
              support this award.


