Title       : Algebraic and Geometric Representations of Combinatorial Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9970270

Award Number: 9970270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zoltan Furedi z-furedi@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tibor Szabo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970270

Representations of graphs employing algebraic or geometric ideas is
              one of he central topics of combinatorial research.  Their importance is
              highlighted  by their applications in Theoretical Computer Science.  The PIs
              continue their work on this subject and investigate three different aspects of 
              representations.  One of the goals of the PIs is to discover dense graphs not
              containg some fixed graph G as a subgraph.  This problem is wide open once G is
              bipartite.  The PIs search for algebraic or geometric representation of the
              appropriate graphs (e.g., Ramanujan graphs, norm graphs, polarity graphs).  In
              another aspect of graph representations the type of representation is given and
              one tries to find the most efficient one for a class of graphs.  The PI and the
              coPI investigate ``worst-case'' and ``average-case'' efficiencies of important
              representations.  The methods here also include probability theory.  Finally,
              the PIs apply appropriately chosen representations as tools in the 
              determination of some other parameter or property of a combinatorial structure
              of interest. 


Graphs are made up of "vertices" and "edges" connecting some
              pairs of vertices. Behind the transparent definition hidden is a vast amount of
               complexity.  One of the reasons the study of graphs is of paramount interest 
              is their wide applicability in Computer Science.  The "thinking" of today's 
              computers is modeled by graphs.  Algorithms often use specific exmples of
              graphs having a certain appropriately chosen structure.  The speed of an 
              algorithm could depend on the attributes of the graphs employed.  The problems 
              arising are part of a broader research area within Combinatorics, which aims at
              obtaining information about global properties of graphs under some local
              restrictions.  The PIs tackle specific problems of this type.  They apply ideas
              from algebra and geometry to obtain representations of graphs with excellent
              global properties.  Another aspect of graph representations is the following. 
              Expensive computer (disk) space can be saved by communicating the structure of
              a graph to the computer efficiently.  In these problems the type of the
              representation, that is the the way of communication is fixed, and one tries to
              determine how well different graphs can be represented.  The  PI and the coPI
              investigate "economic" ways to represent graphs using  representations from
              algebra and geomtry. 

