Title       : The Unramified Fontaine-Mazur Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9970184

Award Number: 9970184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89985              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel Boston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports research into one of the most important  conjectures in
              number theory today, the Fontaine-Mazur conjecture. One part of this conjecture
              was resolved by Wiles in the course of his proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, but
              there is another part  concerning unramified Galois representations that has
              barely been investigated. The conjecture says that all such should be trivial
              in the sense of having finite image. Motivated by group theory I will develop
              the evidence that there is a new kind of representation, namely certain Galois
              actions on rooted trees, for which the images are nontrivial. These
              representations are as natural to consider as the usual Galois representations
              and I will carry over as much of the theory as possible to the new case.

My
              research is mostly in algebraic number theory, although I do bring tools from
              group theory and computational algebra to bear upon the problems I attack and I
              also have recently worked in coding theory and cryptography. Algebraic number
              theory involves the use of advanced algebra to attack very simply stated
              problems involving the integers, such as whether the sum of two nth powers can
              be another nth power  (Fermat's Last Theorem, mentioned above). It has long
              been consideredvery pure mathematics but recent advances in coding theory, 
              cryptography, and even finance have applied it to very good effect.

