Title       : Thermo-Mechanically Activated Transient Plasticity and Elevated Temperature
               Forming Limit Diagram
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2001     
File        : a9970053

Award Number: 9970053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Wu xwu@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Netshape material forming through plastic deformation is an efficient
              manufacturing process.  A high plastic strain and a high speed with a low
              forming energy is desired in netshape forming.  Superplastic forming can
              achieve extremely high strains, but the strain rate is too low for mass
              production and thus is not feasible for the automobile industry.  At a high
              strain rate (-1/s) the formability in hot forming is usually lower than that at
              room temperature, due to the lack of a hardening mechanism to resist localized
              necking.  The objective of this project is to develop a new forming technique
              with improved formability limit, reduced forming energy and cost, and improved
              mechanical property.  The approach is to use a new concept based on
              thermomechanically activated transient plasticity to achieve high rates of
              deformation at low stresses.  In this process the workpiece is deformed under a
              nonstable  microstructure state at a thermomechanically activated deformation
              condition.  With a sequential post heat treatment, the mechanical properties of
              the formed parts can be significantly improved.  The elevated temperature
              forming limit diagram with the consideration of strain rate and microstructure
              evolution will be established to serve as a foundation for manufacturing
              process design.
     This project is expected to generate important knowledge
              fundamental to thermo-mechanically activated transient plasticity.  This
              knowledge will be important to the advancement of netshape forming technology,
              especially on formability improvement for aluminum and high-strength steels, as
              well as significant implication for manufacturing education.

