Title       : Asymptotic Behavior of Cauchy-Stieltjes Type Integrals of Singular Measures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9970151

Award Number: 9970151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexei G. Poltoratski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970151
Principal Investigator: Alexei G.
              Poltoratski

Abstract: Poltoratski's research will focus on a variety of
              questions related to the boundary behavior of Cauchy-Stieltjes integrals. The
              project consists of three parts. The first part concentrates on problems in
              complex function theory. Specifically, the PI plans to study the interaction
              between singular and nonsingular components of Cauchy integrals. The second
              part of the project is devoted to applications in quantum dynamics and 
              Anderson localization, some of the most interesting areas involving
              mathematical models of modern solid state physics. The objective of the third
              part of the project is to complement the well-developed theory of contractive
              operators in Hilbert spaces with a deeper understanding of the structure of
              so-called almost unitary operators.

Complex function theory is one of the
              most classical parts of modern mathematics, yet at the same time is one of its
              most rapidly expanding and developing fields. The present stage of its
              development features many promising new applications to various areas of
              mathematics and physics. Among the cornerstones of complex function theory is
              the integral formula named after the famous French mathematician Augustin
              Cauchy. The importance of this formula lies in the fact that most analytic
              functions of one complex variable can be defined as or represented by Cauchy
              integrals. Poltoratski plans to study various properties of functions defined
              via Cauchy integrals near the boundaries of their domains, where the precise
              behavior of such functions is subtle and difficult to comprehend. The results
              will then be applied to several other central topics in mathematics, as well as
              to quantum dynamics. The application to quantum dynamics will deal with
              mathematical models of wave propagation. A conjecture made by the Nobel
              laureate P. Anderson about the behavior of waves in disordered media has made
              this an area of intensive research activity in recent years. Despite this
              flurry of activity, wave propagation in disordered media is not completely
              understood, especially in spacial dimensions greater than one. New information
              about this phenomenon could be highly relevant to a host of problems in physics
              and engineering.

