Title       : Stable Relations and their Loci in Operator Algebra Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9970799

Award Number: 9970799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67682              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry A. Loring loring@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Loring

The abstract properties of curves in a unit cube defined by
              polynomials are well understood.  In particular, points that approximately are
              zeros of the polynomials are close to exact zeros.  The same set of polynomials
              can become "unstable" when applied to matrices (and even more so when applied
              to operator algebra variables).  That is, there can be contractive matrices
              that, when substituted into the polynomials give results near zero, and yet
              there is no actual matrix-root close to the approximate solution.  We call such
              approximate solutions phantom solutions.  These phantom approximate solutions
              can be misleading in the context of computer models.  There is a notion of
              stability for a relation that does not require the relation to be polynomial. 
              Much of this project will study relations that remain stable when applied to
              operator algebra variables.  These are rare, but tend to be related to
              interesting invariants of operator algebras.  Stability results limited to the
              realm of matrices will also be explored, with the hope of finding some
              applications to numerical analysis.

Polynomial relations have stability
              properties that we rely on every day.  Take the example of a laser cutting some
              flat material, where the cut-points are determined as the zero-set of a set of
              equations.  If the x and y coordinates of the laser come close to satisfying
              these equations, we go ahead and fire the laser, for we are sure that close to
              this approximate solution there is an exact solution, and thus we are cutting
              close to where we should.  In computer modeling, one's model is often based on
              more that just numerical variables.  In particular, much of numerical analysis
              involves matrix-valued computations.  It turns out that equations that are
              stable for ordinary values become unstable for matrix values.  That is, there
              can be approximate solutions to equations that are not close to any true
              solutions.  We call such things phantom approximate solutions.  This project
              will study these phantom approximate solutions and ways to detect and avoid
              them.

