Title       : Localization in Semiconductor Heterostructures Studied by Subsurface Charge
               Accumulation Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9970756

Award Number: 9970756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart H. Tessmer tessmer@pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970756
Tessmer

This project applies a novel technique, subsurface charge
              accumulation imaging (SCAI), to probe the local electronic structure of
              two-dimensional electron systems (2DES). SCAI is a scanned probe method that
              permits minute amounts of electrical charge to be locally resolved in a
              cryogenic environment. Initial experiments have examined samples for which the
              bulk of the 2DES acted as an electrical conductor. In contrast, by applying
              SCAI to 2DESs in an insulating state with respect to bulk transport,
              fundamentally distinct physics may be explored. This would include 2DES in the
              disorder-dominated insulator, and pinned Wigner crystal regimes, in addition to
              the interior compressibility at the center of a quantum Hall plateau.  The
              focus of the current project is to develop such a capability. This will require
              more advanced sample geometries, which include a three-dimensional electrode
              separated from the 2DES by a tunneling barrier. The specific goal is to
              demonstrate the utility of the SCAI for these systems.
%%%
This research
              applies new scanning probe microscopy techniques to probe the behavior of
              electrons confined to two dimensions in semiconductor systems.  The goal is to
              further develop the technique to allow us to map out the spatial patterns
              formed by the charge when the sample is in an insulating state.  This will
              permit us to investigate fundamental aspects of the electron interactions with
              each other and with the disorder of the semiconductor. The research provides a
              challenging training ground for graduate students and postdoctoral research
              associates in an emerging technology.
***


