Title       : Free Radical Intermediates and Radical-Molecule Complexes Generated in
               Cryochemical Reactions of Fluorine and Oxygen Atoms with Guest Molecules in
               Free-Standing Rare Gas Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9970032

Award Number: 9970032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Wight wight@chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
Program Ref : 0000,5939,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Charles Wight of the University of Utah is supported by the Experimental
              Physical Chemistry Program and Eastern Europe Program to continue his studies
              of free radical intermediates and radical-molecule complexes generated in
              cryochemical reactions of fluorine and oxygen atoms with guest molecules in a
              free-standing rare gas crystals.  This project facilitates an international
              collaboration between Wight's research group at the University of Utah and
              scientists at the Institute for Chemical Physics Research at Chernogolovka,
              Russia.  The collaborative approach will employ complementary techniques such
              as high-resolution EPR, FTIR, and ultraviolet spectroscopy to investigate the
              reaction pathways of interest in highly ordered large crystals at cryogenic
              temperatures.  The research is expected to lead to the determination of
              branching ratios for reaction channels of atoms and photochemical yields of
              reaction products, the structure and lattice sites of intermediate species, and
              distinctions between reaction products arising from photogenerated and
              diffusing thermal atoms.  The targets of the studies represent chemical
              reactions that are relevant to contemporary problems in atmospheric and
              combustion chemistry.  The outcomes from this effort are expected to provide
              insights into the role of long-lived intermediate complexes that are formed
              near to the transition state of chemical reactions. 

The dynamics of
              atom-molecule chemical reactions is important in a variety of areas, including
              atmospheric chemistry, combustion/flaming suppression, plasma etching in the
              microelectronics industry, and chemical lasers.   When energetic chemical
              reactions are performed in cold crystals, reaction products are prevented from
              flying apart as they do in gas phase reactions.  Chemical intermediate
              complexes that are not observable in gas phase reactions can then be studied
              using spectroscopic approaches to elucidate the structure and kinetic behavior
              of these important and elusive reactive species.


