Title       : Bernoulli Properties of Complex Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a9970575

Award Number: 9970575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41715              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorelei Koss koss@dickinson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970575	
Principal Investigator: Lorelei Koss

Abstract: This
              project involves the study of Bernoulli properties of complex dynamical systems
              with respect to a measure of maximal entropy. Koss will concentrate on systems
              that can be realized as factors of one-sided Bernoulli shifts where points are
              identified with respect to a group action. In particular, the research will
              focus on finding independent generating partitions that give an isomorphism to
              a one-sided Bernoulli shift of maximal entropy for complex toral endomorphisms,
              rational maps of the sphere with parabolic orbifold, and Ueda maps of complex
              projective space. Koss will also investigate whether a group factor of a
              one-sided Bernoulli shift must be one-sided Bernoulli.

The field of
              dynamical systems is the study of how systems change over time. It has many
              applications to physics, chemistry, biology, economics, and computer science,
              such as describing the motion of planets, the change of population in a certain
              species, or the errors that can occur in the transmission of computer data. The
              study of chaotic or random behavior in dynamical systems is an exciting and
              relatively new area, and many mathematical tools have been developed to
              distinguish between different types of random processes. This project involves
              an exploration to discover systems that exhibit maximal random behavior,
              meaning those that can be modeled by the toss of a fair die. In addition to its
              inherent mathematical interest, this research represents one step towards a
              more thorough understanding of chaotic behavior, which in turn can help with
              the construction of more accurate models for predicting outcomes in the
              physical world.

