Title       : Attractors, Smooth Dynamics and Combinatorics in Low-Dimension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  2001  
File        : a9970363

Award Number: 9970363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71264              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander M. Blokh ablokh@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970363
Principal Investigator: Alexander M. Blokh

Abstract:
              Blokh plans to describe Milnor attractors for certain rational functions, to
              determine their conformal measures, and to use the new notion of a growing tree
              as a tool for studying dynamics on the Julia set (jointly with Misiurewicz and
              Levin). In one-dimensional dynamics, Blokh and Misiurewicz introduced the
              notion of super-persistent recurrence. The lack of such recurrence at a point
              is a mild expanding property. This behavior implies recent results by Blokh and
              Misiurewicz according to which wild attractors with negative Schwarzian
              derivatives are super-persistently recurrent and limit sets of critical points
              in a dense family of smooth interval maps are minimal. Blokh intends to use
              this device to study further properties of attractors and stability for smooth
              interval maps. He also hopes to extend the rotation theory to graph maps and
              then study forcing among periodic orbit portraits.

Many processes in
              biology, the physical sciences, and economics can be modeled by dynamical
              systems. Studying these models allows one to draw valid conclusions about the
              processes themselves and their long-term behavior. This project is aimed at
              studying a variety of such dynamical systems. Blokh intends to verify that
              either the behavior of the system is on average chaotic (but almost the same
              for the majority of initial conditions) or it coincides with the behavior of
              systems starting at a special finite set of so-called critical initial
              conditions. Also, a system is said to behave periodically if the same
              conditions recur with the same frequency all the time (e.g., the motion of the
              planets about the sun). Periodic dynamics are easier to study than more general
              motions, which is why it is important to understand periodic systems as fully
              as possible before probing the mysteries of more complicated systems. Blokh
              wishes to characterize all periodic behaviors of dynamical systems using only
              finitely many parameters. The results obtained will help to describe the
              possible outcomes for a variety of processes and to explain the prevalence of
              certain types of processes in both theoretical settings and the natural
              world.

