Title       : Exploring a Frontier of Experimental Gravitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9970987

Award Number: 9970987
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $793381             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric G. Adelberger eric@npl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Blayne R. Heckel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jens H. Gundlach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Universality of Gravitational Free Fall, the underlying symmetry of general
              relativity (Einstein's theory of gravity), will be tested with unprecedented
              precision and generality.  There are two strong reasons for testing this
              symmetry.  First, general relativity is not a quantum theory and current ideas
              about quantum gravity naturally produce violations of the Universality of Free
              Fall that may be experimentally accessible.  Discovery of such fields would
              have profound consequences for our understanding of gravity and perhaps of
              cosmology.  Second, by searching for violations of a symmetry that general
              relativity holds to be exact, one can probe for new, ultra-weak,
              non-gravitational fields.  Current ideas in cosmology suggest that much of the
              energy in the universe may be tied up in such fields.  Although such ultra-weak
              fields would normally be obscured by gravitational forces, they are detectable
              because they generically violate the Universality of Free Fall.
	The proposed
              tests require the continued improvement of instruments for detecting tiny
              differences in the accelerations of test bodies attracted toward the earth, the
              sun, large-scale cosmological structures, or toward a massive uranium
              laboratory source.  The test bodies include Be, Al, Ti, Cu, Pb, plus bodies
              having compositions close to the earth's core and the moon respectively.  Three
              different torsion-balance instruments, initially developed under previous NSF
              support, will be upgraded and employed in this work.  The combination of these
              instruments will test the Universality of Free Fall for Yukawa length scales
              from 1 cm to infinity with differential acceleration resolutions down to 10-13
              cm/s2.  The torsion balance instruments will be adapted to probe for
              spin-dependent forces by using an electron-spin polarized pendulum and
              attractor.  In addition, the Newtonian constant G will be measured using a new
              technique that avoids important sources of error in previous measurements. 
              Recent results for G have scattered widely, demonstrating the necessity of
              several independent measurements of this fundamental constant.  The technique
              should be capable of determining G to a precision of 1 part in 105.

