Title       : Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9970718

Award Number: 9970718
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murugappan Muthukumar muthu@polysci.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970718
Muthukumar
This is a grant to support theoretical research on
              polymers.  In particular, investigations will be made on the thermodynamics of
              polyelectrolyte solutions; relaxation and transport of polyelectrolytes in
              random environments; topological frustrations associated with pattern
              recognition and complexations; and, kinetics of polymer crystallization from
              solutions.  Full mathematical expressions will be derived which describe the
              non-universal features of the fast and slow dynamics accopanying the
              ordinary-extraordinary transition in polyelectrolyte solutions; pattern
              recognition and transport of polyelectrolytes in random media; and, shape,
              thickness and crystallization kinetics of lamellae.  This theoretical research
              complements experimental investigations which are being actively pursued in
              many laboratories worldwide.  The results of this work are relevant to numerous
              applications including separation techniques like chromatography and
              electrophoresis, preparation and processing of molecular composites, and
              controlled fabrication of nanoscale structures and artificial
              enzymes.
%%%
This is a grant to support theoretical research on polymers.  In
              particular, investigations will be made on the thermodynamics of
              polyelectrolyte solutions; relaxation and transport of polyelectrolytes in
              random environments; topological frustrations associated with pattern
              recognition and complexations; and, kinetics of polymer crystallization from
              solutions. This theoretical research complements experimental investigations
              which are being actively pursued in many laboratories worldwide.  The results
              of this work are relevant to numerous applications including separation
              techniques like chromatography and electrophoresis, preparation and processing
              of molecular composites, and controlled fabrication of nanoscale structures and
              artificial enzymes.
***

