Title       : Screening in Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2001     
File        : a9970291

Award Number: 9970291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz-Bernd Schuttler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9970291
Schuttler
This grant supports theoretical research on the development
              of a controlled, numerical perturbative approach  for solving Hubbard-type
              strongly correlated electron models in the near-filled band regime, relevant to
              the cuprate superconductors.  The perturbative expansion approach exploits the
              recently discovered strong suppression of the electron-electron Coulomb
              repulsion, due to screening by charge fluctuations in near-half-filled large-U
              Hubbard systems, in order to generate accurate, controlled high-order
              approximations to the exact solution of the model.

The iterative solution of
              the self-consistent perturbative equations requires the numerical evaluation of
              high-order self-energy and polarization insertion Feynman diagrams on large
              space-time lattices.  This is accomplished by means of high-dimensional Monte
              Carlo summation techniques which are efficiently implemented on massively
              parallel high performance computers.  The validity of the approach is
              established by inclusion of next-higher-order corrections and by comparison to
              exact Monte Carlo results for small finite-dimensional, as well as zero-and
              infinite-dimensional model systems.
                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                The primary application of
              this approach is a detailed microscopic investigation of possible incipient
              charge and spin instabilities, possible competing d- and s-wave pairing
              instabilities and their underlying pairing mechanism, pseudo-gap formation, and
              possible cross-over between Fermi-and non-Fermi-liquid behavior, in
              two-dimensional (2D) and quasi-2D Hubbard and extended Hubbard model systems. 
              Model results for the dynamical single-particle, charge and spin correlations
              are compared to angle-resolved photo-emission, optical and DC conductivity,
              electron energy loss, inelastic x-ray scattering, and inelastic neutron
              scattering data obtained in the cuprate materials.  Important extensions of
              this work will include local field, multi-band and electron-phonon effects and
              will address questions such as the isotope effect, polaronic instabilities, and
              superconductivity-related phonon anomalies within a unified microscopic
              treatment.

The results of this research will shed light on questions of
              fundamental importance in the micrscopic theory of the cuprate superconductors.
              The numerical perturbative expansion approach developed therein has
              considerable potential for wider applications in the general area of correlated
              electron physics.
***

