Title       : The chromatic splitting conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9970978

Award Number: 9970978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55968              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Hovey mhovey@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970978
Hovey
     The principal investigator, Mark Hovey, is working on the
              chromatic
splitting conjecture in stable homotopy theory.  A standard
              procedure in
algebra is to study an algebraic object by studying its
              localizations at
various primes, then reassembling the localizations into a
              global picture.
In stable homotopy theory, one can localize at an ordinary
              integer prime p,
but after doing so, more primes become visible.  These are
              known as Morava
K-theories.  Denote the localization of a spectrum X with
              respect to the
nth Morava K-theory K(n) by L(K(n))X.  Calculation of L(K(n))X
              can usually
be reduced to a purely algebraic problem, but little is known
              about the
reassembly of the L(K(n))X for different n into knowledge of X
              itself.  The
chromatic splitting conjecture, due to Mike Hopkins, is a
              conjecture about
the composition L(K(m))L(K(n))X for finite spectra X, and it
              would allow
one to recover X from the different L(K(n))X.  The truth of this
              conjecture
is known to have significant impact on several other conjectures in
              stable
homotopy theory, and even partial results about it would be a major
              advance.
One of the methods involved in the principal investigator's approach
              to this
conjecture is the study of the derived functors of the inverse limit
              functor
in a category of comodules.
     Homotopy theory is the study of
              curves, surfaces, and higher dimensional
spaces up to continuous deformation. 
              That is, in homotopy theory, the letter
A and the letter O are considered
              equivalent, because one can gradually
deform the letter A into a triangle by
              pushing in the legs, then gradually
deform the triangle into a circle by
              pushing out on the corners.  A 
difficulty with homotopy theory is that
              different dimensions behave
differently.  More precisely, given a space X, one
              can form its suspension
by attaching it with wires to two points outside X. 
              The suspension of a
circle, for example, is a sphere, and the suspension of a
              sphere is a sphere
of the next higher dimension.  In stable homotopy theory,
              two spaces X and Y
are considered equivalent if, after suspending X and Y
              repeatedly, one can
be deformed into the other.  For example, the surface of a
              donut is obtained
by attaching a sphere to two circles that touch at one point
              (one circle
goes around the hole, one circle goes around the filling, and the
              surface of
the sphere gets spread out over the rest of the surface of the
              donut).  But
a donut cannot be deformed into two circles and a sphere, all
              touching at one
point.  However, the suspension of a donut can be deformed
              into two spheres
and a 3-dimensional sphere, all touching at one point.  The
              great advantage
of stable homotopy theory is that problems become much more
              amenable to
algebraic methods of solution.  Many geometric problems turn out
              to depend
only on the stable homotopy type of the space involved, so stable
              homotopy
theory has been of considerable utility.  
***



