Title       : Modular Towers of Noncongruence Curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9970676

Award Number: 9970676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84597              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Fried mfried@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Professor Fried will continue research on modular towers.  A Modular tower is
              a sequence of moduli spaces canonically attached to a set of data coming from a
              finite group.  Modular towers are designed to allow analogies of the ideas of
              modular curves in many applications not previously associated with such
              techniques.  This project will concentrate on modular curve towers.  Among the
              goals of the project is to establish that high levels of a modular tower of
              curves will have no rational points, an important issue for many of the
              applications of the towers. Also to make the techniques of modular towers more
              easily applicable in new situations, Professor Fried will try to establish
              criteria which allow arbitrary towers of non-congruence curves to be given the
              structure of a modular tower. 

In this project, Professor Fried will
              continue his work on issues related to the Inverse Galois Problem.  This is a
              long-standing unanswered question with its origins in the 19 century.  Over a
              hundred years ago mathematicians found that one could classify properties of
              the solutions to an equation by studying the symmetries of those solutions. 
              The solutions themselves and the symmetries of the solutions were connected in
              a direct but very surprising way.  Easy properties of symmetries were often
              connected to difficult properties of the solutions and vice versa. This allows
              the easy things to be transferred back and forth to the hard things through the
              connection.  The result is very powerful method for discovery.  In earlier
              work, Professor Fried introduced a new object into this connection called
              modular towers, and he hopes to use this object strengthen our understanding of
              the connection in the direction from the symmetries to the solutions.
