Title       : Gravitational Waves and the Physics of Strong Gravitational Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9970821

Award Number: 9970821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick R. Brady patrick@gravity.phys.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1252      SUPPORT OF LIGO RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Research will be conducted to develop, to implement and to test data-analysis
              algorithms to search for gravitational-wave signals in data from the Laser
              Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO).  The effort will focus
              on: (i) the development of search and discrimination techniques in
              computationally expensive searches for sources of continuous gravitational
              waves, (ii) the exploration of analysis techniques which utilize data from
              multiple detectors, (iii) the development of techniques to detect gravitational
              wave signals from unmodelled burst sources, and (iv) the extraction of
              astrophysical information from the data.  The ultimate goal of LIGO is the
              routine observation of gravitational waves from astrophysical sources; it is
              extremely important to develop robust techniques and algorithms to extract
              (from the data stream) the wealth of information that is carried by the
              gravitational wave signals.
	Theoretical tools will be developed to study the
              physics of strong gravitational fields.  The effort will focus on the
              development of approximate methods to study gravitational-wave generation by
              inspiralling binary neutron stars and/or black holes in regimes which are not
              amenable to current techniques.  Accurate theoretical models are needed to
              optimally utilize the data from the gravitational waves detectors.  Efforts to
              understand the dynamics of gravitational collapse and black-hole formation will
              also continue; Brady's group will use numerical methods to study the dynamical
              collapse of perfect fluids and singularities inside spinning black holes.

