Title       : Powers of Ideals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9970566

Award Number: 9970566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Helen G. Grundman                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irena Swanson iswanson@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970566

The common thread for the projects in this proposal are asymptotic
              properties of ordinary, Frobenius, and symbolic powers of a given ideal.  The
              background motivation is the still open question of whether tight closure
              commutes with localization.  The main tools that the proposer plans to use and
              develop further are the Rees-Izumi type comparisons of a large class of
              valuations, as well as the primary decompositions and the prime filtrations of
              the cokernels of the powers of an ideal.  The Rees-Izumi part would be done in
              continued collaboration with Reinhold Hubl.  The primary decompositions and
              prime filtrations part is related to Huneke's Artin-Rees lemma and would
              include collaboration with Anna Guerrieri on primary decompositions of special
              Jacobian ideals.  In the case of affine rings, the asymptotic properties of
              Frobenius powers of ideals can also be studied via boundedness of the degrees
              of Grobner bases.  This part would be done in collaboration with Susan
              Hermiller.  The part concerned with finding algorithms for calculating adjoints
              would be undertaken with the proposer's graduate student Mark Rhodes.  Serkan
              Hocsten, Bernd Sturmfels and the proposer plan to work on the stabilization
              properties of resolutions and of associated primes of powers of monomial
              ideals.

This proposal is in the area of commutative algebra with
              applications in algebraic geometry and computational algebra.  The main
              background motivation is proving some basic properties about tight closure, but
              the proposed techniques would have implications also outside the tight closure
              theory.  Tight closure is a young theory due to Melvin Hochster and Craig
              Huneke which has in a short time proved many new results in commutative algebra
              and algebraic geometry and has in addition shortened and simplified several old
              results.  The predominant object of study of this proposal are ideals, and
              especially sets of ideals which are related to each other in some natural way,
              such as ordinary, Frobenius, or symbolic powers of a particular ideal.  The
              main goal of this proposal is then establishing certain asymptotic and
              stabilization properties of these sets of ideals.



