Title       : Electronics and Optics for a Fourth Channel for Flow Cytometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9970247

Award Number: 9970247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannine M. Durdik jdurdik@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Ivey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph L. Henry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Parcells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9970247

Abstract

	This proposal involves the acquisition and installation
              of electronics, optics and accessories needed for 4 color fluorescence
              cytometry for the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville.  The equipment will
              modify an existing FACSort which is currently capable of 3 color analysis.  The
              projects positively impacted by this are quite varied.  The investigators
              involved in this proposal come from both the Fulbright College of Arts and
              Sciences and the College of Agriculture.  The projects that will be most
              directly affected include normal development in the immune system of  birds;
              induction of the proteins involved in trafficking, molecular biology of
              apoptotic and anti-apoptotic signals, and microbes living and differentiating
              at high pH.  The equipment will be used for sorting and characterizing cells,
              organelles and spores and gene regulation. It will provide the potential to
              measure new fluorescent colors in conjunction with size, complexity of
              organelles and three other colors.  Because of the availability of green
              fluorescent protein-like molecules as reporter genes, new research into
              microbes surviving and thriving in extreme environments will be possible using
              new tools developed using these molecules.  These will be used to study
              responses to environmental shifts.  In another project, reactivation of latent
              Marek's virus will be used as a tool to initiate death and anti-death signals
              for the study of normal T cell death pathways.  New antibodies to define the
              development of chicken lymphocytes will be characterized in four colors as is
              the minimum currently required to fully evaluate mammalian B cell development.
              The instrumentation will impact significantly on both research infrastructure
              and student training.

