Title       : Some Problems in Probability Theory: Random Walks and Percolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a9970943

Award Number: 9970943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195061             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry Kesten kesten@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970943


Various probability problems will be studied.  The principal ones
              deal with systems of weakly interacting random walks and with rho-percolation. 
              In the random walk systems one starts with one particle at each site of the
              integer lattice in d dimensions and lets each particle perform a continuous
              time random walk on this lattice.  Interactions occur only when a particle
              jumps to a site which is itself occupied or is adjacent to an occupied site. 
              In this case the particle which just jumped may coalesce with one of the
              particles at or adjacent to the site to which it jumped.  In another version
              the particle which just jumped may annihilate another particle.  The asymptotic
              density of such systems will be investigated.  Rho-percolation has the same
              set-up as ordinary site percolation.  The sites of a lattice are independently
              chosen to be occupied or vacant with probability p or 1-p, respectively.  One
              says that rho-percolation occurs if there exists an infinite self-avoiding path
              on the lattice whose lower density of occupied sites is at least rho.  The
              proposer intends to investigate analogues of various power bounds which are
              already known or conjectured for ordinary percolation.

This research will
              study problems about systems of particles which undergo random motion and which
              have an interaction which removes particles from the system when two particles
              come close to each other.  One motivation for studying such systems is that
              they can be viewed as crude models for certain chemical reactions.  It is hoped
              that the variants of the model proposed for investigation here are somewhat
              more realistic than the models usually considered.  Another, unrelated, class
              of problems in the proposal considers a system which undergoes a phase
              transition.  Almost all materials have phase transitions at some temperature or
              magnetic field.  Even though a great deal is known in statistical physics on
              the non rigorous level about phase transitions, they are still only poorly
              understood on a mathematical level.  It is hoped that interesting and
              instructive calculations can be carried out for the relatively new model of
              rho-percolation.

