Title       : Project in Operator Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9970486

Award Number: 9970486
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97699              (Estimated)
Investigator: Florin Radulescu radulesc@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Radulescu

The aim of this project is to investigate a range of
              problems in the structure theory of von Neumann algebras, concerning  the
              harmonic analysis of such algebras arising in connection with discrete groups
              and in deformation quantization theory and on the convex analysis of these von
              Neumann algebras. The goal is to determine  the structure of the von Neumann
              algebras that reflect the properties of (quantum) non commutative probability,
              and to relate this structure to the representation theory of Lie groups  and
              their discrete subgroups.  An invariant for such von Neumann algebras,  which
              will be investigated in this project, comes from the  analysis of the 
              structure of convex sets, consisting of noncommutative moments associated with
              these von Neumann algebras.  This approach is related to Voiculescu's free
              entropy, where the (renormalized) asymptotic measure of such sets plays an
              essential role.

 The operator algebras  studied in this project are  related
              to the  atom model introduced by Wigner.  His  approach, while  philosophically
              relying on Heisenberg's Uncertaneity Principle, was based on the theory of 
              random matrices. The random matrices  have also numerous other applications in
              prediction theory or atmospheric science.   A surprising, recent, discovery, by
              Voiculescu, shows that the random matrices are, the asymptotic generators for
              the von Neumann algebras associated to quantum probability.
 The aim of this
              project is to develop  a conceptual relation between the random matrices in 
              von Neumann algebras and the  quantization theory.  Such a development would
              probably explain the complementarity between the two theories (random matrices
              versus infinite matrices) and hence would hopefully give new tools to solve a
              number of long-standing problems   in these areas.

