Title       : Connectivity and Minors in Graph Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9970329

Award Number: 9970329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guoli Ding ding@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Connectivity and Minors in Graph Theory

Abstract

Connectivity is one of
              the most fundamental characteristics of   graphs. Almost all problems in graph
              theory, including various   coloring problems, routing problems, and embedding
              problems are very   closely related to connectivity. However, connectivity is
              not   preserved under most graph operations which are usually needed in  
              studying graphs. Thus, knowing how to perform these operations, in  
              particular, minor operations, while maintaining the connectivity is   a very
              important and fundamental problem facing graph theorists   today. In this
              project, the PI proposes to investigate three (sets   of) problems on graph
              connectivity. Instead of concentrating on   local properties like the existence
              of contractible edges, these   problems are more concerned with global
              structure of k-connected   graphs. The PI's first problem is a Ramsey-type
              problem which   basically says that a large complete-bipartite-graph-minor is  
              unavoidable from every highly connected large graph. Problem two is   about
              fixing the connectivity of a minor. It seeks the best function   f(k,m) for
              which, if G is a minor of a k-connected graph H, then H   has a k-connected
              minor H' with at most f(k,|E(G)|) edges such that   H' also contains G as a
              minor. The third problem in this project is   a conjecture which asserts that
              the graph version of Seymour's   splitter theorem can be extended from
              3-connected graphs to   k-connected graphs for all k.

All these proposed
              problems are important and fundamental. Their   solutions will provide powerful
              new tools for dealing with high   connectivity, and that will affect many areas
              of graph theory. For   instance, these solutions could have a big impact on
              problems like   characterizing K(6)-minor-free graphs and Petersen-minor-free  
              graphs, two well-known open problems in graph theory. Moreover, this   study is
              also very important from the point of view of   applications. It could bring
              new insights on improving network   reliability and network security.

