Title       : Hilbert Type Numbers and Related Topics in Analytic Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1999      
File        : a9970372

Award Number: 9970372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yulij Ilyashenko yulij@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970372
Principal Investigator: Yulij Ilyashenko

Abstract:
              Hilbert asked in his 16th problem: " What may be said about the number and
              location of limit cycles of planar polynomial vector fields of given degree?"
              The main specification of this question is: "Give an upper bound on the number
              of limit cycles for the above vector fields." The maximal possible number of
              limit cycles in this context is called a "Hilbert number." The existence of
              this number has not yet been proved even for degree two vector fields. There
              exist various analogs and simplifications of the problem proposed by Arnold,
              Ilyashenko, Pugh and others. Each of these simplified versions requires an
              upper estimate of the maximal possible number of limit cycles in some specific
              class of differential equations. This class depends on a parameter which is
              typically a degree of some polynomial involved in the definition of the class.
              The required quantities are called "Hilbert type numbers." The present project
              deals with Abel and Lienard equations, quadratic vector fields, and zeros of
              Abelian integrals. Related simplified versions of the Hilbert 16th problem were
              stated during last three decades, but with very few exceptions, they too remain
              unsolved. The main objective of this project is to give some upper estimates of
               "Hilbert type numbers," not for the whole class for which these numbers are
              defined, but for some reduced set of equations. On the one hand, these
              estimates should greatly extend our present knowledge. On the other hand, they
              will hopefully provide tools for finding explicit upper estimates for analogs
              of the Hilbert numbers in their original setting.

At the beginning of this
              century, Hilbert presented a list of problems intended to predict the
              development of mathematics over the course of the ensuing hundred years. Now,
              at the end of the century, it is clear that his prediction was correct. For the
              most part, the Hilbert problems have been solved, and their solutions are
              highlights in the recent  history of mathematics. Some of the problems,
              however, remain unsolved. Among these is the second part of Hilbert's 16th
              problem.  It requires an upper estimate for some quantitative geometric
              characteristics of polynomial differential equations in the plane.  These
              characteristics are called "Hilbert numbers." Not a single Hilbert number has
              been found up to the present time, despite tremendous efforts by brilliant
              mathematicians throughout the century. It is clear now that the way to the
              solution must proceed through simplifications of the problem. Simplified
              problems require estimations for the same geometric characteristics, but for
              classes of equations which are less complicated than those in the original
              Hilbert problem. It is the hope that solutions to these simplified versions
              will furnish tools for attacking the original problem. The beauty of planar
              differential equations is that questions and answers in this theory can be
              illustrated by pictures understandable to a broad audience. On the other hand,
              the solutions may involve deep results from different domains of mathematics
              like algebraic geometry, complex analysis, topology and so on. The methods
              developed in the theory of planar differential equations find numerous
              applications on the boundary of mathematics with other disciplines such as
              catastrophe theory, applied mathematics, biological modelling, etc. For this
              reason, the subject is attractive to young mathematicians, some of whom
              (including students of the Principal Investigator) have made significant
              contributions to the field. 

