Title       : Many-Body Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9970607

Award Number: 9970607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80566              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej R. Zworski zworski@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The object of the proposed research by Andras Vasy is the study of
              many-body
scattering. The data from a scattering experiment are
              mathematically
represented by the scattering matrices, or S-matrices. The
              central issue
in many-body scattering is understanding the structure of these
              operators.
A new method is now available for the analysis; it adopts
              techniques used
for the study of hyperbolic equations. This project will
              employ these
microlocal techniques to analyze the wave front relation of the
              free-cluster
to free-cluster scattering matrix in many-body scattering,
              involving
arbitrarily many particles, when the subsystems have no bound
              states.
This S-matrix represents scattering data when both the incoming and
              the
outgoing particles are asymptotically free, i.e. they are not bound
              together.
Its wave front relation describes the singularities of the outgoing
              data
in terms of those of the incoming ones. More precisely, the main goal of
              the
present project is to prove that if the subsystems of a many-body
              system
have no bound states, e.g. if all potentials are non-negative, then the
              wave
front relation of the free-cluster to free-cluster S-matrix is given
              by
the broken geodesic flow to distance pi on the sphere. The absence of
              bound
states simplifies the phase space structure of the problem and
              hence
provides an ideal first step towards the understanding of the
              S-matrices
in general. In addition, in this situation the problem is
              geometrically
analogous to the wave equation in domains with corners. Thus,
              the completion
of the project will demonstrate that scattering is in many
              respects a
hyperbolic problem, similar to the wave equation. The next step
              will be
to analyze what happens if there are bound states in some
              subsystems;
in this case one has to combine the behavior of bound states with
              the
classical dynamics to understand the propagation of
              singularities.

Indeed, many people are familiar with the following two
              descriptions of
the propagation of light. First, in geometric optics, light
              propagates
in straight lines, reflecting from surfaces according to Snell's
              law.
That is, the angles of incidence and of reflection are the same, as
              if
light consisted of little billiard balls. Second, light can be described
              by
the wave equation, its propagation thus being similar to that of
              water
waves. There are many ways in this particular example in which the
              first
picture gives a rough description of the second, but the
              following
connection has particularly wide-ranging generalizations:
              singularities of
the amplitude of the wave (`sharp signals' or `jumps in
              signals') propagate
along light rays. The purpose of the current proposal is
              to investigate the
analogous relationship between classical and quantum
              mechanical particles,
that is, to analyze in what ways does the motion of
              classical particles,
considered as little billiard balls colliding with each
              other, describe
the motion of quantum mechanical particles. In more concrete
              terms, how well
does the motion of four billiard balls describe how four
              electrons collide
with each other? Since it is easier to analyze the
              corresponding properties
of classical systems than those of quantum ones, just
              as it is easier to
describe light moving in straight lines than to solve the
              wave equation,
the answer to this question significantly improves our
              understanding of
quantum mechanics.

