Title       : Combinatorics and Number Theory II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9970651

Award Number: 9970651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wen-Ching W. Li WLI@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The applications of Number Theory to other fields have been attracting
              increasing interest in recent years. This investigation will exploit the rich
              interplay between Number Theory and Combinatorics. The problems to be
              investigated either have their origin in Combinatorics or have immediate
              application to Combinatorics, yet the problems themselves are Number-
              Theoretic. Roughly speaking, the problems in this investigation can be divided
              into two parts. The first part is an extension of the recent joint  work with
              C.-L. Chai, concerning explicit constructions of automorphic  froms for general
              linear groups over function fields from geometric setting. Such forms will
              automatically satisfy the generalized Ramanujan conjecture. The Sato-Tate
              conjecture for the automorphic forms whose Fourier coefficients  are
              eigenvalues of certain Ramanujan graphs is expected to be proved. Also 
              proposed in this part is the study of Ramanujan hypergraphs, their connection 
              with buildings, and the connection between the eigenvalues of hypergraphs and 
              eigenvalues of Hecke operators. The purpose is to understand to which extent 
              the connection between Ramanujan graphs and classical cusp forms can be 
              generalized to higher rank groups. The second part is applications of number 
              theory to the construction of good codes. The proposed approaches include 
              p-adic analysis, character sum estimates, and explicit constructions of
              infinite towers of curves with many rational points. The PI plans to write a
              sequal to her book "Number Theory with Applications", including  results on the
              interaction between number theory and eigenvalues of Ramanujan graphs obtained
              in recent years as well as new results from this proposal.  The content of this
              book will also be taught in a graduate course at her home  institution.

This
              research falls into the general mathematical fields of Number Theory and
              Combinatorics.  Number theory has its historical roots in the study of the
              whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the divisibility
              of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics
              and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However,
              within the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in diverse
              applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
              communication systems, which is the central theme of modern information theory.
              Combinatorics is also an indispensable tool in modern communications. One of
              the goals of Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how
              discrete collections of objects can be arranged. The design of large networks,
              such as those occurring in telephone systems, good error-correcting codes used
              in satellite and wireless  communications, and the design of algorithms in
              computer science deal with  discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
              combinatorial research using techniques from number theory.

