Title       : Analysis on Fractals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a9970337

Award Number: 9970337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133827             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Strichartz str@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Strichartz

	Analysis on fractals studies the properties of
              functions defined on 
fractals, centering on certain analogs of differential
              equations.  On a 
limited class of self-similar fractals it is possible to
              construct 
operators that play the role of the Laplacian, one of the central
              
objects in traditional analysis on Euclidean spaces and manifolds.  
This
              project will attempt to extend the construction of Laplacians to a 
broader
              class of fractals, and to explore the fundamental properties 
of these
              Laplacians and other differential-type operators.  In addition, 
this project
              will attempt to broaden the connections between this new 
area of research and
              more traditional areas, including global 
analysis, harmonic analysis, splines
              and the finite element method, 
pseudodifferential operators, and special
              functions.  This project 
includes collaborative work with undergraduate
              students (REU) on 
computer experiments to explore examples and generate
              
conjectures.  It is expected that this experimental work will lead to
              
deeper theoretical understanding of the subject. 

	Scientists in diverse
              areas have realized that many objects in the 
real world can be modeled by
              fractals.  In order to study physical 
processes on such fractal objects, it
              is necessary to develop a 
mathematical theory that will give the analog of
              differential equations 
on fractals.  Such a theory is in the early stages of
              development, and 
this project will contribute to that development, bringing
              to the 
problem ideas and techniques from other areas of mathematics.  It 
is
              expected that this project will develop tools that will be of use to 
applied
              mathematicians and scientists, since part of the project 
focuses on numerical
              methods and algorithms for solving concrete 
problems.  The contribution of
              undergraduate students to the project 
will be significant, and in turn will
              be a positive educational 
experience for the students. 


