Title       : Symbolic Dynamics of Cocyclic Subshifts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9970725

Award Number: 9970725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaroslaw M. Kwapisz jarek@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Kwapisz

Cocyclic subshifts are the supports of locally constant
              matrix cocycles on the full shift over a finite alphabet.  Despite the simple
              definition, they contain all sofic subshifts and are much more intricate.  The
              PI proposes their comprehensive study based on an original approach rooted in
              the Wedderburn-Artin theory of algebras.  In particular, the goal is to explain
              topological structure of cocyclic subshifts via a Morse decomposition and their
              probabilistic behavior via the ergodic theory of the maximal measure.  The
              functional analysis of thermodynamical formalism will be deployed to compute
              the entropy and the occurrence probabilities of specific words.  The PI also
              plans to explore the impact of cocyclic subshifts on coding theory,
              probabilistic automata, theory of formal languages, finite dimensional
              algebras, and the general theory of dynamical systems.  The last connection,
              perhaps less obvious, is the main motivation of this project.  Topological
              methods of the Conley index may be applied to real-life dynamical systems
              (differential equations) to perceive them as generators of certain cocyclic
              subshifts --- which can be used then to detect orbits of the orginal system. 
              One application is rigorous verification of chaotic behavior, and the PI
              intends to write computer programs for chaos detection based on the
              theory.

From a more general perspective, this project explores new ideas in
              symbolic dynamics, a branch of mathematics that deals with infinite sequences
              of zeroes and ones and is largely motivated by problems of telecommunication,
              where routinely data is encoded by such sequences and the volume is large
              enough to justify the idealization to infinite sequences.  One mainly studies
              the sets of all possible sequences --- termed subshifts --- that can be
              generated (or recognized) by a particular type of device.  To give a classical
              example, sofic subshifts are recognized by automata capable of assuming only
              finitely many states, which are widely implemented in digital electronics (e.g.
              modems, hard drive controllers, etc).  Cocyclic subshifts, in turn, require
              more sophisticated automata that are abstractly specified by two (or more)
              square matrices A_0 and A_1.  An infinite binary sequence belongs to the
              subshift if, after putting the matrices in the place of symbols, we get a
              matrix product that never equals zero.  (For instance, 0110101...is rejected if
              for some initial segment, say 0110, we have A_0A_1A_1A_0=0; otherwise, it is
              accepted.)  This scheme can be satisfactorily implemented on a computer;
              however, it cannot compete with the existing technology without thorough
              theoretical research of the kind proposed by the PI.  Finally, the relevance of
              cocyclic subshifts transcends the narrow context chosen here to explain the
              PI's ideas:  cocyclic subshifts embody a fundamental aspect of (random) matrix
              products which are ubiquitous in mathematics, science, and engineering.  For
              instance, detection of chaos in dynamics (e.g. population dynamics in biology
              and medicine) is one area in which the methods developed by the PI can be
              implemented.
 


