Title       : Properties of solutions of linear and non-linear hyperbolic equations, singular
               Fourier integral operators, averages over curves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9970330

Award Number: 9970330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Comech   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Singular integral operators is a vast modern branch of Analysis, which
now
              attracts many strong analysts.  Particularly intense development
for the last
              several years has been in the field of averaging
operators and Fourier
              integral operators associated to singular
canonical relations. Andrew Comech
              obtained several general results in
this field; in particular, the
              classification of singular canonical
relations and regularity properties of
              the associated Fourier integral
operators in the Sobolev spaces.  The approach
              was based on
incorporating certain curvature assumptions into the modern tools
              of
Harmonic Analysis.  Among the applications of these results are
              the
regularity properties of the Radon Transform of Melrose-Taylor
              and
smoothness of restrictions of solutions to hyperbolic equations.  In
both
              cases Andrew's methods lead to the optimal conclusions.  The
future research
              is aimed at the properties of solutions to non-linear
hyperbolic equations,
              such as long-time behavior and soliton
asymptotics of solutions to nonlinear
              hyperbolic equations.  Questions
from the very foundations of Harmonic
              Analysis, which are related to
the proposed research, include the regularity
              properties of the
averages taken over lower-dimensional varieties (most
              importantly,
averaging operators over curves).  

Andrew Comech is going to
              continue his research on the wedge of the
two fundamental mathematical fields:
              Harmonic Analysis and the Theory
of Hyperbolic Equations.  The research grows
              far into the modern
development of the mathematics, being intimately related
              to nonlinear 
differential equations, attractors, and solitons.  On the other
              hand, 
the research has its roots deep in the natural sciences and technology.
              
Particular interests of Andrew Comech are related to the properties of
              
nonlinear wave equations of relativistic Quantum Physics, which are 
now
              widely investigated both in Physics and in Mathematics.  Not less 
interesting
              are the opportunities open due to applications to Tomography, 
as well as
              aspects of numerical computations involving Fourier Analysis.  
These are
              active and promising areas of today's scientific research.  

