Title       : Asymptotic Analysis of Complex Quantum Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2001     
File        : a9970323

Award Number: 9970323
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84375              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laszlo Erdos lerdos@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970323
Principal Investigator: Laszlo Erdos

Abstract: This
              research project has two parts. The objective of the first part is to study the
              ground state properties of large atoms in a strong nonhomogeneous magnetic
              field. On physical grounds it is expected that the magnetic version of the
              classical Thomas-Fermi theory correctly describes the atom as the nuclear
              charge tends to infinity. The following specific problems need to be solved to
              prove this rigorously: (1) finding the proper Lieb-Thirring type inequality for
              magnetic fields; (2) describing the zero energy eigenstates of the three
              dimensional Dirac operator; (3) proving a semiclassical asymptotics result on
              the sum of the negative eigenvalues of the Pauli operator by constructing
              appropriate magnetic coherent states. The second part of the project aims at
              finding kinetic scaling limits of the long time Schrodinger evolution. Random
              impurities, phonons and electron-electron interactions modify the free
              evolution of an electron cloud via collisions. The goal is to characterize the
              large scale effects of these collision mechanisms by proving that the
              Schrodinger evolution converges to a macroscopic transport evolution described
              by the Boltzmann equation. The collision kernel needs to be determined
              separately in each case: it is linear in case of impurity and phonon effects,
              and it is nonlinear for many-body interactions.

First principles of physics
              (e.g., the famous Pauli or Schrodinger equations) tell us exactly what
              mathematical equation governs the behavior of any quantum system. Due to the
              size and complexity of the real systems, these equations are usually far too
              complicated to solve with even the most advanced of present-day computers.
              Approximate problems and models need to be set up and studied that retain the
              relevant features of the true problem but are simple enough to be
              computationally feasible. Physics and engineering generally use such simpler
              models (e.g., the Thomas-Fermi theory in atomic physics or the Boltzmann
              equation in electron transport theory). Besides the computational and numerical
              aspects of such models, it is equally important to investigate the extent to
              which these simplified models are consistent with the real ones; i.e., to
              determine the regimes of physical parameters in which it is justified to use
              them. Rigorous mathematical study not only gives a solid theoretical
              justification of the often ad hoc simplifying procedures, but very often helps
              to find the correct model as well. This is precisely the objective of the
              present proposal in the case of two important physical problems: (1) behavior
              of atoms in strong magnetic fields; (2) electron transport in an impure medium.
              Both problems have direct applications in semiconductor design. In addition,
              the first problem is of interest from an astrophysical perspective, for strong
              magnetic fields occur naturally on the surfaces of neutron stars and are
              responsible for such unusual physical phenomena as highly nonspherical atoms.
              This award is jointly funded by the Analysis Program in the Division of
              Mathematical Sciences and the Mathematical Physics Program in the Division of
              Physics.

