Title       : Rapid Development of Dependable Applications over Ad Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  1999     
File        : a9970939

Award Number: 9970939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gruia C. Roman roman@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9970939  Roman, Gruia-Catalin
Ad hoc networks refer to systems of components
              that communicate via  wireless devices without the support of a permanent
              infrastructure such as the one provided by the Internet.  Such networks are
              assembled, reshaped and taken apart as components move in and out of
              communication range.  This project develops  software engineering methods and
              an associated software infrastructure to facilitate rapid construction of
              dependable mobile applications executing over ad hoc networks.  Several mobile
              applications are developed for demonstration and evaluation purposes.  They
              will involve collaborative exploration of unknown environments, cooperative
              behaviors in a competitive setting, and group learning activities.  Formal
              techniques are employed for reasoning about mobile computations and in the
              verification of algorithms needed to solve problems that are fundamental to
              mobile computing.  The research seeks to identify novel coordination constructs
              that support transient interactions among mobile components, have cleanly
              defined semantics, have efficient implementations, and simplify programming. 
              The choice of constructs will be driven by the need to build self-adaptive
              components able to function correctly in open systems under a minimalist set of
              operating assumptions.  Ease of programming is achieved by making component
              interactions transparent to the programming effort, i.e., implicit in the
              definition of the coordination constructs.

