Title       : Research in Ring Theory and Quantum Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9970159

Award Number: 9970159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth R. Goodearl goodearl@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No:  DMS-9970159
Proposal Title:  Research in Ring Theory and Quantum
              Groups
Principal Investigator:  K.R. Goodearl

Technical Description. The
              Principal Investigator proposes to continue
his investigations in ring theory
              (algebra/mathematics), concentrating on
the structure of quantum coordinate
              algebras (quantized algebras of
functions), noetherian rings, and related
              rings. The main focus will be
on the structure of the prime and primitive
              spectra of quantum algebras.
The goals include classification of prime ideals,
              finiteness conditions
for prime ideals invariant under tori of automorphisms,
              verification of
supporting properties such as Auslander-regularity,
              Cohen-Macaulayness,
and normal separation (crucial to proving catenarity and
              investigating
links), and presentations of quantized prime or primitive
              spectra as
topological quotients of classical spectra or
              varieties.

Abstract. Spurred by developments in theoretical physics
              involving
quantum analogs of enveloping algebras of Lie algebras and
              coordinate
rings of algebraic varieties, the theory of quantum algebras has
              rapidly
expanded, and numerous mathematicians have become involved in
              it.
Although certain similarities between quantum algebras and
              their
classical predecessors are evident and others have surfaced in
              the
meantime, new perspectives need to be found, and new tools developed
              to
understand these algebras more fully. This proposal concentrates
              on
quantum coordinate rings (as opposed to quantized enveloping algebras)
and
              classes of quantum algebras exhibiting related behavior.
Sufficiently many
              common phenomena have been discovered in a wide range
of algebras of the above
              type to lead one to conjecture that general,
axiomatizable underpinnings
              within this class of algebras are
responsible for the parallels in their
              behavior. The main long-term
thrust of the research is to uncover and describe
              such general
structures. In the medium term, the proposal aims to extend the
              range of
known shared phenomena within this class of algebras, in order to
              gain
better insight into their common base.

