Title       : Algorithms in Nonlinear Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9970326

Award Number: 9970326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82328              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir N. Temlyakov temlyak@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our main interest in this proposal is  nonlinear approximation. The basic idea
              behind nonlinear approximation is that the elements used in the approximation
              do not come from a fixed linear space but are allowed to depend on the function
              being approximated. While the scope of our proposal is mostly theoretical, we
              should note that this form of approximation appears in many numerical
              applications such as adaptive PDE solvers, compression of images and signals,
              statistical classification, and so on.   The standard problem in this regard is
              the problem of m-term approximation where one fixes a basis and looks to
              approximate a target function  by a linear combination of m terms of the basis.
               When the basis is a wavelet basis or a basis of other waveforms, then this
              type of approximation is the starting point for compression algorithms. We are
              interested in the quantitative aspects of this type of approximation.  Namely, 
               we want to understand the properties (usually smoothness) of the function
              which govern its rate of approximation in some given norm (or metric).  We are
              also interested in stable algorithms for  finding good or near best
              approximations using m terms. Some of our earlier work has introduced and
              analyzed such algorithms. More recently, there has emerged another more
              complicated form of nonlinear approximation which we call  highly nonlinear
              approximation.  It takes many forms but has the basic ingredient that a basis 
              is replaced by a larger system of functions that is usually redundant. Some
              types of approximation that fall into this general category are mathematical
              frames, adaptive pursuit (or greedy algorithms) and  adaptive basis selection. 
              Redundancy on the one hand offers much promise for greater efficiency in terms
              of approximation rate,  but on the other hand gives rise to highly nontrivial
              theoretical and practical problems. With this motivation, our recent work and
              the current proposal focuses on nonlinear approximation both in the classical
              form of m-term approximation (where several important problems remain unsolved)
              and in the form
 of highly nonlinear approximation where a theory is only now
              emerging.

Nonlinear approximation seeks ways to approximate complicated
              functions by simple functions using methods that depend nonlinearly on the
              function being approximated. Such methods of approximation are more flexible
              than traditional linear approximation methods and proved to be very useful in
              various applications such as image compression, signal processing, design of
              neural networks, and the numerical solution of nonlinear partial differential
              equations. The purpose of the proposed research is to continue investigations
              of nonlinear approximation. Emphasis will be placed on studying the efficiency
              of algorithms which are important in practical applications. Implementation of
              these algorithms may substantially reduce time for signal and image prosessing.
              This is important for automated target recognition and related applications
              including autonomous landing of aircraft and registration of images from a
              database.

