Title       : GOALI: A Unified Treatment of Belief, Utility, and Action
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9970890

Award Number: 9970890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lokendra Shastri shastri@icsi.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internationl CompSci Inst
	      1947 Center Street
	      Berkeley, CA  947041105    510/666-2900

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970890 
Shastri

This project will address fundamental issues in the
              structure and dynamics of human cognition and decision-making processes.
              Specifically, it will try to integrate high-level cognitive modeling and
              connectionist knowledge representation research with methods from optimal
              control. Computational, biological, and cognitive data all help us understand
              the remarkable strengths and limits of human reasoning. These data reveal new
              computational forms for cognitive systems. Continuing prior research in a
              neurally motivated model of reflexive inference (SHRUTI) and cognitive models
              of naturalistic decision making, the PI is developing a new method for a
              Approximate Dynamic Programming, termed causal-HDP. He utilizes the
              computational structure of causal models to direcfiy compute multi-step
              approximations of the Bellman equation during reflexive reasoning. These
              approximations are supplemented with remembered estimates of the tail of the
              distribution, as in Adaptive Critic designs. This approach is a hybrid between
              classical time-backward dynamic programming and incremental, heuristic dynamic
              programming.

Limits on computational resources necessitate adaptive
              attention shifting behaviors, which extend the scope of reflexive inference.
              Metacognitive skills are developed from attention shifting, and provided for
              reasoning explicity about uncertainty, as identified in incomplete arguments,
              unreliable evidence or conclusions, and conflicting goals for evidence. When
              stakes and time warrant more than reflexive behavior, real decision-makers use
              such skills to evaluate and improve interpretations and plans. By combining a
              reflexive reasoner with attention shifting mechanisms, the project will develop
              systems capable of assembling larger, coherent interpretations and plans and of
              reasoning with uncertainty.

These concepts will be explored within the
              general framework of causal networks and will include a detailed realization of
              causal-HDP within SHRUTI. There will be an empirical evaluation of the
              causal-HDP method, and attention shifting strategies, using the neurally
              motivated SHRUTI implementation, and evaluate them with both abstract and real
              world tasks. Finally, the formalism will be mapped onto other research,
              theorems, and proofs in Approximate Dynamics Programming, and onto other models
              and data in cognitive psychology. This work should result in an improved
              understanding of architectures capable of rapid inference and planning, and the
              metacognitive mechanisms used for reasoning with uncertainty.
***
