Title       : Riemann-Hilbert Problems in Random Matrix Theory, Approximation Theory, and
               Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a9970328

Award Number: 9970328
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79764              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. McLaughlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970328
Principal Investigator: Kenneth D. T.-R.
              McLaughlin

Abstract: The proposed research concerns applications of
              Riemann-Hilbert problems and new techniques developed for their asymptotic
              analysis to classical problems in (1) random matrix theory, (2) approximation
              theory and orthogonal polynomials, and (3) integrable systems. In random matrix
              theory, McLaughlin proposes to study eigenvalue statistics in situations when
              the limiting density of states exhibits "atypical" behavior in order to
              illustrate explicitly nonuniversal behavior in local statistics of random
              matrices. He further proposes to study coupled families of random matrices,
              which appear in the study of the planar appoximation to quantum field theory as
              well as in graph coloring problems that arise in statistical mechanics. Other
              directions include new asymptotic problems pertaining to the bulk scaling
              limit. In approximation theory, McLaughlin proposes to continue work on support
              properties of equilibrium measures, to gain further understanding of the
              relationship between the external field V and the support of the associated
              equilibrium measure. In addition, an investigation of pointwise convergence of
              polynomials orthogonal with respect to Freud weights is proposed. The proposed
              research is to study the generalization of Gibbs's phenomenon to Freud weights
              and to obtain a rate of convergence of approximation by such polynomials. In
              integrable systems, McLaughlin proposes (with A. Kuijlaars) to combine
              knowledge from approximation theory and singular limits of integrable systems,
              to investigate the onset of infinite genus oscillations in the small dispersion
              limit of the Korteweg-de Vries equation. Another project (with S. Kamvissis and
              P. Miller) looks at a special class of initial data for the semi-classical
              limit of the focusing nonlinear Schrodinger equation.

Random matrix theory
              has recently been the meeting ground for many areas of mathematics and physics.
              One reason for the subject's importance is the famous claim of Eugene Wigner
              who, in the 1950s, proposed that "neutron resonance levels" could be modeled by
              the "eigenvalues of a random matrix." Neutron resonance levels are special
              numerical values for the velocities of neutrons: when physicists fired neutrons
              at a large quantity of atoms with heavy nuclei, they observed that the neutrons
              were "trapped" by the bulk of atoms only for these special velocities. Wigner's
              conjecture asserts: the statistical distribution of the distance between these
              resonance levels is a universal quantity, just as the speed of light in a
              vacuum is, according to Einstein's theory of relativity, a universal constant.
              Over the years, Wigner's conjecture became a fundamental issue in mathematics
              as well as physics: Can this universal behavior be modeled by thinking of the
              resonance levels as "typical" eigenvalues of matrices chosen at random by some
              simple mathematical rules? For a large class of random matrix models,
              McLaughlin and his collaborators discovered a mathematically precise
              description of the statistics of eigenvalues of random matrices, thus providing
              a proof of Wigner's conjecture. A part of McLaughlin's current research is
              devoted to a deeper understanding of this fundamental universal behavior. In
              other directions, McLaughlin is working to develop further the techniques
              mentioned above, because of their application to many different areas of
              mathematical analysis and physics. This award is jointly funded by the Analysis
              Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Mathematical Physics
              Program in the Division of Physics.

