Title       : Computational and Combinatorial Commutative Algebra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9970616

Award Number: 9970616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105942             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Bayer bayer@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Barnard College
	      3009 Broadway
	      New York, NY  100276598    212/280-5262

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970616

The investigator proposes to continue his work in commutative
              algebra, studying syzygies of ideals which arise in combinatorial applications.
               Syzygies are iterated relations among the generators of ideals, which reveal
              hidden structure in ideals.  His previous work provides a foundation for
              interpretting sets of syzygies as objects in combinatorial topology, and
              provides a link between toric and monomial ideals, two significant classes of
              ideals arising in combinatorics.  He seeks to extend this foundation for a
              class of toric ideals which relate to the combinatorial theory of matroids, and
              to then generalize the new results to a broader class of ideals, while avoiding
              arbitrary orientation choices by working in a product of projective spaces.  He
              will also continue his study of computational algebraic geometry and his
              development of computer algebra tools, seeking to further develop injective
              methods as a computational tool.

In other words, the investigator proposes
              to strengthen a link between counting methods in combinatorics and in algebra,
              for the purpose of making the algebraic methods more applicable to
              combinatorics.  In many combinatorials settings, such as counting colorings of
              a map, one can count by overcounting the possibilities, counting each
              possibility at least once, and then iteratively correcting by subtracting each
              overcount at least once, and so forth. Syzygies play exactly the same role in
              algebra, correcting for overcounting of dimensions.  The investigator's prior
              work yields new interpretations of syzygies which arise from combinatorial
              problems, and he seeks to further develop these interpretations and to apply
              them to combinatorial problems.

