Title       : Harmonic Analysis and Non-commutative Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9970671

Award Number: 9970671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114628             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Fox jfox@euclid.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Fox

The project "Non-Commutative Geometry and Harmonic Analysis" is
              investigating several problems that use the techniques of non-commutative
              geometry and operator K-theory. We are developing elements in equivariant
              K-theory based on ideas from geometric quantization for semi-simple Lie groups.
              These constructions unify and extend previous constructions developed by Fox,
              Haskel, Julg, and Kasparov.  We are using non-commutative geometry to develop
              models of neural networks, which we hope will have several advantages over the
              classical models. The models should provide for greater computational
              efficiency and the framework should allow for the computation of invariants of
              the large-scale structure of the model.

A. Connes and G. Kasparov have
              developed new areas of mathematics that provide tools for studying systems that
              are inherently complex. There have been a number of spectacular successes of
              these ideas when applied to mathematical problems in geometry and topology. The
              techniques are starting to be used on problems that were originally considered
              outside the scope of the theory and there is promise that these new tools will
              prove useful in a huge range of applications. This project consists of two
              programs using non-commutative geometry. The first program is studying ways
              that symmetry can incorporated into this new geometry. We have new techniques
              that we believe are natural and will shed light on the structure of geometric
              objects. The second program involves the use of non-commutative geometry to
              develop models of the brain and brain functions, commonly known as neural
              networks. The inherently complex structure of the brain has been a major
              stumbling block for mathematical modeling and one of our goals is to apply some
              of the techniques of non-commutative geometry to obtain new models of neural
              functioning.  An unexpected, but delightful, development has been serious
              communication between the mathematics department and the neuroscience community
              on our campus. A true collaboration at the undergraduate, graduate and research
              level is developing and promises to enrich both mathematics and biology.
              Mathematical neuroscience has a huge potential for applications (as already
              demonstrated by the applications of classical neural networks) which will
              increase as computational power increases and our understanding neural
              computation expands.

