Title       : Representation Theoretical Methods in the Theory of Special Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2001      
File        : a9970709

Award Number: 9970709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92001              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adriano M. Garsia garsia@schur.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9970709

The investigator and  his associates study  the connections between
              Representation Theory and the Theory of Special functions.  He bridge for this
              connection is provided by the Frobenius map which relates group characters to
              symmetric functions.  In the ten years since its discovery, the Macdonald
              symmetric function basis has progressively emerged has a central element in
              this connection.  Efforts at proving a variety of conjectures surrounding the
              Macdonald basis, have led to some truly remarkable discoveries in the Theory of
              Symmetric functions as well as in Representation Theory.  In particular this
              led the principal  investigator  and his associates to the discovery of new and
               efficient tools  to carry out calculations (both at the theoretical as well as
              practical levels) within the theory of symmetric functions.  The surprising
              development is that there is a family of plethystic operators which play a
              remarkable role within the theory of symmetric functions and unravel the
              complexity of the Macdonald basis.  Investigations, made possible by these
              discoveries reveal that this basis encodes some truly surprising properties of
              the diagonal action of the symmetric group Sn on polynomials on two sets of
              variables x1,...,xn and y1,...,yn.  The implications of these developments in
              several areas which range from Algebraic Combinatorics to Algebraic Geometry
              and Theoretical Physics are  presently under intensive investigation.

To
              this date very few researchers and educators in the pure as well as the applied
              sciences truly appreciate the vastness of new horizons offered by the
              combination of symbolic manipulation software and processing power of present
              day computers.  Several areas of mathematics have truly become experimental
              sciences.  In computer explorations, investigators that have mastered this art,
              are being daily amazed to see conjectures and theorems literately jump out of
              the screen.  In the early days of  the computer era, in the late sixties and
              early seventies involvement with the space exploration efforts carried out at
              the Jet Propulsion Laboratories, the principal investigator was made keenly
              aware of the needs to develop tools that enabled the translation of theoretical
              discoveries into practical computational methods.  This led to a frantic effort
              towards the replacement of pure "existence" proofs by "algorithmic" arguments.
              Nevertheless, the ability to carry extensive computations by hand for days
              without committing a single mistake is a quality that has been reserved to only
              a handful of humans over the ages.  It has become clear that the power of such
              giants as Gauss and Euler was substantially based on this rare ability. 
              However, it is not irreverent to say that, nowadays, any talented mathematics
              graduate student in possession of a 400MHz PC with MAPLE or  MATHEMATICA  can
              easily computationally outdo weeks of both Gauss and Euler  ombined in a matter
              of minutes.  Yet a great deal remains to be done.  The few utilities that are
              added constantly to these symbolic manipulation packages, nowhere near exhaust
              the possibilities that have become available.  Surprisingly, very few
              investigators realize the power of the theory of symmetric functions as a
              symbolic manipulation tool.  The latter stems from the fact that non linear
              problems may be linearized by the introduction of an infinite number of
              variables.  It develops that the change of bases matrices of symmetric function
              theory may be used to "mock" the presence of infinities within a finite device,
              thereby permitting the linearization of many a computational problem.  This
              given it is easily seen how important it is to pursue investigations in the
              theory of symmetric functions that extend and deepen  the computational power
              of the theory.  This is the foremost goal of the present project.


