Title       : Analysis and Invariant Theory for Gelfand Pairs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a9970552

Award Number: 9970552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gail Ratcliff ratcliff@arch.umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chal Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9970552
Principal Investigators: Gail Ratcliff, Chal
              Benson

Abstract. This research project concerns analysis on compact
              extensions  of nilpotent Lie groups. One says that the action of a compact Lie
              group K on a nilpotent Lie group N yields a Gelfand pair when the integrable
              K-invariant functions on N commute under convolution. The investigators will
              continue their study of such Gelfand pairs, in particular their study of the
              associated space of spherical functions, especially when N is a Heisenberg
              group. Specific goals include further development of algorithms for computing
              spherical functions and their eigenvalues, study of identities for generalized
              binomial coefficients, a description of the topology of the Gelfand space, and
              applications to questions concerning hull minimal ideals in Schwartz
              spaces.

The techniques of Fourier analysis, which traces its roots to the
              study of problems in heat conduction, are among the most powerful tools in the
              mathematician's arsenal. An important construction in Fourier analysis is the
              so-called convolution product. In the classical setting, convolution has the
              important property of commutativity. That is, one can rearrange the order of
              the factors in the product without affecting the result of the multiplication.
              There is, however, a modern and far-reaching generalization of Fourier
              analysis, like its ancestor linked to important problems in physics, in which
              convolution often fails to be commutative. In many problems in this type of
              analysis, which is done in the framework of objects known as "Lie groups,"
              noncommutativity arises quite naturally and cannot be avoided, leading to great
              technical difficulties. Gelfand pairs provide a device to recover the
              simplicity of commutativity in certain noncommutative settings. Each Gelfand
              pair provides an environment with enough symmetry to ensure commutativity of
              the convolution product. Such pairs are named in honor of the Russian
              mathematician I. M. Gelfand and have been studied since the 1950s. Their
              usefulness is now well established in connection with analysis in the
              noncommutative setting of semi-simple Lie groups. In the past decade, it has
              been shown that Gelfand pairs also arise in another non-commutative setting,
              that of  nilpotent Lie groups. The goals of this research concern the
              systematic study and mathematical analysis of this new class of Gelfand pairs,
              including the development of algorithms for explicit computations.

