Title       : Automated Sequencing at Colgate University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1999     
File        : a9970204

Award Number: 9970204
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Damhnait McHugh dmchugh@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Coyne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara C. Hoopes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather B. McDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Leebens-Mack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract
Title of Project: Automated Sequencing at Colgate
              University
NSF Proposal Number: 9970204

PI: Damhnait McHugh
Co-PI: Robert
              S. Coyne
Co-PI: Barbara C. Hoopes
Co-PI: James H. Leebens-Mack
Co-PI:
              Heather B. McDonald


This award, combined with funds from Colgate
              University, will provide for a central, on-site DNA sequencing and genotyping
              facility at Colgate University. The facility will be comprised of an ABI310
              Prism Genetic Analyzer (ABI 310) and ancillary equipment including a thermal
              cycler, a microcentrifuge, and a computer workstation.  The facility will allow
              faculty members, research staff, and students at Colgate University to easily
              and efficiently carry out DNA sequencing and genotyping for research projects
              in cell and molecular biology and evolution, systematics, and conservation
              biology.  Specifically, the facility will be used to generate data for the
              diverse research projects being carried out by the six Major Users on the
              Colgate University faculty: phylogenetic analysis of annelids and the evolution
              of larval developmental modes, coevolution of yuccas and yucca moths,
              large-scale genome rearrangement in ciliated protozoans, spindle pole
              duplication, regulation of transcription expression in yeast, and the role of
              carbonic anhydrase in plants.  In addition, the equipment will be used by
              undergraduate students working in collaboration with faculty members and on
              their own research projects, and Minor Users from nearby Hamilton College will
              also have access to the facility.



