Title       : Hands on Physics: Evaluation and Dissemination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9970881

Award Number: 9970881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Tinker bob@concord.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concord Consortium
	      10 Concord Crossing, Suite 300
	      Concord, MA  01742    978/369-4367

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Hands On Physics Evaluation and Dissemination project will result in the
              summative evaluation and widespread dissemination of Hands on Physics  (HOP),
              an innovative, inquiry based approach to physics designed for high school and 
              college students. HOP is a completely new, project-based approach to physics
              that is adapted to dissemination and delivery over the Web. This project is
              creating a complete implementation package of seven HOP units and supporting
              materials that can be widely disseminated and take  full advantage of the Web.
              The project is supporting summative evaluation in ten sites, a  dissemination
              effort, and a set of final revisions.

Summative evaluation. Because HOP
              represents a radically different way to teach physics, educators are demanding
              more evidence that it is effective and can achieve its goals. The limited
              studies undertaken so far have been formative, intended to help guide the
              materials development process. The  project features a definitive summative
              study. 

Implementation support. Teachers need assistance in implementing 
              such a novel approach. By creating a Web-based HOP interest group, the project
              is providing assistance on meeting teaching standards, selecting companion 
              materials, performing student evaluation, and solving technical problems. 
              These topics will covered in a NetCourse for teachers and in informal online
              discussions. 

Final editing. This project is providing better artwork,
              greater consistency, more emphasis on student problem-solving, and increased
              use of probeware. HOP has the potential to make a major contribution to physics
              education, defining a new paradigm for teaching firmly rooted in both science
              and  technology education. HOP also has important implications beyond its
              target community of science  and technology educators. Its educational style,
              gender-neutrality, and its ability to offer valuable experience-based material
              over the Web, set it apart from  anything else currently being developed and
              make it an important experiment of interest to all science and technology
              educators. 
