Title       : Orthogonal Polynomials of Several Variables and Symmetry Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9970389

Award Number: 9970389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37554              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Dunkl cfd5z@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The classical orthogonal polynomials of one variable are significantly involved
              in several aspects of mathematics, for example: the Chebyshev, Legendre, and
              Hermite polynomials are used in approximation theory, Gaussian quadrature, and
              the hydrogen atom quantum model, respectively. The reasons why these
              polynomials are so effective come from the associated differential equations,
              the recurrence relations, and the weight functions. The goal of this project is
              to construct and study similarly useful families of orthogonal polynomials of
              several variables. A very fruitful approach to this aim is the study of systems
              which have finite symmetry groups. The main types considered in this proposal
              are the symmetry groups of the simplex, the hypercube and the icosahedron. The
              first two comprise infinite families, labeled by dimension, and are associated
              with systems allowing arbitrary permutations of the coordinates, or
              sign-changes as well. The icosahedron is a three-dimensional regular solid with
              a truly ancient historical record, which is the subject of current research in
              quasi-crystals. These are paradoxical structures; ordinary crystals like salt
              have a shape which allows the rigid fitting together of an unlimited number of
              molecules, and even though the icosahedron does not allow such patterns (called
              regular tessellations) there exist physical substances with icosahedral
              structures (for example, pentagonal symmetry appears under electron microscope
              observations).

This project is concerned with finding orthogonal bases of 
              polynomials; these bases have a special significance because they can be used
              directly in the analysis of functions; the origin of the phrase ``harmonic
              analysis'' is the technique of decomposing a musical note into fundamentals and
              overtones. This technique has developed into such applications as
              decompositions of quantum-mechanical systems into different energy levels, or
              the approximations of functions by easily computable polynomials. Besides the
              icosahedral group, the proposal deals with the analog of spherical harmonic
              polynomials for the hyperoctahedral group, which allows both permutations as
              well as sign-changes of the co-ordinates. One of the aims is to investigate the
              application of orthogonal polynomials to quantum systems with three-body
              interactions as well as the spin Calogero models (identical particles in a
              one-dimensional space, each with a spin of +/- 1). It is a goal to find
              formulas specific enough to allow asymptotic calculations: qualitative
              descriptions of the long-term behavior of the systems. Finally, it is planned
              to investigate exceptional differential equations, in the sense that some
              underlying parameters take on specific isolated values leading to unusual
              phenomena; on the one hand there are the bi-spectral equations in the
              Korteweg-deVries scheme, and on the other hand there are ``super-integrable''
              quantum-mechanical systems. The technical foundation of this proposal is the
              differential-difference operator associated with reflection groups which was
              constructed by the proposer and has been used in many research articles in
              physics and mathematics.



