Title       : Part to Art: A Comprehensive Geometric Modeling Paradigm for the Design of
               Micro-Electromechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9970059

Award Number: 9970059
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216719             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh G. K. Ananthasuresh gksuresh@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The research supported by this grant focuses on the development of a
              comprehensive geometric modeling paradigm for designing
              Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS). The new geometric modeling scheme for
              MEMS will address the issues of unusual aspect ratios; multiple layers;
              heterogenous material composition; and geometric intricacies brought about by
              photolithography, conformal and other depositions, and isotropic and
              anisotropic etches. The art-to-part problem, that is, building accurate
              physical models using the artwork of photolithography masks and the process
              information, will be addressed first. Accurate physical models that truly
              represent the microfabricated devices are useful in performing the
              computational behavioral simulations. The part-to-art problem, i.e., generating
              the masks from the 3-D model for a given process, will be addressed next. The
              geometric modeling framework to be developed in this work will employ a
              constitutive element representation and suitable image processing algorithms to
              naturally mimic the deposition and etching processes. The set-theoretic basis
              of erosion and dilation will be used to solve the art-to-part and the
              part-to-art problems. By a proper selection of constitutive elements and
              structuring elements, several types of crystal orientations, etches and
              deposits will be simulated. The design rules for validating an already created
              3-dimensional model, and generative rules to aid the MEMS designer to create an
              object for a chosen process will also be developed in the new geometric
              modeling framework. Microfabricated test structures will be utilized to
              validate the algorithms developed in this work.
     The process of creating
              an accurate model from the masks will be a notable addition to the emerging
              computer-aided design tools for MEMS and will favorably impact the MEMS
              industry. The part-to-art problem, if successfully solved, will significantly
              change the way MEMS devices are designed. Then, MEMS designers will no longer
              need to start from manufacturing information (masks), but instead can focus on
              directly creating the solid model using behavioral simulations. The generative
              rules will expedite the MEMS design process and will lead to better
              visualization without having to know the minute details of microfabrication
              processes.

