Title       : Dynamic Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Transport Catalytic
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9122529

Award Number: 9122529
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Muhammad Sahimi moe@iran.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Katherine S. Shing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Systematic Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics simulation                       
              studies for diffusion and sorption processes in pillared-clays                 
              will be conducted.  Pillared clays are a new class of                          
              catalytic material chemically similar to, but morphologically                  
              very different from, zeolites.  Zeolites have been the subject                 
              of extensive experimental and theoretical studies while                        
              studies on the pillared clays are primarily experimental.                      
              Compared to zeolites, pillared-clays have the advantage of                     
              having more structural flexibility, that is, by changing the                   
              height, size and distribution of the pillars the structure of                  
              the pillared-clay can be optimized for particular reaction                     
              and/or separation applications.  As a result, in order to                      
              fully exploit this structural flexibility, it is important to                  
              understand the fundamental thermodynamic and transport                         
              properties and their dependence on the physicochemical                         
              characteristics of the pillared-clays, as well as those of the                 
              molecular species diffusing through the porous medium.                         
                                                                                             
              This work will systematically examine the following:                           
                                                                                             
              1.     Diffusion of 3-Dimensional molecules through pillared-                  
              clay of       various size, height and distribution of pillars.                
                                                                                             
              2.     Diffusion with reversible and irreversible adsorption at                
              low    and high flow rates (or densities).                                     
                                                                                             
              3.     The variation of diffusion and sorption with inter-                     
              molecular            and surface forces and with the shape, size and           
              flexibility          of the diffusing molecules.                               
                                                                                             
              4.     Comparison of Monte Carlo and Molecular Dynamics results                
              to     establish the relationship between MC simulation time and               
              MD     time, if any.                                                           
                                                                                             
              5.     Studies of multicomponent diffusion in porous media and                 
              the    evaluation of mutual diffusivities.
