Title       : The Virtual Design Team: Simulating Decision-MakIng and Information Flow in
               Concurrent, MultidisCiplinary Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1994     
File        : a9122541

Award Number: 9122541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Levitt levitt@cive.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9146,9216,MANU,
Abstract    :
                 This research integrates ideas from artificial intelligence                 
              (AI) and coordination theory to develop a Virtual Design Team                  
              VDT)-an object-oriented, discrete event, computer simulation                   
              model of the flow of decisions and information among participants              
              in complex, multi-disciplinary design projects.  Conducting                    
              controlled experiments in real organizations to assess the                     
              performance of alternative coordination structures is both                     
              expensive and fraught with practical difficulties.  Compounding                
              this, powerful computer simulation tools to analyze the                        
              performance of organization structures by simulation-analogous to              
              finite element models for simulating structural behavior-have not              
              yet been developed.  The VDT addresses this need by using  AI                  
              techniques to model how the organizational structure of, and the               
              information processing technologies used by, managers in a                     
              multi-disciplinary project design team effect the richness,                    
              volume and timing of information passing among team members.  The              
              long range goal of this work is to provide a computerized                      
              analysis tool that can help researchers and practitioners analyze              
              the performance of organizations.  The first phase of the project              
              will model the impact of organizational structure and information              
              processing technologies on task duration.  The second phase will               
              extend the model to capture the impacts of organization structure              
              and information technologies on design quality and reliability.
