Title       : Dissertation Research: Ecology and Evolution of Aquatic Sphagna: Functional
               Morphology, Physiology and Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1992     
File        : a9122851

Award Number: 9122851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman L. Christensen, Jr. normc@env.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven K. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brent D. Mishler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Large boundary layers and slow diffusion rates of dioxide in              
              water can lead to limitations in growth and photosynthesis of                  
              aquatic and saturated plants. Although investigators have sought               
              to characterize the physiological mechanisms that facilitate carbon            
              uptake in water, little work has focused on the  role of morphology            
              in reducing boundary layer resistances in aquatic habitats. Species            
              in the moss genus Sphagnum exhibit morphological variation that                
              preliminary studies indicate is correlated with position along the             
              water gradient. Thus, the genus can be used as a model system to               
              investigate the relationship among morphology, boundary layer                  
              properties and physiological ecology. Also, because the genus is               
              taxonomically well studied phylogeny can be developed and modern               
              methods of comparative biology used to test hypotheses of                      
              adaptation.                                                                    
                   The major goals of this proposed study are as follows: 1) to              
              determine the extent that morphology and habitat are correlated in             
              Sphagnum; 2) to measure boundary layer conductance for plants along            
              the water gradient and describe its relationships to morphology;               
              3) to demonstrate that differences in boundary layer conductance               
              lead to carbon limitations for non-aquatic Sphagnum at submerged               
              CO2 levels; and 4) to test whether functional characters are                   
              adaptations using historical evidence from a constructed phylogeny.
