Title       : The Costs of Inflation: Theory and Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1993   
File        : a9122325

Award Number: 9122325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence M. Ball   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Romer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on the costs of moderate inflation.  While                
              policy makers view inflation as a serious economic problem,                    
              economists have had difficulty identifying major costs of                      
              inflation.  The research explores the idea that inflation creates              
              variability in relative prices, and thus erodes the efficiency of              
              the price system.  The model developed by this project emphasizes              
              the role of long-term relationships.  Without long-term                        
              relationships, customers benefit from relative price variability               
              by substituting towards low-price goods.  And since firms can                  
              largely eliminate variability through more frequent nominal                    
              adjustment, which is inexpensive, variability can have only small              
              costs to firms.  With long-term relationships, in contrast,                    
              inflation reduces the information conveyed by current prices                   
              concerning future prices, causing consumers to make costly                     
              mistakes about whether to enter relationships.  In addition, the               
              reduced informativeness of prices makes demand less price-                     
              elastic, thereby increasing markups.  The research formalizes                  
              these ideas and investigates their quantitative importance.  The               
              project explores how the web of input-output relationships                     
              magnifies the costs of inflation; examines empirically the                     
              effects of inflation on relative price variability and on                      
              macroeconomic performance; and investigates the mismeasurement of              
              aggregate output under inflation.                                              
                                                                                             
              The project also investigates the causes of inflation in the                   
              short run.  Theories of costly price adjustment imply that firms               
              adjust prices more rapidly in response to large shocks than to                 
              small ones.  A corollary is that innovations in inflation depend               
              positively on the skewness of relative prices shocks; if shocks                
              are skewed to the right, for example, firms adjust quickly to                  
              shocks in the upper tail, raising the aggregate price level.  The              
              project develops this idea theoretically and then tests it using               
              disaggregated data.
