Title       : Support for the Symposium on Geomorphic Systems; Oxford, Ohio; September 1992.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1992  
File        : a9122445

Award Number: 9122445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7670               (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Renwick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In recent decades, nonlinear dynamical systems theory, which              
              includes such approaches and techniques as chaos theory and the                
              theory of dissipative structures, has brought revolutionary                    
              advancements to physics, physical chemistry and fluid dynamics.                
              The broad applicability of nonlinear dynamical systems theory                  
              makes it appropriate for the study of earth surface processes                  
              such as turbulent flow.  The increasingly complex nature of                    
              problems related to, for example, global environmental change and              
              the interconnectedness of geomorphic and related phenomena demand              
              a more systems oriented approach to their study.  Two major                    
              schools of thought on geomorphic systems are lodged in North                   
              America and Europe, respectively.  While North Americans                       
              emphasize more contemporary processes, Europeans focus on longer               
              term landscape evolution.  Debates of this nature usually take                 
              place at major international conferences.  The annual Binghamton               
              Geomorphology Symposium is the foremost gathering of scholars in               
              Geomorphology, and in 1992 the Symposium will be organized around              
              the theme of geomorphic systems.  This project allows five                     
              eminent geomorphologists associated with the European perspective              
              on geomorphic systems to participate in the Binghamton Symposium.              
              Their presence and their contributed papers will provide the                   
              basis for a coordinated examination of the role of dynamical                   
              systems theory in the study of surficial processes with the                    
              ultimate objective of achieving a better understanding of                      
              physical landscape change on the surface of the earth.                         
                   The Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium  has, for over two                 
              decades, led the way in advancing the research frontier of                     
              geomorphological studies.  The geomorphic systems theme provides               
              an opportunity to explore the utility of nonlinear dynamical                   
              systems theory for the study of earth surface processes and                    
              landforms.  It should also examine the potential of geomorphic                 
              systems studies for predicting the response of earth surface                   
              systems to large-scale perturbations such as climate and sea-                  
              level change.  The participation of the five European experts                  
              will fertilize research in geomorphic systems by bringing                      
              together geomorphologists from different traditions to discuss                 
              and inform each other about the dynamic processes which produce                
              the variety of landscapes present on the earth.  The symposium                 
              will investigate the utility of chaos and bifurcation theory,                  
              dissipative structures, and hierarchy theory for research on the               
              behavior and evolution of specific geomorphic systems.  It will                
              further explore the roles of spatial and temporal scale and                    
              scale-linkage problems in geomorphology.  This project provides a              
              unique opportunity to bring together scholars under the auspices               
              of an established, distinguished symposium format to discuss and               
              debate the future direction of an important subdiscipline within               
              geography.
