Title       : Dissertation Research: The Exceptional Nature of the Noun Phrase in Walloon: Its
               Significance for Comparative Romance Syntax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1992     
File        : a9122243

Award Number: 9122243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy B. Bernstein  (Student current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Graduate School
	      365 Fifth Avenue
	      New York, NY  100164309    212/790-4395

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                         ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The dissertation student will spend two months in Belgium in                   
              order to collect data on nominal structure in Walloon, a Belgian               
              Romance language.  The results of this investigation will form an              
              essential component of a doctoral thesis concerning the                        
              comparative syntax of nominal structure across Romance languages.              
              Data will be collected primarily by interviewing and recording                 
              native Walloon speakers living in the region of the Ardennes, as               
              well as by consulting local scholars in Louvain-la-Neuve and                   
              Liege and examining texts in university and public libraries.                  
              The syntactic phenomena to be investigated include adjective                   
              placement, nominal agreement patterns, clitic constructions, and               
              possessive pronouns.  The proposed activity will be facilitated                
              by the collaboration of Professor Michel Francard,  a Walloon                  
              dialectologist at the Universite Catholique de Louvain.                        
                   The significance of this project is twofold:  Firstly, as                 
              preliminary dissertation research has shown, unexpected syntactic              
              patterns of Walloon noun phrases shed light on an array of                     
              phenomena that have eluded adequate explanation in recent work on              
              comparative Romance syntax.  In addition, this research                        
              undertaking will provide the important opportunity to gather and               
              analyze syntactic data from this moribund language that, until                 
              recently, has been studied only descriptively.
