Title       : Theoretical and Empirical Study of World Class Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9122482

Award Number: 9122482
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Schroeder rschroeder@csom.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sadao Sakakibara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a comprehensive examination of the phenomena of                
              "World Class Manufacturing" from theoretical and empirical points              
              of view.  The theoretical component will synthesize the support for            
              World Class Manufacturing from the literature bases of operations              
              management, strategic management, organization behavior,                       
              organization theory, human resources management, and international             
              business.  The empirical component will develop a database of                  
              information about World Class Manufacturers in the United States,              
              Europe, and Japan, as well as traditional firms, for comparison.               
              This database will be used to test propositions concerning world               
              class manufacturing and its relationship to performance.                       
                                                                                             
              The data will be gathered using a set of questionnaires which were             
              developed using reliable and valid measures of the traits which                
              characterize the management practices of World Class Manufacturing,            
              as well as a series of objective measures of plant performance.                
              The data in the database will be the basis for a series of papers              
              relating various management practices to performance, for World                
              Class Manufacturers and traditional plants.  The data will be                  
              supplemented by qualitative information gathered during a series of            
              plant visits, which will include structured interviews as well as              
              plant tours.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Thus, this project combines theory with quantitative and                       
              qualitative research in order to comprehensively examine World                 
              Class Manufacturing.  It will provide the foundation for an                    
              examination of manufacturing management, as well as answering a                
              number of questions about the relationship of various management               
              practices to plant performance.  It is the first major examination             
              of World Class Manufacturing, and its findings should be of value              
              to both academics and practitioners.  Because of its interest to               
              industry, the project also is supported by 3M, Honeywell, and                  
              Donaldson Company under the Joint NSF/Private Sector Research                  
              Opportunities Program.
