Title       : SGER: Experimental Gonadal Hypertrophy and the Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Gonadal
               Control Axis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1993 
File        : a9122790

Award Number: 9122790
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33369              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Iwamoto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul S. Cooke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Jackson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A recriprocal relationship exists between the nervous system,                  
              hormones and behavior.  This relationship begins early in life,                
              when the release of hormones organizes the brain in terms of its               
              endocrine function and in terms of establishing the appropriate                
              connections for the control of behavior.  Thyroid hormones are                 
              essential for normal development of the brain.  These hormones                 
              exert a significant and crucial effect on differentiation of                   
              cells.  Dr. Iwamoto found that treatment with a drug that induces              
              lower levels of thyriod hormone during a specific period of                    
              postnatal development dramatically affects adult testis weight                 
              and sperm production.  These data are quite striking.  While it                
              is known that hyper- and hypothyroidism interferes with the                    
              physiology of reproduction in females, little is known about the               
              consequences in males.  Dr. Iwamato will determine whether this                
              gonadal hypertrophy induced by developmental hypothyroidism                    
              results from or causes a major change in hypothalamic function                 
              and sensitivity to gonadal steroids.  He will compare the                      
              gonadotropin and testosterone secretory patterns, and single unit              
              activity of hypothalamic cells in response to testosterone and                 
              estrogen, of these animals to normal males.  This unique                       
              transient hypothyroidism that induces hypogonadal males may prove              
              to be an important model for understanding the hypothalamic-                   
              pituitary-gonadal system and thus, provide new insights into the               
              understanding and treatment of male infertility.
