Title       : Measuring Distortions From the Differential Tax Treatment ofCorporate and
               Noncorporate Income
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1993   
File        : a9122240

Award Number: 9122240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey K. MacKie-Mason   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger H. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is to analyze the distortions arising              
              from the corporate income tax.  In the past attention has been                 
              focused on the impact of the corporate income tax on the rate of               
              corporate investment, corporate debt policy, and dividend policy.              
              In contrast, this research focuses on the effects of the tax on                
              the organization structure of the firm, the type and composition               
              of labor compensation, and the location of borrowing by                        
              multinational firms.  This research is important because it will               
              provide a better understanding concerning the extent to which                  
              this tax might effect the performance of the U.S. economy.                     
                                                                                             
              The project consists of four empirical studies to measure                      
              distortions arising from the differential taxation of corporate                
              and noncorporate income.  The first study will use a panel data                
              set of individual tax returns to examine tax effects on                        
              individual investment in corporate and noncorporate firms.  The                
              second study will use a panel data set of unemployment insurance               
              records to measure the effects of taxes on the composition of                  
              firm entrants and exits, the relative growth rates of corporate                
              and noncorporate firms, and the frequency of reorganizations of                
              existing firms.  The third study will analyze the extent to which              
              corporate entrepreneurs have an incentive to identify their labor              
              income as corporate income in order to avoid personal taxation.                
              IRS tax return data will be used for this analysis.  The fourth                
              study will analyze an aspect of the 1984 Tax Reform Act which                  
              gave multinational firms an incentive to shift their borrowing                 
              into foreign subsidiaries.
