Title       : Existence Values and Option Prices for Environmental Public Goods: Laboratory
               Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1994        
File        : a9122189

Award Number: 9122189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43237              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Brookshire brookshi@bootes.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael McKee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              Environmental resources such as wilderness areas, plant or animal              
              species, and visibility are public goods yielding benefits which               
              may be broadly classified as use and non-use.  For example, in                 
              the case of a remote wilderness area some people intend to visit               
              it, and they will enjoy a use benefit.  Others are not certain                 
              they will ever visit the area, but nonetheless wish to keep that               
              option open.  Still others derive a benefit from simply knowing                
              the wilderness area exists.  These option and existence values                 
              represent categories of non-use values.  The Grand Canyon is a                 
              good example of a resource which gives rise to all three                       
              categories of values.  The sum of the use, option, and existence               
              values represents the total value of the environmental amenity.                
              It is important to identify the individual components, not only                
              the total value of these amenities.  Such identification is                    
              important to ensuring consistency of measurement as well as to                 
              address questions of the appropriate means to fund the provision,              
              protection and preservation of these amenities.                                
                                                                                             
              It is fairly well understood how to properly measure the benefit               
              to direct users (use value).  However, there is much less                      
              agreement concerning the measurement of non-use (option and                    
              existence) values.  The purpose of this project is to conduct a                
              series of laboratory experiments designed to measure these three               
              benefit components associated with environmental amenities.  The               
              study will provide estimates of the bounds on the values arising               
              from existence and option component of total value.  This                      
              research is important because increasing stress on the natural                 
              environment is causing public policy to focus on issues                        
              associated with the preservation environmental assets.  Further,               
              the courts have seen fit to include non-use values in                          
              environmental damage cases.  Thus, there is a need to develop                  
              methods for accurate measurement of non-use values.
