Title       : International Capital Markets and Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1996     
File        : a9122436

Award Number: 9122436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277675             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Gallman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lance E. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The international transfer of capital for investment purposes has              
              had a profound effect in determining the direction and profile of              
              world economic development and political change.  Historically,                
              critics on the left have equated the export of capital with                    
              financial imperialism, while in recent years critics on the right              
              have accused the American government of selling the nation's                   
              birthright to the Japanese.  It is also the case that in the last              
              century the rapid development of Australia, Canada, and the                    
              United States were at least partially underwritten by massive                  
              capital transfers from Britain, and in this century the                        
              reemergence of Germany and Japan from the devastation of the                   
              Second World War can be attributed in some important measure to                
              capital transfers from the U.S.  There is little doubt that the                
              existing global distribution of economic activity has been                     
              affected by almost two centuries of international capital                      
              transfers.  Yet, despite those two hundred years of history and                
              rhetoric, very little is actually known about the exact                        
              relationship among international capital transfers, the transfer               
              of institutional technology, and the diffusion of economic                     
              growth.  The purpose of this project is to develop a basis for                 
              analyzing these relationships.  This is important because it will              
              give us a better understanding of the role of foreign and                      
              domestic capital markets in promoting economic growth and                      
              development.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the research will focus on the role of British                   
              international capital flows in the late nineteenth and early                   
              twentieth centuries in promoting development in Australia,                     
              Canada, the United States, and Argentina.  The study will be                   
              concerned with the mechanisms of international capital transfers,              
              the diffusion of financial institutional forms from Britain to                 
              the other four countries, and adaptations of these institutional               
              forms to local conditions and requirements.  Finally, it will                  
              analyze the distribution of British capital among sectors and                  
              organizational forms, and it will attempt to assess the impact of              
              British capital on local development.
