Title       : Estimation with Simulation: Theory and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9122283

Award Number: 9122283
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40987              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Ruud   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project develops estimation methods that use simulations to               
              overcome the computational burdens of numerically complex                      
              econometric models.  This is a very important line of research                 
              because many economic problems are intractable even using                      
              supercomputers.  Many applied economists must consciously design               
              models to avoid computationally intractable aspects, even though               
              the economics of the issue naturally lead in that direction.                   
              This project generalizes the simulated moments methods, uses it                
              to solve complicated empirical economic problems and extends a                 
              new class of semi-parametric estimators for linear index models                
              developed by the investigator under his previous NSF grant.                    
                                                                                             
              The method of simulated moments is generalized to limited                      
              dependent variable models besides the conditional multinomial                  
              Probit model and to inference problems associated with                         
              approximating moment functions like the score of the log-                      
              likelihood.  The research in computation addresses the existence               
              and nondifferentiability of simulated moments estimators.  The                 
              second part of the research is an empirical application of                     
              simulated moments estimation methods to the analysis of labor                  
              supply with nonlinear taxes.  The third part of the research is                
              about semi-parametric estimation of index models.  Asymptotic                  
              distribution theory for a class of estimators for linear index                 
              models will be derived and the relationship between this family                
              of estimators and others is explored.
