Title       : Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1993  
File        : a9122656

Award Number: 9122656
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard W. West                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4432               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee H. Knight c/o D.Menzel OMNET  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Menzel  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 5416      SHIPBOARD SCIENTIFIC SUPP EQUI
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests support for shipboard scientific support                
              equipment for the research vessel BLUE FIN, operated by the                    
              Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, and dedicated to use in                    
              support of ocean science research.                                             
                                                                                             
              The Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment Program provides funds              
              for ship equipment deemed essential to the proper and safe                     
              conduct of ocean science research. This Program provides support               
              for such items as deck equipment including winch systems for the               
              deployment and retrieval of scientific instruments, navigational               
              equipment such as radars, gyroscopes and earth satellite                       
              receivers to pin point the location of research sites,                         
              communication equipment including radio transceivers and                       
              satellite transceivers for voice and scientific data                           
              communications and other equipment such as motorized workboats                 
              for transporting scientists to and from data retrieval sites.                  
                                                                                             
              The Project Director, Dr. David Menzel is fully qualified to                   
              direct this project having had considerable experience in                      
              overseeing the acquisition and installation of shipboard                       
              equipment.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project will allow the institution to replace an operable                 
              base station radio.
