Title       : Control of Gene Expression in the Biosynthesis of Mitochondrial Ribosomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1993  
File        : a9122588

Award Number: 9122588
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Mason tmason@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Despite the universality of ribosomes in procaryotic and eucaryotic            
              cells, the majority of our knowledge of their structure, function              
              and synthesis has been developed through decades of intensive study            
              of bacterial ribosomes, predominantly in E. coli.  In contrast to              
              bacteria, eucaryotic cell maintain distinctly different sets of                
              ribosomes for protein synthesis in cytoplasm, chloroplasts, and                
              mitochondria.  An important research objective is to understand the            
              features of eucaryotic ribosomes that represent special adaptations            
              to complex genomic organization and subcellular comparmentalization            
              for eucaryotic cells.  The yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a                 
              fertile experimental system for the analysis of both organellar and            
              cytoplasmic ribosomes within a single cell.  Several laboratories              
              are studying yeast cytoplasmic ribosomes, our goal is to contribute            
              complementary information about yeast mitochondrial ribosomes and              
              their constituents.  The principal function of the mitochondrial               
              translation system in yeast is to produce a small number of                    
              subunits for the energy-transducing complexes of the inner                     
              membrane.  To accomplish this task, both the nuclear mitochondrial             
              genes are used to encode the requisite RNAs and proteins of the                
              translational apparatus.  With the exception of one protein of the             
              small ribosomal subunit (VAR1), all of the ribosomal proteins are              
              encoded by 60-70 different nuclear genes.  Of the four such genes              
              characterized by us MRP7 and MRP20 are particularly intriguing                 
              because they encode proteins that are related to the EL27 and EL23             
              proteins, respectively, of the E. coli 50S ribosomal subunit. Both             
              MRP& and MRP20 are essential proteins in yeast, and there is strong            
              experimental evidence for close physical proximity between EL27 and            
              the peptidyltransferase center of the E. coli ribosome.  EL23 is a             
              primary rRNA binding protein, which may also be located near the               
              peptidvltransferase center.  The research objectives of this                   
              proposal are based on the contention that MRP7 and MRP20, like                 
              their bacterial counterparts, are likely to be close to an                     
              important catalytic center of the ribosome.  We intend to use a                
              combined molecular genetic and biochemical approach to : 1) gain               
              additional information about the synthesis, structure, and function            
              of the MRP7 and MRP20 or both.  The research will provide new                  
              insight into the structure and function of proteins that are                   
              located in a highly conserved functional domain of the ribosome.
