Title       : Ionic Organic Reactions and Their Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  1994    
File        : a9122356

Award Number: 9122356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440200             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Olah olah@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research will continue on ionic organic reactions and their                    
              intermediates with emphasis on the role of electrophilic                       
              (proto) solvation in activating onium ions, carboxonium ions                   
              and certain carbocationic systems by interaction with the                      
              available non-bonded electron pairs of the heteroatoms.  Some                  
              potential oxonium and carboxonium dications will be studied                    
              such as diprotonated alcohols, diprotonated CO, diprotonated                   
              HCN and diprotonated CO2 as well as diprotonated esters.                       
              Included will be experimental superacidic investigations based                 
              on isotopic exchange studies, as well as low temperature                       
              spectroscopic investigations and theoretical studies.  The                     
              protolytic (alkylative) chemistry will also be studied.  The                   
              protolytic (coordinative) activation of the Friedel-Crafts                     
              reaction will be explored in reactions of alkanes, as well as                  
              highly deactivated aromatics.  Halooxonium ions and mixed                      
              halo-alkyl derivatives will be also prepared and studied in                    
              chlorination reactions.  Polyhalonium dications  will be                       
              explored, as will be bora-cations.  The search for persistent                  
              silicenium ions will be continued, including solid state 29Si                  
              NMR studies.  The recently discovered derivatization of C60 and                
              C70 fullerenes will be followed up including halogenation,                     
              alkylation, acyclation and other reactions.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              With this award, the Organic Synthesis Program will support the                
              research of Dr. George A. Olah at the Univeristy of Southern                   
              California.  The research will explore the generation of                       
              diprotonated species formed by the interaction of a proton with                
              the unshared electron pairs on oxygen and nitrogen atoms in                    
              stable molecular species.  The chemistry of these reactive                     
              species will be studied.  This will result in the development                  
              of some new unique synthetic methodology that should benefit                   
              research in biochemistry and medicine as well as in the                        
              chemical industry.
