Title       : Patent Management and Technological Innovation: The Woodworth Planer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1992     
File        : a9122735

Award Number: 9122735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn C. Cooper   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Why do some new technologies "catch on" rapidly in one place but               
              not another?  Economic and technological infrastructures of                    
              different localities may make a difference, but the managerial                 
              behavior of the agents of innovation is also relevant, as they                 
              contend with varying local social and political circumstances.                 
              For a proper understanding of the development of new technologies              
              in the United States, it is critical that these differing factors              
              be sorted out.   Dr. Cooper is studying in detail a specific case              
              to help answer these questions.  She is examining the effect of                
              American patent management on adoption of the eventually                       
              predominant wood-planning machine during its patent period of                  
              1828-1856, in five different regions of the United States.  She                
              is gathering original Woodworth planer patent assignment and                   
              litigation records to compare characteristics of competing                     
              planing methods and the circumstances of early and peaceful                    
              adoption with those of late and contentious adoption in New                    
              England, New York, Mid-Atlantic, Mid-West and Southern regions.                
              The reputedly "odious" behavior of Woodworth planer assignees                  
              provoked a nationwide campaign to kill the twice-extended patent.              
              Dr. Cooper is analyzing the campaign's petitions to Congress in                
              order to identify the interest groups opposing and supporting the              
              planer patent in the various localities.  Her study should                     
              improve our understanding of how the patent system functioned in               
              spreading innovations during the great period of                               
              industrialization of production in the United States.
