Title       : US-Poland MSC Joint Fund Research on New Directions for Lignin Utilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9122877

Award Number: 9122877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1991    
Expires     : October 1,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Henryk Struszczyk   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst. of Chemical Fibres
	      90-570 Lodz,
	      Lodz, PL  000000000    /   -

NSF Program : 5933      US-POLAND MARIE CURRIE JNT FND
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this project, Dr. Henryk Struszczyk of the Institute of Chemical            
              Fibres, Lodz, Poland, will cooperate with Dr. W.C. Glasser of                  
              Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Dr. V.L.                  
              Chiang of Michigan Technical University, and Dr. R. Narayan of                 
              Purdue University, under the U.S.-Poland Marie Sklodowska-Curie                
              Joint Fund to research "New Directions for Lignin Utilization."                
              The researchers will study new directions of lignin utilization as a           
              source for modified polymers production as well as in a form of                
              polymeric carriers as a matrix for preparation of controlled release           
              pesticides suitable for agricultural application.  Lignin, a by-               
              product of producing wood pulp, is now mainly burned as an                     
              energy source, but this produces toxic sulfur dioxide gases harmful            
              to the environment.  The researchers believe lignin could serve as a           
              source of new products, especially polymers.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project in chemistry fulfills the program objectives of                   
              advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the              
              U.S. and Poland to combine complementary efforts and capabilities              
              in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of              
              equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
