Title       : Equilibrium Search: Theory and Estimation of Dynamic Monopsony Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1993   
File        : a9122253

Award Number: 9122253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225681             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Neumann george-neumann@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Kiefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project centers on theoretical and empirical models of the                
              labor markets.  It builds on the large collection of research on               
              search models of the labor market.  Recent work in equilibrium                 
              search models has shown that monopsony arises naturally in search              
              models, with the degree of monopsony power depending upon the                  
              matching technology.  A simple model in which wage dispersion                  
              arises in equilibrium even with homogeneous workers and firms will             
              be considered.  With this model, the statistical issues arising in             
              estimation will be explored, using techniques recently introduced              
              in the partial equilibrium search framework.  Extensions to make               
              the model more realistic will be examined, and data from the Survey            
              of Income Program Participation and other sources will be fitted               
              to the model.  Three specific applications will be studied: 1) the             
              measurement of local monopsony power; 2) aggregate labor market                
              dynamics; and 3) the public finance implications of Unemployment               
              Insurance changes on equilibrium labor market behavior.                        
                                                                                             
              This approach to the study of labor markets is particularly                    
              important because it provides a way of asking whether "thin" labor             
              markets have an effect on wages, and, ultimately, upon economic                
              development in non-urban areas.  For example, planners in rural                
              areas commonly argue that it is difficult to attract a skilled                 
              labor force.  This research provides the tools with which one can              
              answer this question.
