Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Amenability for Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  1993      
File        : a9122526

Award Number: 9122526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65363              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. T. Paterson MMAP@OLEMISS.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Paterson will investigate the long-standing problem of higher             
              dimensional cohomology for operator algebras, and clarify the                  
              difference between amenability and strong amenability for C*-                  
              algebras.  He will also study amenable C*-algebras in terms of                 
              complete boundedness, and investigate the role of amenable                     
              foliations in understanding the C*-algebras associated with groups.            
              This work will be based on the recently discovered equivalence of              
              amenability of C*-algebras and the existence of a right invariant              
              mean on a certain space of functions on its unitary group.                     
                   The general area of mathematics of this project has its basis             
              in the theory of algebras of Hilbert space operators.  Operators               
              can be thought of as finite or infinite matrices of complex                    
              numbers.  Special types of operators are often put together in an              
              algebra, naturally called an operator algebra.  These abstract                 
              objects have a surprising variety of applications.  For example,               
              they play a key role in knot theory, which in turn is  currently               
              being used to study the structure of DNA, and they are of                      
              fundamental importance in noncommutative geometry, which is                    
              becoming increasingly important in physics.
