Title       : Democratic Controls over Tax Enforcement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1994 
File        : a9122692

Award Number: 9122692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187512             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Scholz scholz@datalab2.sbs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              One of the most striking political developments of the past                    
              century has been the expansion of government regulation and the                
              consequent intrusion of "civil" enforcement agencies into most                 
              areas of social and economic life.  The past three decades in                  
              particular has witnessed a dramatic growth in the scope of                     
              authority and size of government agencies that focus coercive                  
              enforcement activities on normal citizens, rather than on                      
              criminals and criminal activities.  While studies of regulatory                
              enforcement and administrative justice have also expanded                      
              rapidly, there is a considerable gap in our knowledge of civil                 
              enforcement and the behavior of non-policement enforcement                     
              agencies.  In particular, the critical question addressed in this              
              project is the extent to which the expanded coercive activities                
              of enforcement agencies are controlled by democratic political                 
              institutions and principles.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project analyzes the extent to which the coercive                         
              enforcement powers of federal agencies are controlled by elected               
              officials and democratic principles.  The project expands the                  
              conceptual framework to include the democratic principles of                   
              efficiency and equality, which may constrain even controls                     
              exerted by elected officials over enforcement actions against                  
              citizens.  The research team analyzes the responsiveness of                    
              Internal Revenue Service (IRS) enforcement activities to                       
              democratic controls.  This will be accomplished through                        
              interviews with Financial and Examination officials in the IRS                 
              and political leaders and knowledgeable observers in Washington,               
              New York and California.  The researchers will develop three                   
              state-level data bases consisting of:  IRS audit activities by                 
              audit class for 1960-1980; total individual and corporate audit                
              activities for 1960-1990; and, IRS personnel for 1975-1990.  They              
              will use multiple indicators to probe the impact of presidential,              
              congressional, gubernatorial, and state legislative officials on               
              IRS audits and personnel.  They will clarify the concepts, develop             
              measures, and probe the impact of the democratic                               
              principles of efficiency and equality on IRS audits and                        
              personnel.  Finally, they will compare enforcement production                  
              functions for effectiveness of audits in improving tax compliance              
              over time, states, and audit classes.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research will provide an extensive analysis of IRS                        
              enforcement, focusing on the impact of political controls,                     
              democratic principles, organizationl constraints, and enforcement              
              effectiveness in explaining the variance of enforcement across                 
              tates and taxpayer categories for the last three decades.
