Title       : Empirical Models of the Automobile Industry and Implications of a Carbon Tax
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1993   
File        : a9122672

Award Number: 9122672
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven T. Berry SteveB@econ.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ariel Pakes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Levinsohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this project is develop a methodology for                       
              empirically analyzing differentiated product industries, and                   
              apply it to study the changes that have occurred in the U.S.                   
              automobile industry over the last two decades.  The general                    
              methodology has wide applicability, but the specifics of the                   
              model are tailored to auto industry application.  Therefore, the               
              project will have both a methodological and empirical output.                  
              The empirical goals are twofold: to come to a broad understanding              
              of the changes that have occurred in the U.S. auto market during               
              the last twenty years, and to provide an evaluation of public                  
              policies that have been suggested for this industry.  Of                       
              particular interest is the impact of enviromnental regulation in               
              the form of a carbon tax on the auto industry.                                 
                                                                                             
              This project involves developing an estimable static model of                  
              differentiated product markets.  The key elements of the model                 
              are consumer preferences for the characteristics of marketed                   
              products, the cost functions of firms, and a market equilibrium                
              assumption.  The  research focuses on three methodological                     
              concerns: to develop a tractable model of consumer behavior that               
              allows for reasonable substitution patterns, to incorporate the                
              presence of product characteristics which are unobserved by the                
              researcher, and to account for the process by which firms choose               
              the characteristics of new products.  The resulting model will be              
              used to analyze a series of important public concerns in the                   
              automobile industry including  policies that aim to increase fuel              
              efficiency, to regulate international trade, and to implement                  
              anti-trust laws.  Because the model starts at the detailed micro               
              level, it can provide results not only on the implications of                  
              these policies for prices and quantities, but also for the                     
              distribution of consumer welfare among income groups and the                   
              distribution of profits among producers.
