Title       : Collaborative Research on Climatic Modification Associated with Metropolitan
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1992     
File        : a9122129

Award Number: 9122129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Brazel attbg@asuvm.inre.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Recent research on global climate change has focused on                   
              global warming, desertification, deforestation and related macro-              
              scale changes in the environment.  While local and regional                    
              climatic modification has been included in this theme generally,               
              such research has tended to concentrate on micro-scale studies of              
              urban canyons.  Meso-scale models consider the boundary layer of               
              air and the city's overall modification of it.  Recent                         
              advancements in remote sensing techniques, geographical                        
              information systems, and energy balance models permit the                      
              matching of land use information with remotely sensed surface                  
              temperature data at an appropriate scale of resolution so that                 
              climate modification associated with desert metropolitan                       
              development can be analyzed.  This project will examine the                    
              causal links between urban development and climate modification                
              using surface temperature, reflectivity, vegetation indices,                   
              thermal inertia, and current land use for the Phoenix, Arizona                 
              metropolitan area.  Remotely sensed imagery, climatic records,                 
              computer modeling and field work will be used to understand the                
              complex set of relationships between the urban fabric and near                 
              surface and boundary layer climate at varying resolutions of                   
              spatial scale.                                                                 
                   This research will improve upon existing models of urban                  
              climate modification by analyzing data from different sources at               
              the same level of spatial scale, permitting more accurate                      
              assessment of the influence of human activity on climate                       
              conditions at the surface.  The use of the Phoenix area as a                   
              laboratory to design and test methods for evaluating land use                  
              change on climate conditions will have important extensions to                 
              critically sensitive arid and semi-arid regions of the world.
