Title       : Television Advertising in Political Campaigns: A Study of the 1992 California
               Senate Races
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1994      
File        : a9122471

Award Number: 9122471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shanto Iyengar   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Ansolabehere  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Despite the huge amounts of resources invested in campaign                     
              advertising, little reliable evidence exists concerning the                    
              independent effects of advertising on electoral outcomes.  This                
              project applies a multi-method strategy to assess the impact of                
              televised campaign advertising on the 1992 California Senate                   
              elections.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Through the use of realistic "field experiments," the investigators            
              assess the effects of particular campaign ads and particular                   
              pairing of ads.  In these experiments, a representative cross-                 
              section of the Southern California electorate will be shown ads                
              aired by the various senatorial candidates.  Following exposure to             
              the ads, experimental participants are asked a variety of questions            
              concerning their political beliefs and preferences.  This method               
              permits estimation of the effectiveness of particular ads and                  
              particular advertising strategies on the behavior of individual                
              voters.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The experimental results are replicated using statewide polling                
              data, an exhaustive analysis of every campaign ad aired by the                 
              field of candidates and interviews with campaign managers.  Trends             
              in voter preference, for instance, will be tracked across the                  
              course of the campaign in relation to the amount of televised                  
              advertising used by particular candidates as well as the content               
              of advertising.  In addition, following the election, the managers             
              of each campaign will be interviewed so as to ascertain their                  
              advertising "game plan."                                                       
                                                                                             
              The major areas of investigation concern the effects of broadcast              
              advertising on voter turnout and voter choice.  How does political             
              advertising affect individuals' interest and desire to participate             
              in the political process?  Of particular importance is the impact              
              of attack advertising on voter participation.  Other areas under               
              investigation include the relative effectiveness of "issue" versus             
              "image" ads as a means of stimulating voter interest and formation.            
                                                                                             
              The investigators also assess the effects of advertising on                    
              candidate choice.  Some of the important questions here include                
              the differential importance of advertising in primary and general              
              election campaigns, whether ads work differently among different               
              groups of voters, and the degree to which the persuasive effects               
              of ads are conditioned by patterns of news media coverage.                     
                                                                                             
              This research will provide rigorous evidence concerning the effects            
              of campaign advertising strategy on electoral outcomes in addition             
              to the long-term impact of advertising on the democratic process.
