Title       : Dissertation Research: Reaction Norms of Ontogenetic Trajectories in Lobelia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9122762

Award Number: 9122762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Massimo Pigliucci  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Ontogeny and genetic variation are two topics that are thought to              
              be crucial for our understanding of patterns and processes of                  
              evolutionary change.  Although the basic concepts for the study of             
              developmental systems and the reaction of norms of genotypes to the            
              environments had been formulated during the first half of this                 
              century, only recently have they become a central focus of                     
              experimental and theoretical work.  The developmental aspect                   
              focuses on the concept of ontogenetic trajectories, which describes            
              the change in phenotype during growth.  The environmental                      
              variation, which elicits a genotype-specific response called                   
              phenotypic plasticity, is described by a function that relates                 
              environments and phenotypes through the genotype:  i.e., the                   
              reaction norm.  The aim of this proposal is to couple the                      
              developmental and environmental aspects in a study of genetic                  
              variability in two species, Lobelia cardinalis and Lobelia                     
              siphilitica (Lobeliaceae).  The research project is divided into               
              two distinct experiments:  (I) Experiment I is a description of the            
              plasticity for ontogenetic trajectories to different level of                  
              shading in the genotypes samples from two populations for each                 
              species.  The objective is to gain information about 1) genetic                
              variation for reaction norms across development and 2) how                     
              environmental changes can modify the developmental trajectory.                 
              (II) Experiment II is an artificial selection experiment which -               
              based on the information obtained from Experiment I - will test the            
              ability of the genetic systems of Lobelia spp. to respond to                   
              selection on additive genetic variance of their reaction norms.  A             
              proximal objective of this type of research is to obtain reliable              
              models of phenotypic evolution, using some of the parameter values             
              from actual experiments.  Attempts in this sense have already been             
              published, but focused only on the ontogenetic component of                    
              variation.  A more comprehensive model is desirable, which includes            
              environmental variation and is consistent with our general                     
              understanding of biological complexity and with actual experimental            
              possibilities.  The ultimate goal is to gain a basic understanding             
              and a general phenomenological description of the ways in which                
              phenotypic novelties can arise and eventually be fixed during                  
              macroevolution.  These notions, together with the parallel increase            
              in our knowledge of the physiological and molecular basis of such              
              phenomena, would eventually lead us to less vague statements about             
              how population biology and molecular genetics can be coupled for a             
              more complete understanding of evolutionary phenomena.
