Title       : Expectations, the Macro Economy, and Asset Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9122229

Award Number: 9122229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Shiller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research consists of continuing work in three different                   
              areas: survey research which attempts to assess possible                       
              impediments affecting the ability of the remnants of the Soviet                
              Union and Eastern Europe to adjust to the market; the behavior of              
              real estate prices and returns; and studies of the correlations                
              between asset prices and their relation to underlying economic                 
              fundamentals.   Research regarding the heretofore communist                    
              economies will involve developing questionnaires and surveys                   
              concerning the expectations of future government interference in               
              the economy and the impact that such expectations may have on                  
              inhibiting entrepreneurial activity.  Indigenous entrepreneurial               
              behavior will be critical in determining the success of the                    
              transition to a market economy, and this work will represent an                
              important first step in understanding the determinants of                      
              entrepreneurial behavior and the prospects of a successful                     
              transition.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              The second area of work will test for efficiency in the operation              
              of real estate markets and the forecastability of real estate                  
              prices and returns using methods that are guided by theory                     
              derived from structural models of the real estate market.  This                
              work is at the border of structural modeling and the kind of                   
              modeling suggested by empirical finance.  The third area of work               
              is directly in the finance area and will involve extending                     
              previous work on the time series properties of long term interest              
              rates in comparison with those of stock prices and dividends.                  
              The work involves relating correlations among different asset                  
              prices and correlations among market fundamentals that underlie                
              such prices.  Specifically, the implications of the information                
              pooling model will be tested to see if its explanation of asset                
              price co-movements is actually consistent with the data.  These                
              two areas of research are important because they will shed light               
              on the operation of two markets critical to the performance of                 
              the U.S. economy, the capital market and the real estate market.
