Title       : Marine Sulfur Chemistry Studies in Support of MAGE/ASTEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9122126

Award Number: 9122126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Hobbs phobbs@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean A. Hegg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald J. Ferek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A set of seven proposals and two supplement requests was                  
              submitted for participation in an international marine atmospheric             
              chemistry experiment.  The Atlantic Stratocumulus Transition in the            
              eastern North Atlantic during June 1992, is a multinational effort             
              designed to improve our capability for studying cloud-chemistry                
              interactions and the air/sea fluxes that affect them.  The specific            
              goals of the MAGE atmospheric chemistry experiment in ASTEX                    
              include:  1) develop and test a Lagrangian strategy for studying               
              chemical and meteorological evolution in a tagged airmass, using               
              ships, balloons, and aircraft; 2) develop and test new techniques              
              for estimating trace-gas and aerosol fluxes across the air/sea                 
              interface by comparison with traditional approaches; 3) evaluate               
              the impact of marine and continental aerosols and the formation and            
              dissipation of stratocumulus clouds; 4) compare the impacts of                 
              natural and anthropogenic sulfur, halogens, and hydrocarbons on                
              marine aerosol chemistry; and 5) use a multinational, multi-agency             
              field experiment as a means for addressing tropospheric chemistry              
              issues.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                   In this MAGE proposal, the PIs plan to conduct measurements of            
              SO2 and DMS and measurements of DMS fluxes from the ocean surface              
              to the atmosphere, and to investigate the sources of cloud                     
              condensation nuclei in the cloud-topped marine boundary layer and              
              cloud condensation nucleus production associated with marine                   
              clouds.  The proposed measurements will be obtained from the                   
              University of Washington Convair C-131 research aircraft, and the              
              proposed studies will be closely coordinated with simultaneous                 
              studies (involving shipboard, ground-based, and airborne                       
              measurements) of ocean-atmosphere interactions to be carried out as            
              part of the multi-agency ASTEX program.
