Title       : Multiple Metal-Carbon Bonds, Metallacycles, and Catalytic Reactions Involving
               Olefins and Acetylenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9122827

Award Number: 9122827
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1197500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Schrock rrs@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              With support from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo-                      
              metallic Chemistry Program, Professor Richard Schrock of MIT                   
              will continue his research on the chemistry of compounds that                  
              contain metal-nitrogen and metal-carbon multiple bonds with                    
              emphasis on their use as metathesis catalysts for function-                    
              alized olefins.  The metals of most interest are molybdenum and                
              rhenium.  Kinetic and mechanistic studies to determine the                     
              effects of coordinated ligands on catalyst activity will play a                
              central role in the catalyst development.  The chemistry of                    
              recently discovered polyimido osmium complexes and compounds                   
              that contain rhenium-rhenium double bonds will be explored as                  
              part of this project; in both of these new classes of compounds                
              the metal atoms have only two d-electrons.  Finally, studies                   
              directed toward the development of metal-carbon multiple bond                  
              chemistry of ruthenium in the +6 oxidation state will be                       
              initiated.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Olefin metathesis, which refers to pairwise scrambling of                      
              substituents in compounds that contain carbon-carbon double                    
              bonds, is an extremely versatile reaction with great tech-                     
              nological significance.  The single biggest drawback to even                   
              greater use of this reaction is the failure of known catalysts                 
              to promote the reaction when there are groups other than                       
              hydrogen or alkyl attached to the carbon atoms of the double                   
              bond.  A primary objective of this project is to develop                       
              practical catalysts for metathesis of such olefins.  Other                     
              aspects of the work are directed to the synthesis of new                       
              compounds with unusual structures and/or in which the metal                    
              atoms have unusual oxidation states.
