Title       : U.S.-Hungary Biochemical Research on Structurally Related Serine Proteases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1993  
File        : a9122594

Award Number: 9122594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30404              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Rutter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510402   Biomaterials-Short & Long Terms         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5916,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Hungary biochemical research project on                                
              "Structurally Related Serine Proteases" is                                     
              between Dr. William J. Rutter of The Hormone                                   
              Research Institute, University of California-San                               
              Francisco, and Dr. Gabor Pal of Eotvos                                         
              University, Budapest.  Serene proteases, such as                               
              trypsin and chymotrypsin, share a 3-dimensional                                
              structure and possess an identical catalytic                                   
              apparatus but display strikingly different                                     
              substrate specificities.  As such, they are ideal                              
              models to study how the substrate recognition                                  
              process (ground state stabilization) relates to                                
              catalysis (transition state stabilization).  Via                               
              site-directed mutagenesis, a series of                                         
              alterations of the substrate binding pocket of                                 
              trypsin (residues 189195, 214-220, 225-228) were                               
              made to produce mutants with chymotrypsin-like                                 
              specificity.  One of the trypsin mutants (D189S,                               
              YG217-219SGG, Q192M) is of particular interest.                                
              Its affinity toward various peptide substrates of                              
              chymotrypsin (P1=Leu, Phe, Tyr, Trp) is                                        
              comparable to that of chymotrypsin, while its                                  
              catalytic efficiency (Kcat/Km) is 3-4 orders of                                
              magnitude less than that of chymotrypsin or                                    
              trypsin.  Thus the redesigned and apparently                                   
              tight enzyme-substrate interactions in the ground                              
              state do not seem to properly contribute to                                    
              transition state stabilization.  One                                           
              interpretation of these results is that the                                    
              interaction of trypsin and chyumotrypsin with                                  
              their own substrates might induce differential                                 
              conformational changes crucial for optimal                                     
              transition state stabilization.  In this                                       
              proposal, the researchers suggest that the                                     
              structural unit that mediates such differential                                
              structural changes upon substrate binding may be                               
              identical with the so-called "activation domain"                               
              of trypsin and chymotryupsin.  The researchers'                                
              view is that the different conformational                                      
              flexibility of these domains in trypsin and                                    
              chymotrypsin may represent the structural basis                                
              for different substrate specificities of these                                 
              two proteases.  Thus, to interchange the                                       
              substrate specificities of trypsin and                                         
              chymotrypsin (without a dramatic loss of                                       
              activity), the activation domains rather than                                  
              just the substrate binding pockets have to be                                  
              interchanged.  The researchers will test this                                  
              hypothesis.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project in biochemistry fulfills the program                              
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by                                 
              enlisting leading experts in the United States                                 
              and Eastern Europe to continue complementary                                   
              talents and pool resources in areas of strong                                  
              mutual interest and competence.
