Title       : Polymer-in-Pore Composite Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  1994   
File        : a9122573

Award Number: 9122573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254995             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Anderson johna@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research offers a new and novel approach for the                          
              development of high-technology materials in the separations                    
              field, namely, a multidimensional route to the significant                     
              problem of synthetic membrane design.  It follows naturally                    
              the highly regarded recent research of the PI and his co-                      
              workers who, through their work, have advanced the field of                    
              surface science and membrane technology.  The novelty of                       
              filling a membrane pore matrix with a polymeric substrate                      
              which offers the possibility of high specificity and                           
              selectivity along with high flux rates is the primary target                   
              of most membrane development research within the separations                   
              area.  Specifically, the PI proposes to prepare high                           
              selectivity                                                                    
              membranes by generating hydrogels within the pore matrix and                   
              by adsorption of block co-polymers on the pore wall structure.                 
                                                                                             
              The fundamental studies herein proposed will be to quantify                    
              the resulting mated matrix with the ensuring field enhanced                    
              mass transport via continuum convection, diffusion, and by                     
              electrophoresis.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The research proposed, although logical and inclusive (i.e.,                   
              the research progresses from the preparation of membrane                       
              materials to the experimental data collection phase, from                      
              which the quantitative aspects of the characterization of the                  
              basic processes via analysis of the matrix substrate leads to                  
              theoretical model development) it is not fully detailed.  The                  
              PI must consider the ultimate stability of the matrix                          
              substrate, the potentially manifold mating problems inherent                   
              in substrate-matrix surface interaction, and the selection of                  
              appropriate test materials for the study.  The work, although                  
              fundamental in nature, has some very definite practical                        
              applicability toward the long sought goal of tailoring                         
              membranes for specific separation problems of industrial                       
              significance.  Thus, despite the relative paucity, of                          
              experimental detail included in the proposal, the PI has an                    
              outstanding record of research achievement and this work,                      
              though somewhat speculative, has the potential for major                       
              contributions to the field of molecular separations.  This is                  
              of especial interest to the area of synthetic and biological                   
              macromolecules.
