Title       : Engineering Canola Oil With Altered Fatty Acid Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1992      
File        : a9122871

Award Number: 9122871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249572             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugo K. Dooner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DNA Plant Technologies
	      6701 San Pablo Avenue
	      Oakland, CA  94608    510/547-2395

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
              Among the economically important agronomic traits, the fatty acid              
              (FA) composition of oilseed crops is one of the most likely to be              
              modified by molecular breeding.  In this proposal, we described                
              experiments that will enable us to engineer a canola (rapeseed) oil            
              with a lower content of linolenic acid (ALA), an undesirable                   
              component that, in addition to being of lower nutritional quality,             
              causes rancidity and flavor instability due to its tendency to                 
              auto-oxidize.  To effect this change the gene responsible for the              
              formation of ALA needs to be isolated.  However, since the gene                
              encodes a microsomal enzyme that is difficult to purify, an                    
              alternative to the conventional biochemical approach to gene                   
              isolation must be sought.  We intend to use a powerful genetic                 
              approach, transposon tagging, to isolate the  corresponding gene.              
              The small model plant Arabidopsis thaliana is a genetically simpler            
              relative of rapeseed.  We propose to  isolate the fad3 gene,                   
              responsible for the formation of ALA in Arabidopsis, as a first                
              step towards the modification of the FA composition in canola.  We             
              will use a streptomycin resistance assay (SPT) to visually detect              
              transposition of the maize transposon Activator (Ac) in                        
              Arabidopsis. Somatic excision  of Ac from an SPT:: Ac gene produces            
              green spots on the white cotyledons of seedlings germinated on                 
              streptomycin and germinal excision results in green revertant                  
              seedlings in the same assay.  Many of the green revertants carry a             
              transposed Ac element.  There, the SPT:: Ac system allows us to for            
              germinal transposition events.  By selecting green revertants from             
              among the progeny of plants that carry an SPT:: Ac gene only 5 cM              
              from fad3, we should be able to identify tagged fad3 mutations and             
              to clone them by homology to Ac.  The analogous gene from canola               
              can be isolated by homology to the Arabidopsis gene and                        
              subsequently engineered to suppress the action of the endogenous               
              fad3 genes when reintroduced into canola.
