Title       : Molecular Dynamics and Monte Carlo Simulations of Classical and Quantum Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9122506

Award Number: 9122506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1181800            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce J. Berne berne@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Professor Bruce Berne is supported by a grant from the                         
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform                     
              theoretical studies of solutions.  Berne will study solvent                    
              effects on chemical reaction dynamics, solvation and                           
              spectra, energy transfer and transport in classical and                        
              quantum many-body systems through a combination of                             
              analytical and numerical techniques.  The numerical work                       
              will involve molecular dynamics, Monte Carlo, quantum Monte                    
              Carlo, and quantum chemistry.  He will attempt to incorporate                  
              many-body dispersion and electrical induction forces by                        
              treating the full coulomb interaction between dispersion                       
              oscillators on atomic or extended atomic sites.  A special                     
              focus will be on the development and application of                            
              analytical and new computer simulation techniques to treat                     
              the problem of multiple time scales and long range forces.                     
              Berne will attempt to incorporate quantum chemistry into                       
              his molecular dynamics codes so that the charges and forces                    
              governing the dynamics are computed quantum chemically on                      
              the fly.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Since most chemical reactions occur in solution, it is                         
              important for chemists to have a complete understanding of                     
              solute-solvent interactions at the molecular level.                            
              Computer simulations provide an excellent method for                           
              examining the effects of these interactions on chemical                        
              reaction dynamics, observed spectra, and transport                             
              properties.  Professor Berne's research efforts are directed                   
              at the development of new computational algorithms which                       
              enhance the capability and reliability of such computer                        
              simulations.
