Title       : Arch, Cointegration and Common Features: Theory and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9122056

Award Number: 9122056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Engle rengle@ucfd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is an accomplishment based renewal of a project that                      
              developed ARCH and related models and tests for cointegration.                 
              Models of ARCH and cointegration are now used in almost every                  
              area of economics to test for economic relationships among                     
              different economic variables using time series data.  These                    
              studies typically use univariate time series models or                         
              multivariate models with at most two or three different time                   
              series.  This is a major drawback for most economic applications.              
              This grant will permit the investigator to continue the research               
              started under the previous grant on multivariate ARCH and                      
              cointegration analysis.  In addition the project develops and                  
              applies a new statistical procedure called common features to                  
              problems in economics and finance.  A conference will be held in               
              April, 1992 in La Jolla, California on new developments in                     
              volatility models and applications to finance.                                 
                                                                                             
              Economic time series have many distinctive characteristics.                    
              Generally, they exhibit serial correlation, trends, seasonality,               
              often heteroskedasticity, skewness, kurtosis, and various other                
              features.  In order to detect each of these features in a data                 
              set, a variety of tests are available each of which takes the                  
              particular feature in question as the alternative to the null                  
              hypothesis that the feature is not present in the data.  Under                 
              its previous NSF grant, the investigator developed a new                       
              statistical procedure called common features that permits the                  
              analyst to determine if two or more data sets share the same                   
              distinctive characteristics.  This procedure was used to show                  
              that there was empirical evidence of a common international                    
              business cycle for the major industrial countries.  The procedure              
              will be extended and generalized.  It will be used to examine                  
              sectoral output in the U.S. to see whether sectors move together               
              over the business cycle.  The procedure will be used to determine              
              whether regions within the U.S. move together.  International                  
              data on capital markets will be analyzed to determine what                     
              features are common to the equity markets for several blocks of                
              countries.  This research should provide new insights into the                 
              nature of the volatility in international capital markets.
