Title       : Inference and Non-Random Sampling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9122477

Award Number: 9122477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156503             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guido Imbens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A common strategy in econometric analyses is to divide the                     
              variables of interest into two types.  The first type is that of               
              a dependent variables whose distribution in the population is to               
              be explained in terms of variables of the second type, the                     
              independent or explanatory variables.   If the data to be                      
              analyzed were randomly selected from the population of interest,               
              then methods exist for estimating the parameters of the                        
              conditional distribution of the dependent variable given the                   
              explanatory variable.  These estimators are consistent, efficient              
              and have other desirable properties.  But some of the most                     
              important properties do not hold if, as is frequently the case in              
              applied economics, the data are not random.  This project                      
              develops estimation procedures and specification tests that are                
              both intuitive and computationally feasible for nonrandom or                   
              partially random sampling procedures that are frequently                       
              encountered in economic problems.  These techniques are used to                
              analyze partially random data sets on Dutch labor market                       
              participation.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project addresses the question of inference if the                        
              researcher has information on the parameters other than a random               
              dataset.  Examples of sampling schemes studied by this project                 
              include: 1) samples that are endogenously stratified; 2)                       
              additional information on moments of the distribution of the                   
              dependent variables from aggregate sources; and 3) datasets                    
              containing different sets of variables.  The application of these              
              techniques to actual problems is used to show that they are                    
              feasible and that they can lead to major efficient gains.
