Title       : U.S.-Pakistan Collaboration on Hadron Substructure at High Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9122027

Award Number: 9122027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Negele Negele@mitlns.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5929      SCIENCE IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 1250,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description: This project supports the travel and living expenses              
              for Dr. Pervez Hoodbhoy of the Department of Physics, Quaid-I-                 
              Azam University (QAU) in Islamabad, Pakistan, to participate in a              
              research project with Drs. John W. Negele and Robert L. Jaffe at               
              the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.  The                     
              project will be in the area of quantum chromodynamics (QCD), the               
              role of quarks and gluons in determining the structure and                     
              properties of hadrons and nuclei.  This area has been subject of               
              research by the theoretical physics group at MIT for some time.                
              Broad issues of the joint research include: development of                     
              nucleon models incorporating known constraints imposed by QCD;                 
              spin structure of the nucleon; calculation of elastic scattering               
              form factors for composit systems of quarks and gluons; direct                 
              excitation of quark and color degrees of freedom in various                    
              reactions; direct measurements of quark momentum in very high                  
              energy deeply inelastic electron scattering from hadron targets;               
              and creation of abnormal states of hadron matter and detecting                 
              their signatures in relativistic heavy ion collisions.                         
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project extends collaboration, by the Pakistani                   
              scientist with the MIT group, that has started in the late 1980's              
              and that has resulted in a number of joint publications.  The                  
              past collaboration produced significant results in the field and               
              enhanced the capability of the QAU group to conduct research and               
              to publish.  In addition, there has been exchange of scientists                
              and garduate students between the two groups.  The project meets               
              the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries program.
