Title       : The Input - Output Approach to Demand- Shift Instrumental Variables Selection:
               Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1992  
File        : a9122346

Award Number: 9122346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincy Fon                               
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39652              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Shea   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Traditional economic wisdom holds that demand surges during                    
              business cycle booms generate inflation.  Demand rises more quickly            
              than capacity during booms; in turn, this excess demand produces               
              "tight" labor and product markets and therefore rising wages and               
              prices.  While this wisdom is widely accepted by economists, the               
              press and policymakers, its empirical foundations are questionable,            
              as many recent studies show that rates of wage and price inflation             
              are uncorrelated or even negatively correlated with the business               
              cycle.                                                                         
                                                                                             
              It is the investigator's opinion that these recent studies fail to             
              address the question of whether demand surges generate wage and                
              price inflation.  The correlation between inflation and the                    
              business cycle reflects the influence of both supply and demand                
              factors.  Adverse supply shocks, such as the oil price increases               
              of 1973 and 1979, cause prices to rise and output to fall; such                
              shocks can cause prices to appear negatively correlated with the               
              business cycle even if demand shocks generate wage-price inflation.            
              Studies examining only the correlation between inflation and the               
              business cycle are thus not useful to policymakers attempting to               
              determine the potential inflationary effects of fiscal or monetary             
              policies designed to stimulate short-run output growth.                        
                                                                                             
              This research will implement a new methodology for addressing the              
              relationship between demand shocks and wage-price inflation.                   
              Information from input-output tables published by the Bureau of                
              Labor Statistics will be used to identify the actual sources of                
              demand for disaggregated industries.  This information makes the               
              estimation of the responses of industry wages and prices to                    
              observable industry demand shocks possible.  For instance, if                  
              input-output tables indicate that most lumber is used for                      
              construction purposes, the response of lumber wages and prices to              
              movements in construction industry output will be investigated.                
              By examining the relationship between price and industry demand,               
              rather than the mere correlation between price and industry output,            
              the influence of supply shocks on industry activity will be                    
              effectively controlled.  These results will therefore be more                  
              useful than existing research for examining the potential                      
              inflationary impact of fiscal and monetary policies designed to                
              stimulate aggregate demand.
