Title       : Democracy and Leadership
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1992  
File        : a9122440

Award Number: 9122440
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25191              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Jacobs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is common knowledge that American presidents rely on private                
              pollsters to provide them with a sense of contemporary public                  
              opinion.  The relationship between presidents and their pollsters              
              is routinely discussed in the mass media, and presidents openly                
              refer to their public opinion surveys.  This close and open                    
              relationship between the White House and pollsters, however, is                
              quite recent.  It began in earnest during the administration of                
              John F. Kennedy.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research investigation addresses the question:  what                      
              difference do White House polls make in presidents' policy                     
              positions.  In short, do polling results affect the decisions of               
              presidents?  Specifically, the researchers investigate the                     
              relationship between the policy positions of American presidents               
              and the public opinion surveys that they assembled.  The opinion               
              surveys are located in presidential archives and will, for the                 
              first time, be systematically collected.  Because scholars have                
              previously relied on published polls, the surveys in presidential              
              archives offer new and better data for examining the president's               
              relationship with the mass public.                                             
                                                                                             
              The analysis focuses on two presidents; John F. Kennedy and Lyndon             
              B. Johnson.  In addition to collecting the survey data, the                    
              researchers will examine evidence concerning other possible                    
              invluences on presidential decision making, such as partisan                   
              divisions in Congress and economic conditions.  The objective is               
              to evaluate the significance of presidents'polling results relative            
              to the influence of other political and institutional variables.
