Title       : Topics in Business Cycle Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9122490

Award Number: 9122490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Eichenbaum   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project addresses two major inconsistencies between modern                
              macroeconomic theories of business cycles and the empirical                    
              evidence.  Positive shocks in the money supply depress both real               
              and nominal interest rates, at least in the short run.  Standard               
              general equilibrium theory, with its emphasis on the alleged role              
              of "sticky" nominal wages and prices in explaining the                         
              expansionary effects of monetary policy, would predict the                     
              opposite relationship.  This project determines whether or not                 
              the explanation for this first inconsistency lies in an                        
              alternative (possibly complementary) channel, one which                        
              emphasizes the role of working capital in the production process               
              and the liquidity effects of changes in the money supply.  The                 
              second inconsistency is the phenomenon of procyclical                          
              productivity.  Productivity tends to fall in downturns and rise                
              in upturns.  This seems to contradict neoclassical theories of                 
              business cycles because changes in aggregate output should                     
              conform to the law of diminishing marginal productivity, i.e., as              
              the percentage of the labor force employed declines (increases),               
              the productivity of the marginal worker should increase                        
              (decrease).  This project determines whether or not procyclical                
              productivity is due to the effect of labor hoarding and changes                
              in capacity utilization.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The project should provide new insights into the role of monetary              
              policy as an impulse to postwar US business cycles.                            
              Specifically, it will improve our understanding of the role of                 
              liquidity effects as central components of the monetary                        
              transmission mechanism.  The project analyzes the impact of                    
              monetary policy on financial markets and the observed dynamic co-              
              movements between short term interest rates, output and the money              
              supply.  The project also improves our understanding of the                    
              dynamic co-movements between average productivity, hours worked                
              and output.  In this research the focus is on the role which                   
              labor hoarding and time varying capacity capital utilization                   
              rates play in generating the observed procyclicality of labor                  
              productivity and the Solow residual.  This in turn leads to an                 
              investigation of how these phenomena impact on existing estimates              
              of the role of technology shocks in generating economic                        
              fluctuations.
