Title       : Bayesian Inference and Econometric Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1992      
File        : a9122380

Award Number: 9122380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74518              (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Zellner arnold.zellner@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project continues to develop and apply Bayesian statistical               
              methods to important economic problems.  Past work by the                      
              investigator yielded many powerful analytical tools that are now               
              widely used in almost every area of theoretical and empirical                  
              research in economics.  The current project emphasizes finding                 
              explicit, reproducible procedures for producing models for                     
              observations, information-processing rules for combining models                
              and other information, and procedures for evaluating alternative               
              models using data.  One contribution of this new research comes                
              from formalizing current practice in constructing economic models              
              and evaluating them in a way that is reproducible and                          
              scientifically rigorous.  Preliminary work with these methods                  
              shows that the Bayesian approach can provide dramatically                      
              improved macroeconomic forecasts from U.S. quarterly                           
              macroeconomic data and from European data.  Improving the                      
              scientific rigor and the empirical accuracy of economic forecasts              
              is a goal of the economics of global change initiative.  For                   
              example, the methods being developed by this project are being                 
              used to combine and evaluate the very different forecasts from                 
              the four primary models of climate change.                                     
                                                                                             
              The main objective of this project is to provide a unified Bayes-              
              Maxent approach to econometric inference and modeling problems                 
              and examine its performance in two areas of application, macro-                
              econometric modeling and forecasting and production function                   
              analysis.  In the Bayes-Maxent approach, models for observations               
              and their associated prior densities are derived as solutions to               
              explicit, constrained, optimization problems using entropy                     
              concepts.  Further, information-processing rules which combine                 
              prior densities and likelihood functions, for example Bayes's                  
              Theorem, are also derived as solutions to constrained maxent                   
              problems.  Research to characterize further and extend the                     
              applicability of the Bayes-Maxent approach are pursued.
