Title       : Mathematical Sciences: 1992 Summer Research Institute on 'Quadratic Forms and
               Division Algebras'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9122671

Award Number: 9122671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108844             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Maxwell jwm@ams.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Mathematical Soc
	      201 Charles Street
	      Providence, RI  029402294    /   -

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   During the 1980's the closely related subjects of the                     
              algebraic theory of quadratic forms and the theory of finite-                  
              dimensional division algebras benefitted greatly from                          
              developments in algebraic K-theory and algebraic geometry.  The                
              topics of this conference, historically speaking, are rooted in                
              number theory.  Most of the main problems and motivation have                  
              number theoretic origins.  In the first half of this century,                  
              these subjects blossomed with the development of modern algebraic              
              number theory.  The discovery of local-global principles for                   
              quadratic forms was bound up with the development of p-adic                    
              fields.  Further, the classification of finite-dimensional                     
              division algebras over local and global fields was closely                     
              connected to the development of class field theory.  In the past               
              forty years, each of these subjects has declared much                          
              independence from number theory.                                               
                   This project will support the 1992 Summer Research Institute              
              on Quadratic Forms and Division Algebras: Connections with                     
              Algebraic K-theory and Algebraic Geometry (the fortieth in the                 
              series) to be held from July 6 - 24, 1992 at the University of                 
              California, Santa Barbara.  The primary topics of the summer                   
              institute are the closely related subjects of finite-dimensional               
              division algebras and the algebraic theory of quadratic forms.                 
              Further progress is expected to be stimulated by holding two                   
              special lecture series, one devoted to algebraic K-theory and the              
              other to algebraic geometry.  In addition, there will be research              
              lectures on the two principal themes, quadratic forms and                      
              division algebras.  The first week of the institute will have                  
              quadratic forms emphasis, the third week will have division                    
              algebra emphasis, and the second week will emphasize both with                 
              the hope of stimulating interaction.
