Title       : Bargaining Macroeconomic Agreements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1992      
File        : a9122454

Award Number: 9122454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74494              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many agreements in macroeconomics and international economics are              
              the outcomes of negotiations among a small number of participants              
              or, in a game theory setting, players.  This project has two                   
              objectives.  The first is to develop an analytical framework to                
              study macroeconomic bargaining problems.  This framework will                  
              include an explicit model of macroeconomic bargaining and an                   
              equilibrium concept of sustainable bargaining equilibrium to                   
              represent the outcomes of the model.  The second objective is to               
              apply the bargaining model to analyze three important,                         
              contemporary, macroeconomic bargaining-problems.                               
                                                                                             
              The first application is to the monetary union problem faced by                
              Europe in adopting a common currency.  Governments have                        
              conflicting interests because a common monetary policy is                      
              likely to result in the redistribution of wealth across member                 
              countries.  The second application involves the debt                           
              renegotiations problem between the developed and less developed                
              countries.  Typical renegotiated agreements include rescheduling               
              of debt payments, new lending, and debt forgiveness.  Obviously,               
              banks and governments have opposite interests with respect to                  
              debt repayment and debt reduction schemes.  The final application              
              concerns negotiations between the major political parties in the               
              U.S regarding the budget deficit problem. In order to reduce the               
              federal deficit, opposition parties must agree on some                         
              combination of tax increases and expenditure cuts.   Conflicting               
              interests arise because the parties respond to different                       
              constituencies and have different preferences about alternative                
              tax and expenditure packages.
