Title       : On-Line Single Particle Mass Spectrometry of Urban Atmospheric Aerosols
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1992    
File        : a9122291

Award Number: 9122291
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray V. Johnston mvj@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony S. Wexler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A new method for on-line chemical analysis is under                       
              development.  Particles entering the source region of a mass                   
              spectromter scatter light form a helium-neon laser beam.  The                  
              scattered light triggers an excimer laser cousing one-step                     
              desorption and ionization of the particle.  Low laser irradiances              
              preferentially vaporize the particle surface; higher irradiances               
              vaporize a larger fraction of the particle.  A complete mass                   
              spectrum of the ionized material is subsequently recoreded with a              
              time-of-flight mass analyzer.                                                  
                   The method will be used to stduy surface-active organic and               
              inorganic coatings on micron-size particles that are relevant to               
              atmospheric aerosols.  The ability of laser desorption to                      
              distinguish molecular species on the surface of n airosol particle             
              from those in the total volume will be tested as a means of                    
              distringuishing surface and total concentrations of ammonium salt              
              in layered particles.  Laser desorption will be used to detect                 
              fractional crystallization on the surface of a particle during                 
              drying.                                                                        
                   The ultimate goal of this research is the development of a                
              method for rapid on-line chemical analysis of atmospheric aerosol              
              particles.
