Title       : Analysis of Longshore Sediment Transport Theory Using Sand Tracers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1992   
File        : a9122659

Award Number: 9122659
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl F. Nordstrom Nordstr@ahab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Coastal erosion is often related to high wave energies                    
              associated with storms, but it usually results from disparities                
              in the coastal sediment budget introduced by longshore transport               
              gradients.  Erosion, therefore, affects low energy coastal                     
              environments as well as high energy coastal environments.  The                 
              rate of longshore sediment transport is an important factor in                 
              determining erosion along a coast, and the accurate prediction of              
              this rate is central to an understanding of coastline changes and              
              the effects of shore protection structures.  Understanding and                 
              prediction of longshore transport distribution across the surf                 
              zone requires reliable and complete field and laboratory data.                 
              This study will attempt to overcome many of the difficulties                   
              involved in mounting a comprehensive field experiment of                       
              longshore sediment transport by more accurately monitoring the                 
              variables which control sediment movement.  The study will                     
              evaluate longshore sediment transport theory with data from an                 
              estuarine beach at Fire Island National Seashore.  Its purpose is              
              to gather and analyze data as a basis for managing estuarine                   
              beaches in the Seashore, and it will identify the processes that               
              characterize wave energy and that cause erosion and changes in                 
              the beach profile.                                                             
                   The basic equations which describe longshore sediment                     
              transport are usually tested with data from beaches and from wave              
              tank experiments in laboratory settings.  While theoretically                  
              sound, the equations are usually tested with poor quality data                 
              from beach studies.  The accurate measurement of sand movement in              
              the surf zone of a beach is critical to any study of sediment                  
              transport.  The small dimensions and relatively low wave energies              
              of estuarine beaches facilitate field sampling and enhance the                 
              accuracy of measurements.  This project is designed to used                    
              specially colored sand as a tracer in order to monitor movement                
              of sediment along a section of shoreline.  This controlled                     
              experiment should generate the necessary data to accurately test               
              the equations for longshore sediment transport.  The results of                
              this study should strengthen our understanding of sediment                     
              movement along shorelines which will lead to better knowledge of               
              shoreline erosion rates, their possible causes, and to more                    
              effective strategies for preventing erosion along coastal areas.
