Title       : Dissertation Research: The Population Biology of Rarity in the Genus Eupatorium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1992       
File        : a9122900

Award Number: 9122900
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3050               (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane L. Byers  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The main goal of population biology is to determine the casual                 
              basis for species distribution and local abundance.  Rare species              
              represent an extreme situation, hence they are a useful system for             
              studying factors that influence abundance.  Increasing awareness of            
              conservation issues has generated additional motivation to study               
              cases of rarity and appropriate management practices for rare                  
              species, but there is currently no coherent theoretical genetic or             
              ecological framework to address these issues.  Eupatorium resinosum            
              (rare) and E. perfoliatum (common) will be used in this study                  
              examining ecological and genetic characteristics associated with               
              rarity.  Low genetic variation is expected in rare species due to              
              genetic drift.  Genetic variation within and among populations will            
              be evaluated by using starch gel electrophoresis.  Inbreeding                  
              depression and limited range of environmental tolerance are also               
              expected in rare species.  A field experiment will be used to                  
              evaluate the extent of inbreeding depression.  A greenhouse                    
              experiment will be used to measure the extent of phenotypic                    
              plasticity which in turn influences a species environmental                    
              tolerance.  Due to the comprehensive design of this study, the                 
              information obtained will provide insights into both evolutionary              
              and management aspects of rarity.
