Title       : Gender Differences in Self Reports on Sensitive Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1994     
File        : a9122488

Award Number: 9122488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Smith smitht@norcmail.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Tourangeau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Models using survey data typically assume that respondents                
              report their behavior accurately.  In fact, however,  these models             
              may be flawed due to bias and imprecision in the survey data                   
              collection process.  The sources of error of self-reports are                  
              numerous, reflecting a combination of the characteristrics of                  
              individual respondents and the nature of the survey instrument and             
              the way it is administered.                                                    
                   This research focuses on gender differences in self-reporting             
              on several topics,  including sexual behavior,  where primary                  
              emphasis is put,  illicit drug use and abortion. It will be carried            
              out in conjunction with the investigators' National Center for                 
              Health Statistics project entitled,  "Cognitive Research on Health             
              Promotion and Disease Prevention".                                             
                   Numerous surveys,  both in the United States and in other                 
              countries,  have shown that men report more sex partners than women            
              do.  This difference persists even when homosexual partners are                
              excluded and when adjustments are made for extreme values,  item               
              non-response,  population size,  and related matters.  The                     
              differences become larger as the time frame covered by the                     
              questions grow longer.  The most plausible explanation for the                 
              difference is that the two genders differ in the direction and/or              
              magnitude of their response errors -- either the men are                       
              overreporting,  the women underreporting,  or both.                            
                   A series of related studies will be carried  out to examine               
              these gender differences in the reports of sexual partners as well             
              as reports on other sexual behaviors,  drug use,  and abortions.               
              They consist of 1)  cognitive interviews exploring the                         
              understanding of sexual terms and willingness to discuss sexual                
              matters,  2)  a bogus pipeline experiment to test whether assumed              
              validation of self-reports will change the reports of men and                  
              women,  3)  a survey experiment to test differences in response                
              format,  recall cues,  and interviewing staff,  4)  a second survey            
              experiment to test differences in mode of administration,  place               
              of interview,  questionaire context, and question wording,  and                
              5) a third survey experiment to test anonymity vs. confidentiality.            
                   These studies should identify the factors that lead to                    
              misreports of sensitive behaviors about sexual partners,                       
              abortions,  and drug use;  contribute to the design of an optimal              
              measurement strategy;  and provide improved estimates of the true              
              incidence levels of these sensitive behaviors.  It is crucial that             
              work of this sort be conducted,  particularly in view of questions             
              raised by the AIDS epidemic and the potential extent of its                    
              applications.
