Title       : CO2 Laser Assisted Vibrational Overtone Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1993   
File        : a9122557

Award Number: 9122557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Rizzo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9156,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program                 
              of the Chemistry Division, Rizzo will pursue a new approach for                
              measuring the spectroscopy of highly vibrationally excited                     
              molecules on the ground potential energy surface using a CO2                   
              laser to selectively dissociate molecules promoted to those                    
              highly excited levels by means of overtone excitation.  In                     
              these experiments he will use infrared multiphoton dissociation                
              as a detector in infrared-optical and optical-infrared double                  
              resonance spectroscopy experiments conducted in low-pressure                   
              static gas cells as well as in supersonic free jets.  These                    
              investigations are extensions of previous three-laser                          
              experiments complicated by the addition of the fourth CO2                      
              photodissociating source.  Specific systems for study consist                  
              of molecules which have a light-atom stretching vibration                      
              suitable for overtone excitation and which can be                              
              photodissociated to produce a fragment that can be probed using                
              laser-induced fluorescence.  Examples of such molecules include                
              alcohols, amines, cyanides, and halogenated alkanes.                           
              %%%                                                                            
              Vibrationally excited molecules are commonly produced in                       
              chemical reactions or by absorbing light followed by loss of                   
              some of the excitation energy in internal processes.  Such                     
              highly excited molecules can be significantly more reactive                    
              than their unexcited counterparts, so that it is important to                  
              understand the dynamics involved with such molecules, such as                  
              how quickly they lose their energy internally, in collisions                   
              with walls and other species, and how quickly they react.                      
              Understanding such dynamic processes is important for                          
              developing accurate models of combustion, atmospheric                          
              processes, chemical laser action, and chemical vapor                           
              deposition, which is used to make thin-film coatings.                          
              Professor Rizzo's studies will help gather information relevant                
              to understanding internal energy conversion.
