Title       : MIAMI RISE: Rising to International Standards in Science/Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0084898

Award Number: 0084898
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11861380           (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrett Stierheim mstierheim@dadeschools.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger C. Cuevas  (Principal Investigator former)
              Constance Thornton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph P. Burke  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Yuwadee Wongbundhit  (Project Director current)
Sponsor     : Dade Cnty Public Schools
	      1450 N E 2nd Avenue
	      Miami, FL  331321308    305/376-1432

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Miami-Dade County School District (M-DCSD) proposes to significantly
              advance the science, mathematics, and technology education (SMT) of all K-12
              students through the Miami-Dade Urban Systemic Program (M-DUSP).  The M-DUSP
              will accomplish this task by building on the extant infrastructure that serves
              as the foundation for the District's Urban Systemic Program's (USP)
              implementation plan.  This infrastructure is characterized by an exemplary
              leadership team, Competency-Based Curricula Standards for science and
              mathematics based on the Florida State Sunshine Standards, a comprehensive
              accountability plan.  This infrastructure is also supported by policies in
              support of SMT education for all, the convergence of fiscal and intellectual
              resources for a single K-12 program for SMT, and a shared vision among all
              sectors of the community in support of the teaching and learning of science and
              mathematics, system-wide.  

To accomplish the USP goals, the M-DCSD will
              provide all of its students with the fundamentals of mathematics and science so
              that their understanding, ability, and academic achievement enable them to
              perform at or above their peers from around the world.  The M-DCSD goals are
              directed toward: (1) student achievement and graduation priorities; (2) equal
              access and equitable outcomes; (3) an enhanced curriculum, instruction, and
              assessment; (4) school environments that supports improved teaching; (5)
              enhanced support for beyond school learning; (6) increased teacher capacity
              through content and pedagogy; and (7) effective use of of technology in science
              and mathematics

The infrastructure was developed over the last ten years
              with support from the Urban Systemic Initiative, other federally funded
              programs, local partners from colleges and universities, and business and
              industry.  Future efforts will be increasingly informed by research and guided
              more deliberately by state, local and international comparison data sets to
              advance to full scale the district's capacity to provide a standards-based
              science, mathematics, and technology education for all students.

