Title       : Collaborative Research; ParCYCLIC: Internet-Enabled Simulation of Earthquake
               Liquefaction Response on Parallel Computers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0084616

Award Number: 0084616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74884              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmed-W. M. Elgamal elgamal@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1623,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This effort is a collaboration between researchers at University of California,
              San Diego (UCSD) and Stanford University.  The objective is to explore and
              utilize advanced computational and information technologies to further develop
              a state-of-the-art nonlinear finite element program (CYCLIC) for earthquake
              ground response and liquefaction simulation.  Calibrated codes for modeling and
              simulation of earthquake geotechnical phenomena will be combined with advanced
              computational methodologies to facilitate the simulation of large-scale systems
              and broaden the scope of practical applications. The proposed work involves
              three main research elements: 

1. Further development of the computational
              program CYCLIC: This development will introduce parameter sensitivity and
              optimization options.  The capacity of the computational program will be
              extended from two-dimensional (2D) to 3D simulation. In addition, a
              transmitting boundary feature will be included. 

2. Parallel and distributed
              computing capability: CYCLIC will be significantly enhanced by incorporating
              state-of-the-art software paradigm and solver technologies that are designed
              for parallel and distributed computing environments.  Specifically, a multitask
              Single-Program-Multiple-Data (SPMD) program paradigm will be employed and
              implemented.  Furthermore, parallel sparse matrix solvers will be developed and
              incorporated into the computational engine to improve performance and extend
              the simulation capabilities.

3. Internet-based interactive web environment:
              In addition to the current 1D remote execution and visualization capability
              (http://casagrande.ucsd.edu), extensions to 2D and 3D will be facilitated
              through parallel computing. Novel useful features will include an extensive
              library of on-line input earthquake records, and a soil material library with
              pre-defined calibrated models for sand, silt, and clay soils. User friendliness
              will be addressed throughout the development process. Advanced Internet-enabled
              and web browsing technologies will be deployed to allow remote users to view
              the results in an interactive and dynamic manner.  The experience gained in the
              development of the Internet-enabled simulation environment will be shared with
              other researchers and may help make many other useful computational programs
              widely accessible over the Internet for future applications. 


