Title       : Planning Grant: Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0084994

Award Number: 0084994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Butcher                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mool C. Gupta   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The mission of the Center for Lasers and Plasmas for Advanced Manufacturing
              (LPMC) is to develop a science, engineering, and technology base for laser and
              plasma processing of materials, devices and systems.  Laser and Plasma
              processing of materials is used in various manufacturing sectors such as
              semiconductor/electronic manufacturing , aerospace, automotive, general
              manufacturing, life science products, medical device manufacturing.  The focus
              of this center in the area of lasers and plasma processing will include:  bulk
              processing, surface processing, coatings, surface etching and
              patterning.

The center will build upon the on going large number of
              industrial projects and state supported center for plasma and photon processing
              at the Applied Research Center.  This center will also take full advantage of
              being sited next to Free Electron Laser Facility of Thomas Jefferson National
              Accelerator Facility.  The Free Electron Laser Facility is the world's most
              powerful, tunable laser, currently delivering kilowatt average power in the
              mid-infrared.  The lead institution is Old Dominion University and partner
              institutions are Christopher Newport University, College of William and Mary
              and Norfolk State University (historically black college and university).

