Title       : Integrated Environmental-Economic Analysis of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and
               Productivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2001     
File        : a0084384

Award Number: 0084384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157096             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay Coggins jcoggins@dept.agecon.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shunrong Qi  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1386,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Conventional measures of gross domestic product (GDP) fail to account for the
              effect of economic activity on the environment.  The primary objectives of the
              project are (1) to develop a methodology for computing green GDP and to apply
              the method to international data and (2) to compute a green Malmquist
              productivity index (MPI).  Related objectives include (3) examining the effect
              of R&D spending on green productivity and (4) examining the convergence or
              divergence of green total factor productivity (TFP) growth rates across
              countries over time.  Throughout, environmental depletion/degradation variables
              are treated as inputs.  Examples of these variables include air pollution,
              deforestation, and energy and land use.  Green GDP will be calculated using a
              data-envelopment-analysis (DEA) framework.  For this purpose a dynamic
              cross-country technology will be specified and estimated.  Exploiting the
              duality properties of the underlying technology, the shadow prices of these
              variables will be calculated.  Deriving green GDP, then, involves subtracting
              the inner product of the vectors of shadow prices and degradation variables
              from conventional GDP.  Green MPI will be calculated using a nonparametric
              output distance function, from which an output-oriented Malmquist index will be
              derived.  This index incorporates the effects of environmental
              depletion/degradation.  The effects of R&D on green productivity growth will be
              examined using regression analysis, in which lagged values of the R&D variable
              also appear as explanatory variables.  Lagged terms are introduced to reflect
              the fact that R&D spending may have lagged effects as well as current effects. 
              The convergence or divergence of green TFP growth rates will be tested using
              time-series analysis.  An auto-regressive model of green TFP growth will be
              specified and a unit-root test will be employed to determine whether green TFP
              growth rates are converging or diverging over time.

The U.N. System of
              National Accounts has been criticized because GDP, the most widely used measure
              of aggregate economic activity, fails to account for environmental effects. 
              Economists and others have suggested that GDP accounts should be adjusted for
              the value of environmental damages, an adjustment that would lead to so-called
              "green GDP" accounts.  It is thought that green GDP is a more accurate measure
              of social welfare than is GDP itself, because it captures the disutility due to
              environmental degradation and not only reflects the "true" social welfare at
              the national level but also provides an informational background for evaluating
              social policy.  Adjusting GDP to account for environmental effects is
              difficult, though, because it requires measuring the monetary value of
              environmental depletion and degradation.  The study will develop a method for
              making this adjustment, and will go on to compare green GDP across countries
              and over time.  Productivity growth, which stems from improvements in the
              fundamental productive capacity of an economy, is the engine of GDP growth and
              of increases in welfare over time.  As with GDP, though, it is important to
              account for environmental factors in measuring productivity growth.  In
              addition to measuring green GDP, the study also will develop a related method
              for measuring green productivity growth and apply the method to international
              data over several years.  Using the green productivity measures across
              countries, two statistical models are employed.  The first will explore the
              effects of R&D activities and technological spillovers on productivity
              advancement.  The second will determine whether productivity converges or
              diverges across countries over time.  The study will thus produce a number of
              extensions to the academic literature.  It will also yield important insights
              for policymaking.  It seems clear that environmental policy should be based on
              integrated environmental-economic analyses.  The measures of green GDP and
              green productivity growth developed in the study will provide a useful input to
              the formation of policies regarding environmental management and economic
              development.

