Title       : Synchrotron Radiation Center Operations: 2001-2006
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0084402

Award Number: 0084402
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Hugh M. Van Horn                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17102900           (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin T. Cadwallader   (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Taylor  (Principal Investigator former)
              Franz J. Himpsel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph J. Bisognano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1743      NATIONAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the National Facilities and Instrumentation Program to the
              University of Wisconsin-Madison supports the continued operation of the
              Synchrotron Radiation Center (SRC) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. SRC
              is one of the most productive, innovative, cost-effective, and user-friendly
              facilities in the U.S. SRC will continue to operate as a national users
              facility for uniquely difficult and time-consuming experiments that lead to new
              depths of understanding of key materials problems at the micro and nano levels.
              These activities match well with the characteristic spectrum of the Aladdin
              ring, which is concentrated at low photon energies. SRC provides output of high
              stability and spectral purity for experiments involving intricate sample
              preparation and characterization. Work on superconductors, low-dimensional
              solids, magnetic nanostructures, and the microanalysis of cells, together with
              cutting edge nanolithography and research in microcircuit device fabrication
              will continue to be supported.

The funds also support low-cost plan to
              improve the beam quality, which will result in beam size reduction by up to a
              factor of 3-4. These will provide world-class flux and resolution in the 5-50
              eV range that is critical for exploring valence electrons, but difficult to
              reach for higher energy rings.  The impact of these efforts will be felt well
              beyond the five years award period.  

SRC will continue to host the Center
              for NanoTechnology (CNTech), a major federally- and industry-funded facility at
              the SRC. As a DARPA Test Bed for Lithography, and a unique training facility in
              the U.S, CNTech is indispensable to the nation and the semiconductor industry
              in providing fundamental and applied research for microcircuit device
              fabrication. In addition, the Canadian Synchrotron Radiation Facility (CSRF)
              depends on SRC as its host; this collaboration will continue until the Canadian
              facility (CLS) is completed.  

SRC continues to make important contribution
              to Graduate training with its reinvigorated program in accelerator physics.
              This educational effort is enhanced through a creative new NSF-funded
              initiative involving high school teachers and students.

