Title       : Multiple Disciplinary Collaborative Research: Evolution of Brain Structures for
               Vocal Learning in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0084357

Award Number: 0084357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erich D. Jarvis jarvis@neuro.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Claudio Mello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jarvis. Lay Abstract


Vocal learning is the process by which young animals
              learn to imitate the vocal sounds made by their parents or a tutor. This rare
              trait has only been found in humans, whales, dolphins, bats and 3 groups of
              birds (hummingbirds, parrots and songbirds). The goal of this project is to
              identify and characterize the brain areas that control vocal communication in
              hummingbirds, as well as test whether the brains of birds that do not have
              vocal learning, such as chicken and pigeons, contain similar structures. The
              main method used is analysis of a gene that is expressed in the brain when
              neuronal cells fire. Utilizing a molecular technique called in situ
              hybridization, one can determine the exact brain cells that are involved in the
              perception and production of vocalizations. By comparing hearing and vocalizing
              animals, one can then generate high-resolution maps of brain areas that control
              the production of learned vocalizations.

Language acquisition, both in terms
              of speech production and semantics, is a fundamental aspect of the human
              experience and depends on vocal learning. Why is it though that so few animals
              have vocal learning? Do only these animals have the necessary brain structures
              and connections? If so, what are these structures, and how did they arise
              during evolution? By addressing such questions, this study may help reveal what
              are the brain mechanisms required for vocal learning, and potentially help
              understand how humans learn speech. The results should also provide a framework
              for studying the neurobiology of learned vocal communication in other animal
              groups. If the evolution of vocal learning is under strong epigenetic
              constraints, it is possible that humans, cetaceans and bats have also evolved
              similar brain structures. Alternatively, brain areas for vocal learning may
              have evolved as a specialization of structures present in a vocal non-learning
              ancestor. Results from this project are expected to throw considerable light on
              these questions.
 

