Title       : Asymmetrical Flow to Wells - Toward a Better Understanding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2001   
File        : a0084733

Award Number: 0084733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25584              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea L. Welker andrea.welker@villanova.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Villanova University
	      
	      Villanova, PA  19085    610/519-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The flow towards noncircular wells is asymmetrical; however, this asymmetrical
              flow is often approximated as symmetrical flow to aid in design calculations.
              For example, the rectangular cross section of a prefabricated vertical drain
              (PVD) is often converted to a circular cross section during design.
              Unfortunately, the impact of this conversion is not fully understood.
              Regardless of whether PVDs are used for soil improvement or remediation, the
              rectangular cross section is converted to a circle regardless of the
              application. Many different formulations for this conversion have been
              developed; yet no definitive research exists that clearly shows one formulation
              to be superior to the others. An experimental program is proposed to study the
              hypothesis that equivalent diameter formulations should be based upon
              equivalent flow rates instead of equipotentials. It is anticipated that the
              equivalent diameter well with the cross-sectional area closest to that of the
              PVD will yield the most similar flow rates. The results of this proposed
              research can be used in future research efforts of interest to this researcher
              and others. For example, studies on the use of PVDs to remediate soils in the
              vadose zone and the impact of heterogeneities on PVD remediation systems are
              planned. Selecting the appropriate equivalent diameter will be an important
              part of these studies, and will be especially important when performing
              mathematical modeling. In addition to being of use to researchers, engineers
              can use the information provided by this study when using PVDs for soil
              improvement and remediation.
