Title       : Collaborative Research: Analysis and design of material microstructure using
               stochastic simulation techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0084547

Award Number: 0084547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Deodatis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1623,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0084547
Deodatis
In recent years, tremendous progress has been made in the
              fabrication of advanced materials, such as composites. As these fabrication
              techniques have progressed, it has become apparent that models describing
              behavior of these materials need improvement in order to be properly introduced
              into engineering design. A major obstacle in improving these models for many
              materials is the high degree of randomness at the microstructural level. This
              research plan describes simulation-based methods that address both the improved
              analysis and the design of random composite microstructures, including advanced
              fibrous/particulate composites, cellular/porous materials, concrete, or other
              multi-phase materials. Specifically, the proposed research work will focus on
              the following three areas: 1) probabilistic characterization of material
              microstructures, 2) stochastic simulation of material microstructures, 3)
              sensitivity studies of material behavior - design issues. The sensitivity
              studies will identify critical sizes and clustering patterns of inclusions,
              volume fractions, etc. 
The above analyses serve two extremely important roles
              in engineering of composite materials: to characterize existing composite
              materials and to aid in improving and optimizing the design of new applications
              of composite materials. Because the proposed techniques are all based on finite
              element methods, they could potentially be applied to any phenomena that have
              been successfully modeled using standard (deterministic) finite element
              analyses, including critical stress, strain, or displacement response of
              mechanical/structural systems, general thermoelastic behavior, material or
              geometric nonlinearities, or nonlinear loadings. 
The  study is a
              collaborative effort between Princeton University and The Johns Hopkins
              University supported under NSF initiative 00-26, Exploratory Research on
              Model-Based Simulation.
***


