Title       : Memphis Urban Systemic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0084872

Award Number: 0084872
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomasena H. Woods                      
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Johnnie B. Watson superintendent@memphis-schools.k12.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marieta W. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Memphis City Schools
	      2597 Avery Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381124818    901/454-5200

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Memphis City Schools, currently in its fifth year of the National Science
              Foundation's Urban Systemic Initiative, proposes the improvement of K-12
              mathematics and science student achievement through the extension of previous
              accomplishments and the implementation of a rich and comprehensive full-scale
              standards-based program districtwide.  The Memphis Urban Systemic Program's
              (MUSP) instructional plan focuses on the implementation of K-12 mathematics and
              science standards-based curricula in 100% of the schools through professional
              development that provides over 100 hours of learning experiences to teachers. 
              The proposed professional development comprises subject content, pedagogical
              approaches, integration of learning technologies, and alignment of student
              assessment with both curriculum and instruction.  Teacher networks and action
              research will be used as tools to expand teachers' abilities to reflect on
              their students' learning and their own instructional process.  

Summer camps
              and Saturday academies will be implemented to assist students meeting the new
              standards, and parental involvement activities will be conducted in schools to
              promote their understanding of the ongoing standards-based reform efforts. 
              Furthermore, the MUSP expects to improve the quality of current teacher
              preparation programs and the science and mathematics teacher shortage by
              developing a strong sequence of undergraduate and pre-service education courses
              in close and intense collaboration with the University of Memphis, LeMoyne-Owen
              College, and Christian Brothers University.

The MUSP proposal constitutes a
              potential urban district reform model, especially by illustrating appropriate
              alignment among standards-based curriculum implementation, professional
              development, and student assessment-one of the most critical components of and
              a necessary condition for successful educational reform.  The development of a
              seamless teacher education program addressing teacher recruitment and
              certification, preservice, and in-service activities depicts a promising
              undertaking as well.

Success of the MUSP will be determined by the degree to
              which students meet or exceed the performance benchmarks established over the
              five years of the proposed program.

