Title       : Solid State Studies in Ceramics Gordon Research Conference, Meriden, NH, August
               6-11, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  2000      
File        : a0084493

Award Number: 0084493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlyle B. Storm grc@grc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory S. Rohrer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in Ceramics will focus on
              interfacial networks, their structure, dynamics, and control. This subject lies
              at the heart of the emerging ability to design ceramic materials with specific
              microstructures and properties.  Recent research activities among ceramists and
              the growing number of publications in this area indicates that a meeting on
              this topic is especially timely.  Key researchers in the field have committed
              to attend this meeting and describe their most recent findings (see
              http://mimp.mems.cmu.edu/~grc/ for a schedule). To augment the traditional
              technical presentations, four additional program initiatives have been
              incorporated into the meeting.  First, a scientific panel discussion is will be
              held to address the important issue of how we conduct interface studies. The
              expert panel (and audience) will address the question of how one selects an
              appropriate length scale for the study of grain boundary networks; the
              advantages and disadvantages of atomic and microscopic observations will be
              debated.  An online, web-based discussion of the question will be initiated to
              foreshadow the proceedings at the meeting.  At the conference, the forum will
              involve a moderated panel of experts in the area who will each be given 15
              minutes to present a viewpoint.  Comments will then be invited from the
              audience so that all of the participants can engage in the discussion.  Second,
              an education forum is planned.  A panel of educators has been invited to
              present strategies for the co-existence of ceramics education within a
              materials science curriculum. The panel will meet with interested conference
              participants during an afternoon session and the panel leader will present a
              synopsis of the findings during a meeting of all conference
              participants.
Third, an invited poster session has been arranged to
              accommodate a higher fraction of young professionals in the program.  This
              poster session is meant to provide an opportunity for young scientists and
              engineers at the start of their independent research careers to describe their
              most recent results.  Fourth, graduate students working on thesis topics
              relevant to the conference will be encouraged to submit abstracts for poster
              presentations and, based on the merit of the abstracts, will be offered funding
              for their conference registration. 

This Gordon Research Conference on Solid
              State Studies in Ceramics will focus on interfacial networks, their structure,
              dynamics, and control. This subject lies at the heart of the emerging ability
              to design ceramic materials with specific microstructures and properties.  The
              conference will gather scholars and educators at all career levels in an
              atmosphere conducive not only to making technical progress, but also for
              establishing sustainable collaborations and professional relationships. 

