Title       : Field Method for Back-calculation of Dynamic p-y Multipliers and Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0084899

Award Number: 0084899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113963             (Estimated)
Investigator: Annalingam Anandarajah rajah@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The design of pile foundations subjected to lateral dynamic cyclic loading such
              as caused by earthquakes, ship collision, etc., is still in need of a rational
              analysis method.  In recent years, the applicability of the Beam on Nonlinear
              Winkler Foundation (BNWF) method for these problems has been studied. The BNWF
              method has been proven to work well for problems involving static, monotonic
              loading.  A number of difficulties occur when trying to extend the static BNWF
              to dynamic problems.  Among these, the difficulties of selecting a suitable
              damping model (series or parallel) and the corresponding damping values, a
              suitable method for accounting for the cyclic pore pressure build up, and a
              rational method for accounting for the pile-soil gapping stand out the most. 
              One method of addressing these difficulties is to conduct a suitable field
              experiment, monitor the behavior and back-calculate the needed parameters from
              the field data.  

Recent studies indicate that the Statnamic testing device
              might be used for conducting lateral pile load tests.  The Statnamic device
              produces a single pulse loading. We have analytically determined that, instead
              of applying the loading directly on the pile head, if it is applied through a
              single degree-of-freedom oscillator involving a mass and a spring, the motion
              of the pile head becomes cyclic.  The objective of the proposed study is to
              develop a method of back-calculating the p-y multipliers and damping parameters
              directly from a set of field data derived from a dynamic cyclic lateral load
              test on single piles.  In achieving the objectives, a series of field tests
              will be conducted at the test site of Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center
              (TFHRC) of FHWA.  Some of the tests will be conducted in a 18-foot deep test
              pit on wet and saturated sands and silty sands of different densities, and the
              others outside the pit in the natural soil which is clay.  The pile and the
              surrounding soil will be adequately instrumented for measuring the needed
              quantities.  Existing p-y curves based analysis methods will be modified to
              account for pore pressure effects and pile-soil gapping.  Also, experiments
              will be conducted on a nine-pile group, and methods of applying the single pile
              data to analyze pile groups will be explored.  The study will be conducted by a
              doctoral student and supervised by the PI.  The doctoral student has already
              spent over an year on the analysis portion of the study and developed computer
              codes based on existing p-y curves based methods.  The proposed modifications
              to the analysis method and experimental work will be completed in a period of
              two years.


