Title       : Coherent Nanotechnology Quantum Devices for Information Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2000 
File        : a0084487

Award Number: 0084487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ki Wook Kim kwk@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Veena Misra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Holton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In a one-year small grant for exploratory research (SGER) granted by the ECS
              Division
of NSF, we have explored new concepts for coherent quantum effects in
              nanotechnology
devices. We have conceived of several new solid-state devices
              based on coupled coherent
quantum phenomena that are potentially useful for
              computing and communications, and
investigated their practicality through
              theoretical studies. With this initial success, we
now propose to continue
              these studies with a more extensive and precise analysis of the
phenomena and
              to initiate a coupled experimental program to show feasibility.

The
              nanotechnology structure that shows most promise for a quantum computer is
              based
on the spin of exchange coupled electrons trapped in an array of gated
              quantum dots
fabricated in either III-V or silicon. The proposed quantum
              computer is capable of 10 5
operations within the coherence time at a
              two-qubit operation rate at 10 8 Hz. It is readily
scalable to a large number
              of elements, on the order of ~10 6 qubits, and electrically
reconfigurable
              utilizing a planar architecture. This device is unquestionably
manufacturable
              using technology enabled by the 70-nm technology node as specified in
the
              "International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors, 1999 Edition". We
              have
established collaborations with industry that wish to take advantage of
              this
nanotechnology once we have shown feasibility.

To fully examine the
              potential of our concepts, we propose to conduct a comprehensive
study by
              analyzing the physical parameters of the devices to generate the desired
              energy
structure and coupling strength among neighboring device elements, by
              investigating the
limitations to coherence, and by simulating the operation of
              the device to operate it as a
quantum computer. We further propose to
              undertake an experimental program to
fabricate and test elementary prototypes
              of these devices to demonstrate feasibility.
Collaboration between the
              theoretical and experimental studies should result in a nano-device
structure
              that is technically interesting and potentially important for
              commercial
use.

This research will be coupled to an educational program
              that provides interdisciplinary
research for graduate students and for the
              development of courses that introduce quantum
information processes at the
              graduate level within the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department at
              North Carolina State University.
