Title       : GOALI: Design and Manufacture of Polymer Heat Exchangers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0084765

Award Number: 0084765
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane H. Davidson david020@maroon.tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott D. Dahl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan C. Mantell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Vichich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project will
              focus on heat exchangers made of thin-walled co-extruded nylon tubing woven
              into tube bundles.  Polymer heat exchangers are an attractive alternative to
              metal heat exchangers in large-volume applications where corrosive fluids are
              present, weight is important, or integration with other components is
              desirable.  The collaborative GOALI project of the University of Minnesota,
              DuPont, and ThemoKing aims to solve key material, design and manufacturing
              problems that must be addressed before polymer heat exchangers can be
              successfully commercialized for cooling automotive and truck components and
              refrigerated containers. Fundamental issues that will investigated are failure
              mechanisms in the coextruded tubes, design and manufacture of tube manifolds,
              and characterization of convective heat transfer in unique woven tube bundles. 
              Tube failure, particularly delamination, will be characterized in terms of the
              relationship between loads, strain, temperature and time.  A modification of
              laminated plate theory will be applied to predict failure in tubing of various
              layered constructions from limited creep/DMA data.  Design guidelines and
              manufacturing techniques for tubesheet and tube bundle manifolds will be
              established using analytic and experimental approaches.  Experimental
              measurements of heat transfer in prototype air-to-liquid heat exchangers will
              result in generally applicable Nusselt number heat transfer correlations that
              can serve as the basis for design of woven tube bundles. 

The models and
              design tools resulting from this research are expected to play a key role in
              the successful commercialization of polymer heat exchangers for the
              transportation industry.

