Title       : Parametrically Excited Nonlinear Gyroscopic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0084944

Award Number: 0084944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180565             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Sri Namachchivaya sri@nsgsun.aae.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: N. Sri Namachchivaya
University of Illinois @ Urbana-Champaign
Proposal (#
              0084944) 
Title: Parametrically Excited Nonlinear Gyroscopic Systems

The
              overall goal of our proposed investigation is to formulate and develop methods
              to study the long term effects of small dissipative, symmetry-breaking and
              time-dependent perturbations on nonlinear gyroscopic systems, particularly the
              dynamics of rotating shafts and pipes conveying fluid. This proposal outlines a
              unified framework to study nonlinear systems with either periodic} or
              stochastic perturbations. An understanding of the dynamics of parametrically
              
excited gyroscopic systems necessitates a study of the complex interactions
              between time-dependent inputs, symmetries, and nonlinearities. Our approach
              will consist of the application of some recent theories of deterministic and
              stochastic dimensional reduction to 
relevant nonlinear gyroscopic models. 
              The proposed work consists of essentially four components: appropriate
              modelling, further development of some theoretical considerations, numerical
              
algorithms, and experimental verification.  The outcome will be a
              greatly-enhanced understanding of the stability and global dynamics of
              gyroscopic systems under dissipation and time-dependent perturbations.  In the
              deterministic context, we will be able to predict global dynamics and the
              mechanisms which give rise to global bifurcations in gyroscopic systems.  We
              shall also examine stabilization of gyroscopic systems by periodic excitations
              when the excitation frequency is slightly above a certain resonance
              frequency.

In the stochastic context, we will be able to compute a number of
              standard 
stability indices (e.g., stationary measures and exit times) in a
              theoretically correct and computationally efficient way.  In the final part of
              this research, dynamic experiments
will be conducted on a rotating shaft to
              verify the theoretical results obtained.  These dynamics experiments will
              locate the stability boundaries and examine the nature of the nonlinear
              response. The numerical and experimental results will, in turn, guide the
              theories to incorporate any new phenomena observed.
