Title       : Investigation of Physical Mechanisms in Multi-band Tunneling in Layered
               Semiconductor Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0084512

Award Number: 0084512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117977             (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Ramdas Ram-Mohan lrram@wpi.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0084512
Ram-Mohan

Layered quantum semiconductor structures such as multiple
              quantum wells, superlattices, and, multi-barrier resonant tunneling diode (RTD)
              structures have been realized as viable devices over the past several years. 
              Here the PI proposes the investigation of carrier tunneling, with special,
              emphasis on hole tunneling, in such structures.

The in-plane energy
              dispersion for holes in these structures displays large non-parabolicities of
              the energy sub-bands. It has also been found that in-plane dispersion in such
              quantum heterostructures significantly influences the tunneling spectrum in the
              growth direction.  In the existing literature, these crucial aspects have not
              been included in (a) multi-band Schrodinger-Poisson self-consistent band
              bending calculations, (b) a tunneling theory including in-plane wavevector
              dependence, and (c) the full theory of the I-V characteristics of general
              layered systems including these effects.  The modeling aspects of the theory
              are best done in a highly accurate finite element approach that was
              investigated earlier by the PI.

A number of puzzling features in the I-V
              characteristics in Type-11 RTDs observed by Magno, et al., at the Naval
              Research Laboratory will be addressed.  A proper understanding of the Type-II
              interband quantum cascade laser (proposed and later implemented by Meyer,
              Vurgaftman and the PI), under active device conditions also requires a detailed
              multi-band approach to tunneling.  These device applications should permit the
              realization of wavefunction engineering of optimized structures for superior
              performance.  In addition, nonequilibrium dissipative effects of phonon
              emission and phonon-assisted tunneling under active device conditions, will be
              investigated using a Numerical Green's Function approach proposed
              here.

These investigations will have direct relevance to device design, to
              device performance, and to the implementation of mid-IR lasers and Type-II
              RTDs.



