Title       : RUI: Molecular Genetic Analysis of Chlorophyll b Synthesis in Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2001      
File        : a0084274

Award Number: 0084274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Brusslan bruss@csulb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach
	      1250 Bellflower Blvd
	      Long Beach, CA  908400004    213/498-4121

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Chlorophyll (Chl) b binds and stabilizes the light harvesting complex proteins
              of photosystem II in vascular and non-vascular plants, green algae and
              prochlorophytes.  Chl b is synthesized from Chl a in a reaction that requires
              chlorophyll a oxygenase, the product of the Arabidopsis AtCAO gene.  This
              project will yield transgenic plants that overexpress AtCAO in order to observe
              if the stable ratio of Chl a to Chl b can be perturbed.  Plants with
              constitutive and inducible promoters will be produced, AtCAO mRNA and protein
              level will be measured, and rates of Chl b synthesis will be determined.  The
              phenotypes of overproducing lines will be examined to determine if an extra
              large PSII light harvesting complex is formed.  The second objective will be
              the production of an AtCAO antibody for measurement of protein levels and for
              suborganelle localization by immunogold labeling.  The third objective concerns
              a mutant, conditional chlorina, that has decreased levels of Chl, especially
              Chl b, under moderate light intensity.  This line appears yellow-green under
              moderate light intensity, and this visible phenotype correlates to partial loss
              of Lhcb proteins located in the inner and outer antenna complex.  This line has
              been used to screen for mutants that turn less yellow-green under moderate
              light intensity, cch suppressors.  One of these suppressor lines has been shown
              to have a phenotype that is visible during segregation of the F2. 
              Characterization and mapping of this, and other suppressors, are proposed.  The
              final objective is to initiate a new project in the laboratory; an analysis of
              the very high-light responsive promoters of the nuclear Elip1 and Elip2 genes. 
              Both Elip genes are induced 100-fold after four hours at very high light
              intensity.  These studies could lead to an understanding of the factors that
              are required for the exciton-dissipating chloroplast to communicate with the
              nucleus.  Along with furthering knowledge about the regulation and localization
              of Chl b synthesis, and chloroplast-nuclear communication, talented
              undergraduate and Masters degree students, many of them from minorities that
              are underrepresented in the sciences, will receive training for research
              careers.
