Title       : Observing Microbial Diversity and Horizontal Gene Transfer in a Shallow
               Contaminated Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0084175

Award Number: 0084175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene L. Madsen elm3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Ghiorse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is designed to advance knowledge about the diversity and activity
              of microorganisms residing in subsurface water and sediments in a shallow
              naphthalene-contaminated aquifer in South Glens Falls, NY.  This site has been
              studied hydrologically, chemically, and microbiologically for a decade and
              features an extensive infrastructure and both hydrogeochemical and
              microbiological data bases for developing and testing hypotheses about factors
              controlling the identity, activity, and genetic exchange processes of resident
              microorganisms.  The four main project objectives are:  (i) to assess the
              diversity of general heterotrophic microorganisms residing in water and
              sediments; (ii) to assess the diversity of microorganisms' metabolic pathways,
              and dioxygenase genes responsible for metabolizing the naphthalene (the major
              environmental contaminant on site); (iii) to discover the mechanisms of
              horizontal gene transfer causing the subsurface microorganisms to adapt to
              naphthalene exposure; and (iv) to assemble a heterotrophic geochemical budget
              for the site that quantifies the role of microorganisms in carbon and energy
              flow through the system. These objectives will be achieved by sampling site
              waters and sediments quarterly for 5 years.  Sampling locations will be inside
              and outside the contaminated zone and key climatic and biogeochemical
              parameters [O2, other electron acceptors, bicarbonate, dissolved organic carbon
              (DOC), N, P, and organic contaminants] will be measured and used for
              interpretive purposes. 
Microbial characterization procedures will include
              growth and isolation on ecologically-relevant carbon sources (site DOC and
              naphthalene) -- as well as nucleic acid-based procedures [e.g., DNA extraction,
              cloning, sequencing, PCR, and Terminal-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
              (T-RFLP)]. Measures of diversity will be based on phenotypic (colony type, Gram
              stain, physiology, etc.) and genotypic [e.g., 16S rRNA sequences, naphthalene
              dioxygenase (nahAc and analogues)] traits. Microscopic examination of site
              populations will play a critical role in achieving this project's goals.
              Fluorescent In situ Hybridization (FISH) will be used in conjunction with
              Substrate Specific Direct Viable Count (SS-DVC), and a general respiratory
              assay (electron transport reduction of a tetrazolium compound to its
              fluorescent form) to independently assess the identity, physiological
              potential, and gene expression of individual microorganisms residing in this
              site.  Prior studies at the site have indicated that naphthalene catabolic
              plasmids within the native populations play a role in metabolic adaptation. 
              Factors controlling plasmid transfer will be examined in laboratory and field
              experiments.
This project will advance knowledge of the identities and roles
              that microorganisms play in this subsurface habitat. To date, no complete
              census of microorganisms residing in any habitat has been achieved.  By
              systematically applying both culture-based and nucleic acid-based procedures at
              this already well-studied site, a complete census may be approached.  But more
              importantly, the diversity of microbial metabolic function will be determined
              in this unique setting where introduced naphthalene has strongly influenced the
              local biogeochemistry. 
Because of its relatively simple biogeochemical
              characteristic and the preexisting database, this site is ideal for the
              ambitious task of cataloging the presence, heterotrophic activity, and genetic
              exchange mechanisms of naturally occurring microorganisms. Discoveries of the
              roles of individual microbial populations in biogeochemical cycling will be
              conveyed to the public through written documents, an internet web site, and
              site visits.


