Title       : Collaborative Research: Life History Variation in Copepods: Modulation through
               Chromatin Diminution and Endoreduplication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0084854

Award Number: 0084854
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grace A. Wyngaard WYNGAAGA@JMU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Reid N. Harris  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0084854
Harris 

This research investigates responses of aquatic
              microcrustaceans to massive losses, gains, and reorganizations of genomic DNA. 
              The focus is on embryonic chromatin diminution - reduction in size and
              reorganization of the genome, with additional exploratory research on 
              endoreduplication - the amplification of nuclear DNA without subsequent
              mitosis.   The PI's will investigate whether variation in DNA content in
              somatic and germ cell lineages can explain variation in developmental time and
              embryonic and adult body sizes through effects on bulk size of the genome. 
              Research will include reconstruction of a phylogeny of the Cyclopidae and use
              of phylogenetically-independent contrasts to test for correlated evolution of
              adult somatic DNA content with developmental rate and adult body size. The PIs
              will investigate whether large amounts of germline DNA in embryos make possible
              higher rates of protein transcription at times during development when there is
              greatest need for such transcripts.  Quantitative changes in DNA will be
              measured using cytophotometry and isotopically labeled DNA and RNA precursors. 
              

Copepods are ideal for examining evolution of large-scale changes in the
              genome because their genome size varies greatly among species, mechanisms that
              modulate their DNA contents are known, their life history variation and
              population biology are well studied, and their chromosomes are amenable to
              quantitative and comparative analyses.  Copepods may be the most abundant
              multicellular organisms in the oceans, are a primary diet item of many fish,
              and thus play a major role in global ecology.  


