Title       : FSML: Field Station Operations Workshop to be held October, 2000 at
               Aspinall-Wilson Center, Gunnison, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  2000    
File        : a0084148

Award Number: 0084148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Lohr slohr@crestedbutte.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rocky Mtn Biol Lab
	      PO 519
	      Crested Butte, CO  81224    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for an effort to compile a manual of standard
              operational policies for biological field stations. There are approximately 170
              field stations in the US that are member stations of the Organization of
              Biological Field Stations (OBFS) as well as a smaller number of foreign
              stations. OBFS members have pointed to the need for and utility of a manual
              that describes common procedures for field station planning activities,
              administrative structures and policies, facility provision and maintenance,
              program integration, data management and communication, fundraising, fiscal
              responsibility and financial management. As a major component of the effort, 10
              participants selected from member stations of the OBFS will meet in a three day
              workshop to finalize an outline and develop an initial draft document  Prior to
              the workshop, survey efforts and preliminary discussions with a wider group at
              the OBFS annual meeting will result in the compilation of existing operating
              policies, and generation of a draft outline of the proposed manual. The final
              product will be available via the internet and also as hard copy.

New field
              stations are being established at a phenomenal rate, and older, established
              stations are reconfiguring to meet demands for integrating research and
              education programs. The OBFS, with support from NSF through several workshops
              and initiatives in the recent past, has identified the development of a
              standard operating procedures manual as a significant step in streamlining
              administrative and facility processes at stations.  This is expected to help
              the stations offer the best possible field research and educational
              opportunities to researchers and students across the nation. 


