Title       : FSML: Upgrading the Long Marine Laboratory Diving and Small Boating Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a0084117

Award Number: 0084117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Carr   (Principal Investigator current)
              James A. Estes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter T. Raimondi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Army-Electronics Command
	      
	      Fort Monmouth, NJ  07703    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports purchase of boats, diving equipment and facilities at the
              Long Marine Laboratory (LML) of the University of California Santa Cruz. These
              improvements in facilities and equipment will allow the Diving and Boating
              Safety Programs (DBSP) to meet the growing numbers and needs of students and
              researchers. Funds will be used to equip a new Marine Support Facility with
              scuba cylinder racks, Nitrox tank-charging equipment, cabinets, and heating and
              ventilation systems.  The new facility will provide students and researchers
              with areas for staging, fabrication and maintenance of diving and scientific
              equipment.  The award will augment institutional funds to be used for site
              preparation, foundation, rough carpentry and minimal interior finish work. In
              addition, the award will support purchase of a 16' inflatable boat, a 22'
              fiberglass vessel and 3 outboard engines. A forklift will also be purchased to
              move boats and heavy gear on the grounds of the facility. 

Since 1976, the
              LML has been the coastal research laboratory for the University's Institute of
              Marine Sciences. The laboratory is located on a coastal bluff adjacent to the
              Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary, the nation's largest National Marine
              Sanctuary. The LML Education Program (K-12) and aquarium displays serve 35,000
              visitors each year. The Diving and Boating Safety Program provides support for
              faculty, staff, student and visiting researchers in biology, chemistry and
              earth sciences. Approximately one-third of the University's 300 undergraduate
              Marine Biology students use the scuba diving and small boat facilities in
              classes or as part of their research.

