Title       : Selection of Industrial Coatings Based on Environmental and Societal Impact
               Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  2000    
File        : a0084903

Award Number: 0084903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457544             (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Gershenson jkgershe@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Ryan Dupont  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Ratliff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides for the development of a method for quickly comparing
              different industrial coating choices based on their environmental and societal
              impacts and their performance in a given application.  The method will expedite
              the selection of industrial coatings during conceptual design by developing a
              set of expressions that relate coating key performance criteria (hardness,
              corrosion resistance, chemical resistance, etc.) to environmental and societal
              impacts (human health effects, resource depletion, energy utilization, etc.). 
              The research will seek to produce a taxonomy of auditable environmental
              characteristics relevant in the selection of industrial coatings; an underlying
              method for trading off environmental concerns over the entire life-cycle of an
              industrial coating from its production, through its use, removal, and
              reapplication; and the relationships used in industrial coatings selection to
              balance environmental impact and cost as a measure of functionality.

If
              successful, this research will yield a fundamental bridge between design, the
              environment, and auditing; allowing all three to operate with a single schedule
              of environmental and societal impact.  Specifically, the project will provide a
              rapid, quantitative methodology for identifying the most environmentally benign
              candidate for a given coating application, which minimizes energy and resource
              utilization, without conducting exhaustive analyses of the systems.  After
              application by design engineers, the result could be reduced environmental
              impact from everyday products.




