Title       : First-Order System Least Squares (FOSLS) for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0084438

Award Number: 0084438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen F. McCormick stevem@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Manteuffel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                            Abstract

This is a renewal proposal to continue
              development of first--order system least squares (FOSLS) for numerical solution
              of partial differential equations (PDEs).  It combines theoretical analysis,
              algorithm design, and software development, driven by several real
              applications, including aerodynamics, meteorology, elasticity,
              electromagnetics, particle transport, and porous flow.  The goal is to develop
              accurate discretizations and fast solvers for the governing PDEs.  The focus
              will be on the continued development of the FOSLS methodology, with special
              attention on developing methods that allow non-smooth problem character and
              solutions, and on further implementation of the methodology in the software
              package FOSPACK. Applications will include coupled systems, especially those
              arising in biological simulation, and porous media flow.  Successful progress
              of this project would enable numerical simulations beyond current capabilities
              in many important applications of national interest.

The central aim of this
              project is research in the field of computational mathematics.  The purpose is
              to improve our understanding of the mathematics behind numerical computer
              simulation of complex physical phenomena.  Such simulations are key to the
              study and control of many important processes, including groundwater flow,
              global change, energy production, biological modeling, and material science. 
              One of the challenges in such simulations is the development of improved
              computational methods for solving the mathematical equations that arise in
              these models.  The basic aim of this research is dramatic improvement in our
              ability to model increasingly more complicated and sophisticated processes with
              much greater accuracy and efficiency.  This should pave the way for simulations
              that can provide scientists, engineers, and policy-makers with much more
              powerful tools to understand and improve our industry, science, and
              environment.

