Title       : Collaborative: Using SHEBA Flux Data to Improve Regional and Global Climate
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0084190

Award Number: 0084190
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63627              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edgar L. Andreas eandreas@crrel.usace.army.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel E. Jordan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1079,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is part of an integrated set of proposals for the Surface Heat
              Budget of the Arctic (SHEBA) Ocean project.  The goal of the current phase of
              the SHEBA project is to use data collected during a one year experiment during
              which an icebreaker frozen into the ice pack of the Beaufort and Chukchi Seas
              was used as a platform for data collection.  A full annual cycle of data
              relating to feedbacks of the ocean-ice-atmosphere system was collected and will
              be used to improve model parameterizations of sea ice response to global
              warming.  The data originally collected by these researchers provides an
              essential dataset of ice-surface observations of the atmospheric boundary level
              for use in improving large-scale models that require better parameterization of
              cloud-radiation and surface-albedo feedbacks for predicting the response of
              Arctic sea ice to global warming.  The project involves analysis and quality
              control of surface-level data and production of a time-series of surface heat
              flux.  The data will be incorporated into models of the atmospheric boundary
              layer and used to compare to data sets of surface parameters collected by
              aircraft over flights.  The results of this project will be used in conjunction
              with other projects to enhance mesoscale and General Circulation Models (GCMs)
              that facilitate better simulations of the Arctic sea ice response to projected
              global warming trends.
