Title       : SGER: Analysis of Fundamental Control Mechanisms for Mobile Agents in Large
               Network Infrastructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0084846

Award Number: 0084846
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52957              (Estimated)
Investigator: Armin R. Mikler mikler@cs.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The objective of this proposal is the feasibility study of fundamental
              control mechanisms for
agent-based systems that facilitate network resource
              management and traffic control. The primary
emphasis is on orchestrating the
              work of multiple intelligent mobile agents such that the
              resulting
collaboration scales well with the size, the resource availability,
              and the dynamics of the
infrastructure. The proposed research investigates the
              feasibility of autonomously adapting the
size of the agent population as a
              function of parameters that describe properties of the
infrastructure directly
              or indirectly. The underlying idea is the separation of network
              centric
functions from the nodes into a mobile sub-layer. The researchers
              expect that this approach will yield a more
scalable architecture for solving
              a variety of different network centric problems. To facilitate this
approach,
              thet  have defined fundamental mechanisms such as agent cloning, agent
              merging,
knowledge acquisition, and agent migration. It is through the use of
              these mechanisms that the researchers
attempt to show the feasibility of
              integrating the intelligent mobile agent paradigm into system-level
tasks. The
              proposed work will involve a formal analytical study of the behavior of the
              agent
population as a function of properties of the infrastructure and
              computational progress of
individual agents. The analysis will further be
              based on carefully constructed simulation
experiments and the emulation of a
              large distributed network environment.
     This proposal intentionally
              disregards several issues of agent-based systems, such as
              knowledge
representation, fault tolerance, and security, and focuses on the
              design and analysis of the
fundamental mechanisms. We believe that the limited
              scope of the proposed project and its
intrinsic exploratory nature makes it an
              ideal candidate for the Small Grants for Exploratory
Research (SGER) program.
