Title       : Direct Field Calibration for Model Simulations of Deep Excavations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a0084556

Award Number: 0084556
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Youssef Hashash hashash@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jamshid Ghaboussi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1623,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Numerical modeling of geotechnical problems is used routinely in major
              construction projects.  These models and simulations involve nonlinear analysis
              of staged construction for open-cut excavations, tunnels, slopes, and similar
              engineered structures.  The most important and difficult part of these computer
              simulations is the representation of the constitutive behavior of the soil
              strata.
In current engineering practice, the engineer selects an existing
              constitutive model and calibrates its parameters to match the results of few
              laboratory material tests. The tests do not generate information on important
              aspects of the soil behavior, which are relevant for a field problem. Often the
              results of numerical simulation using the calibrated constitutive models do not
              match the field measurements. Ad hoc methods are used to select and adjust the
              constitutive model and its properties to match field performance.
We propose a
              novel, powerful and systematic method to calibrate the constitutive model of
              the soil behavior directly from field measurements. We will apply the
              autoprogressive method; a neural network based methodology that has been
              proposed by Ghaboussi and his co-workers, to the modeling of staged
              construction for a deep braced excavation.  A neural network (NN) material
              model will represent the constitutive model of the soil behavior and will be
              calibrated using laboratory test and observed field behavior of excavations.
              
Initially, the proposed methodology will be applied to synthetically
              generated "field measurements" from numerical simulations of deep excavations.
              The synthetic data will include wall lateral displacements and surface
              settlements. A classical bounding surface plasticity model will be used to
              represent clay behavior to generate the synthetic data. As a verification of
              the proposed approach, the soil behavior computed by the trained NN
              constitutive model can be compared to the classical soil model.
The proposed
              methodology will then be applied to field measurements from deep excavations in
              Boston Central Artery/Tunnel CA/T project.  The NN material will learn the
              constitutive model of the soil behavior directly from field measurements of
              deformations. 
The proposed approach can be applied to problems other than
              open-cut excavations. The approach will potentially greatly enhance the
              numerical modeling of geotechnical problems. Field observations and "local
              experience" can then be directly and systematically incorporated into numerical
              models.


