Title       : Preliminary Exploration of Tomographic Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0084694

Award Number: 0084694
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97193              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo B. Nemirovsky ricardo_Nemirovsky@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hernan J. Jara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              We propose the construction of a tabletop tomographic device -Optical Computer
              Tomograph (OCT)-to generate images of small semi-translucent objects, such as
              biological samples and manmade objects, and to conduct a preliminary
              exploration of its educational and scientific potential.  The Optical Computer
              Tomograph will enable students to create 3D and cross-sectional representations
              to be displayed and manipulated on the computer screen.  Students will be able
              to navigate the virtual image of the object (e.g. a slice of an onion or a
              small fish) similarly to how a radiologist navigates computer-generated images
              for a part of the human body obtained through MRI technology.  The fact that
              the students will see and touch the represented object, in parallel with the
              manipulation of computer images, is likely to make a crucial difference for
              their understanding.   

This tool could naturally be used in relation to
              topics in middle and high school biology (e.g. cell structure), physics (e.g.
              light and matter), and mathematics.  Regarding the latter, the mathematical
              transformations entailed in reconstructing an object from a sequence of flat
              projections involve a set of crucial pieces of mathematical concepts used
              extensively in countless technological applications.  Experimenting with these
              processes of reconstruction can make this mathematics accessible to
              students-from middle school students to students of medicine and
              engineering.

While the primary purpose of the OCT is educational as a
              classroom-teaching tool, we can foresee its use for scientific research, to
              investigate questions such as: What resolution can be achieved with an Optical
              Computer Tomograph?  Does it matter whether the source of light is coherent
              (laser) or not?  How do people process visual projections to envision objects
              in space?  The only application of optical tomography that we know of is a
              "Computer Tomography Laser Mammography" being developed by a company in
              Florida.  Their focus is unrelated to microscopy.  Our proposed work could lead
              to the development of an unexplored field of research, that of visible-light
              tomographic microscopy.




