Title       : Robust Airline Crew Scheduling: Move-Up Crews
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2000  
File        : a0084826

Award Number: 0084826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174244             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diego Klabjan klabjan@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1465,1504,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a decision support tool for robust airline crew
              scheduling.  A model that solves the airline crew-scheduling problem and
              captures two objectives the crew cost and the number of crews that can be
              swapped in operations will be devleoped.  The former cost forms the traditional
              objective function and the latter cost is a measure of robustness since
              schedules with many swappable crews are likely to be robust. Two methodologies
              to solve the model are proposed.  A Lagrangian decomposition approach relaxes
              the 'robustness' constraints and iteratively solves the crew-scheduling problem
              with different objective coefficients.  A parallel branch-and-cut algorithm for
              solving these crew-scheduling problems will be developed. The second approach
              uses subgradient optimization and the new concept of computing a 'dual' of an
              integer program.  An algorithm for computing such a dual vector will be
              developed and implemented.

The proposed methodology will yield crew
              schedules that can potentially reduce operational crew cost.  The operational
              crew cost increases up to seven times due to various disruptions in the flight
              schedule.  Using robust crew schedules obtained by this research can
              significantly reduce this factor and hence it can provide substantial benefit
              to airlines. The proposed methodologies use the concept of 'dual' vectors for
              integer programs.  In this case they are used as a subgradient but it can also
              be used for sensitivity analysis, pricing, and producing alternative optimal
              solution to integer programs.

