Title       : Development of a Non-contact Remote Ultrasonic System for the Non-destructive
               Inspection of Railroad Tracks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0084249

Award Number: 0084249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francesco Lanza di Scalea flanza@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: Francesco Lanza di Scalea, University of California, San Diego

NSF
              Proposal # 0084249
"Development of a Non-contact Remote Ultrasonic System for
              the Non-destructive Inspection of Railroad Tracks"

Project Abstract

This
              proposal is aimed at the development of a new-generation ultrasonic system for
              the nondestructive evaluation of railroad tracks in-service.  The proposed
              approach makes use of new developments in the areas of non-contact and remote
              ultrasonic testing, namely laser ultrasonics and gas(air)-coupled ultrasonics,
              to provide a more powerful and efficient tool for rail inspection than
              currently available methods. 
The three-year project will be performed in
              three-phases that include the following activities: 1) development of the
              inspection approach, 2) assessment of the inspection system capability for
              defect detection and 3) determination of the system potential for field
              inspection.
	The development of a non-contact and remote sensoring system is
              expected to dramatically increase the effectiveness of ultrasonic testing for
              rail inspection.  The implementation of fiberoptic technology will enhance the
              flexibility in positioning the ultrasonic probes.  In turn, this will allow for
              the inspection of virtually any locations of the test rail.  The unique
              features of laser ultrasound generation, in terms of simultaneous production of
              different wave modes and excitation of a broad frequency content, will allow to
              target a variety of defect types, sizes and positions. 
	Besides contributing
              to ensuring the safety and structural soundness of the Nation's existing
              railroads, the research will have a broader impact.  It will provide
              fundamental advances toward a better understanding and use of non-contact
              ultrasonic technologies for a number of advanced inspection applications.  A
              few examples of these applications include any type of process control of
              materials during manufacturing, inspection of components at extreme
              temperatures and inspection in vacuum environments such as in space.




