Title       : Interaction of Light and Clock Regulation in Neurospora
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0084509

Award Number: 0084509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer J. Loros   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Circadian clocks represent an aspect of intracellular regulation that influences
              physiology and metabolism in most agriculturally, medically, and industrially
              important species on the earth.  This regulation is based in processes that
              occur within cells although the regulation is apparent throughout the entire
              organism in multicellular species.  Based on work in the Loros laboratory and
              in others the molecular bases of these rhythms are becoming known, but much
              remains to be done.  In particular one productive approach has been to study
              how known components of the clock respond to light in the environment of the
              cell.  Another has been to ask how components of light signaling are involved
              in operation of the clock.  This research is based on experiments using several
              genes (cloned in the Loros laboratory or in the laboratory of close colleagues)
              whose expression patterns are either under direct control of the circadian
              clock or whose activities are required for daily operation of the clock. 
              Additionally, all of these genes either control blue-light inducible gene
              expression and/or are themselves blue-light inducible and therefore show
              multiple levels of regulation between light and the clock.  One of these genes,
              the frequency gene, is a component of the clock mechanism and mutations in it's
              own ORF effect the periodicity of it's transcript rhythm.  The wc-1 and wc-2
              genes are PAS domains (a sequence and functional motif conserved among the
              activating elements from all eukaryotic clocks) containing transcription
              factors required both for general global control of light responses in this
              organism and for normal operation of the circadian clock.  The VVD protein also
              contains a PAS domain and appears to play the role of a regulator of
              light-induced gene expression, a role mediated by the anticipated interaction
              between the PAS domains of VVD and the WC proteins.  Molecular and genetic
              analysis has begun on the three lis mutations that alter blocking of FRQ
              negative feedback in light.  In collaboration with others, the Loros laboratory
              has shown two more genes, clock-controlled gene-1 and clock-controlled gene-2
              to be light-regulated and involved in output pathways from the clock and as
              such they are good model target genes known not to be involved in the
              oscillator.  Based on this past work, research in this project will be focused
              on (1) examining the physiological and biological role of the lis mutants at
              the molecular level in clock function, (2) continuing the genetic
              identification of new genes and gene products in the operation of the
              Neurospora clock, and (3) the identification of, in a global sense, the light
              regulated genes in Neurospora. The on-going, long-term goals of this research
              are to understand, at the molecular level, the genes involved in operating the
              circadian clock, the role of light in regulating the clock and to what extent
              the light input pathway to the clock is merged with the clock cycle itself. 
              This has included understanding the actions of light directly on the molecular
              feedback loop that supports clock operation and on the regulation of the
              expression of genes that are additionally regulated by the clock, genes known
              as ccg's or clock-controlled.
