Title       : FSML Request for a Gas Chromatographic Interface for Compound-Specific Isotopic
               Analyses at the University of Texas Marine Science Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0084061

Award Number: 0084061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Brandes brandes@utmsi.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellery D. Ingall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Dunton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy A. Villareal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for the purchase of a gas chromatography interface and
              related equipment. The interface will extend the capabilities of an existing
              isotope ratio mass spectrometer to allow compound-specific, stable isotopic
              analyses to be performed. The  instrument will add near state of-the-art
              analytical capabilities extremely useful in the scientific fields in which the
              Marine Science Institute has its greatest strengths. The PI and his colleagues
              will develop new measurement techniques specifically tailored to critical
              problems facing the Gulf of Mexico region. These types of experiments can be
              accomplished with much greater specificity and control with this new equipment
              than with the bulk isotopic analyses that existing equipment allows.

The use
              of compound-specific analyses has begun to revolutionize the fields of ecology,
              environmental science and oceanography by allowing specific measurement of the 
              uptake and transfer of biochemicals into marine food webs, elucidation of
              degradation pathways, and source identification of environmental pollutants. 
              The extremely small samples needed for the gas chromatography interface make it
              ideal for analysis of limiting or trace biochemicals in fisheries and other
              ecological studies.  The addition of this equipment will create a central light
              isotope analysis facility that will make available new and exciting
              capabilities for scientists throughout the south-central Texas region.



