Title       : Spatial Modeling, Analysis and Prediction of Nonstationary Environmental
               Processess
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0084375

Award Number: 0084375
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Smith rs@stat.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1386,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:


     SPATIAL MODELING, ANALYSIS AND PREDICTION OF 
     
              NONSTATIONARY ENVIRONMENTAL PROCESSES


Montserrat  Fuentes, North Carolina
              State University

Richard  L. Smith, University of North Carolina, Chapel
              Hill

Spatial statistics is one of the major methodologies of environmental
              
statistics; its applications include producing spatially smoothed or
              
interpolated representations of air pollution fields, calculating 
regional
              average means or regional average trends based on data at a 
finite number of
              monitoring stations, and performing regression 
analyses with spatially
              correlated errors to assess the agreement 
between observed data and the
              predictions of some numerical model.  
However, the most commonly used spatial
              statistics methodology, also 
known as geostatistics or kriging, is
              essentially based on the 
assumption of stationary and isotropic random
              fields. Such 
assumptions cannot be expected to hold in large heterogeneous
              fields. 
The research described here concentrates on nonstationary spatial
              
models. Some new models are introduced, as well as new fitting 
methods
              based on spectral analysis. The applications include three 
real data sets:
              (i) monitoring data for nitrate fields compared with 
Models-3 output as part
              of the process for assessing compliance with 
the Clean Air Act Amendments of
              1990; (ii) modeling the spatial 
distribution of particulate matter fields, as
              one of the components 
needed for an improved risk assessment of human health
              effects of 
particulate matter; (iii) developing statistical models for
              spatial 
temperature fields and applying them to the attribution of various
              
"signals" produced by climate models - in particular, this 
methodology will
              permit improved assessment of the extent to which 
observed global climate
              change may be attributed to anthropogenic 
influences.  

In more detail,
              the new statistical methodology concentrates on two 
approaches to
              nonstationary models: a spatial deformation approach 
due to Guttorp and
              Sampson, and an approach where the field is 
represented locally as a
              stationary isotropic random field, but the 
parameters of the stationary
              random field are allowed to vary 
continuously across space. Kernel functions
              are used to ensure that 
the field is well-defined but also continuous. Some
              combination of 
the two approaches may be needed for fields with are neither
              
stationary nor isotropic. New fitting algorithms are developed, using 
both
              space domain and spectral approaches; in cases where the data 
are distributed
              exactly or approximately on a lattice, it is argued 
that spectral approaches
              have potentially enormous computational 
benefits compared with maximum
              likelihood. The methods are extended 
to prediction/interpolation questions
              using approximate Bayesian 
approaches to account for parameter uncertainty. 
              We develop 
applications to obtaining the total loading of pollutant
              
concentrations and fluxes over different geo-political boundaries, to 
risk
              assessment for particulate matter random fields, and to the 
attribution of an
              observed climate record to various components 
produced by numerical climatic
              model, the latter forming a new 
approach to the fingerprint estimation
              technique developed by 
climatologists.  

This program is being jointly
              funded by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities from the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
              Sciences.


