Title       : Mechanics of Chemical-Mechanical Polishing for Microelectronic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0084736

Award Number: 0084736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhijit Chandra achandra@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ashraf F. Bastawros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of fundamental understanding of
              the mechanics of material removal during Chemical Mechanical Polishing (CMP),
              which is a necessary process step in fabrication of multilevel metallizations
              integrated circuits (IC) with sub 0.5 micron line dimensions.  The project will
              utilize a combination of experimentations and analytical efforts.  Nanoscale
              indentation and single grit scratch experiments will be conducted at the
              laboratory scale using the interference of an atomic force microscope (AFM) tip
              with the workpiece.  The observations from these AFM tests will be synthesized
              in a mechanistic model of the CMP process.  The model will be validated against
              experimental observations from a full scale CMP operation conducted in
              collaboration with industrial partners.  Both uniform as well as patterned
              wafers will be tested, and the model will be further refined in view of the
              feature scale and wafer scale measurements taken during these CMP tests. 
              Detailed parametric study will be conducted, and the validated model will then
              be utilized to seek new design avenues for further improving the CMP technique.
               In particular, the effects of various process parameters on the degree of
              nonuniformity (die scale and wafer scale) of local material removal rate will
              be investigated.

If successful, the research will facilitate CMP technology
              development in three different avenues:  (1) It will aid in identifying the
              dominant causal relationships between the material and process parameters, and
              the effectiveness (measured by quality and integrity of the finished surface)
              and efficiency (measured by material removal rate) of a CMP process.  Such a
              mechanistic description will provide a fundamental understanding of the
              material removal process in CMP, and facilitate process optimization.  (2) The
              model, through its mechanistic description, will aid in alleviating impediments
              and will facilitate a much more versatile use of experimentally gathered data
              for realistic CMP processes.  (3) In addition to providing a more fundamental
              understanding of the CMP process, the value of the experimental and modeling
              efforts lie in its enhanced capability for exploration of the "design space". 
              Currently, many process design options (e.g. optimum selection of slurry and
              pad properties) remain a trial and error procedure due to lack of reliable
              models depicting those effects.  The model will aid in identifying such
              unexplored process parameters, and guide toward new and novel avenues for
              designing CMP processes.  This capability to explore new design avenues may
              have the potential to provide a new impetus to effective and efficient designs
              of CMP processes and related equipment.

