Title       : Chloroplast Function in Fatty Acid Mutants of Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0084329

Award Number: 0084329
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $590000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Browse jab@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project is based on the isolation of a series of Arabidopsis mutants with
              specific alterations in leaf fatty acid composition.  These mutants have
              facilitated investigations of the biochemistry of chloroplast glycerolipid
              synthesis and the roles of membrane composition in chloroplast structure and
              function.  The mutants exhibit a series of very striking phenotypes that result
              from changes in the fatty acid composition of chloroplasts.  In the fab1
              mutant, increased saturated fatty acids result in the collapse of
              photosynthesis after 2-3 weeks at 2 deg. C and an associated breakdown of
              chloroplasts.  The fad3 fad7 fad8 mutants lack trienoic fatty acids but their
              growth and photosynthesis are normal at 22 deg. C under 120-150 umol
              quanta/m2/s of light.  The phenotypes initially discovered in this mutant
              result from their inability to synthesize jasmonate, an oxylipin that is
              derived from linolenic acid.  Photosynthesis is affected in fad3 fad7 fad8
              plants at low temperatures and under high light.  A screen for additional
              Arabidopsis mutants with reduced growth at 5 deg. C did not identify additional
              lipid mutants but did lead to the isolation and cloning of other genetic
              determinants of low-temperature responses.  A fad2 fad6 mutant that is
              deficient in polyunsaturated fatty acids achieves strong vegetative growth on
              sucrose media but is incapable of autotrophic growth. 

The effects of lipid
              changes on short-term photosynthesis at low temperature are very modest when
              expressed on a chlorophyll basis.  Instead, characterization of the mutant
              lines points to the significance of membrane composition being on assembly or
              long-term maintenance of the photosystems.  The overall goal of the experiments
              described in this proposal is to understand the biochemical and biophysical
              bases of these phenotypes.  Measurements of photosynthesis and photoinhibition
              in the mutants will allow detailed comparisons of the mutant phenotypes. 
              Experiments have been carried out to generate additional mutant lines with
              intermediate fatty acid compositions and to screens to isolate mutations that
              suppress the low-temperature phenotype of fab1.  The isolation of suppressors
              is a particularly powerful approach for identifying genes and processes
              contributing to a mutant phenotype and suppressor screens with the fad3 fad7
              fad8 and fad2 fad6 lines will also be performed.  Genomics tools available in
              Arabidopsis will allow cloning of the suppressor genes and characterization of
              the biological processes in which they are involved. 

Observations on the
              Arabidopsis mutants and results from researchers working in other systems
              suggest that protein import into the chloroplast or transport into and through
              the thylakoid membrane may be disrupted by changes in fatty acid composition. 
              Assays of protein trafficking in wild type and each mutant will be carried out
              to test this hypothesis and to determine which of the several protein-targeting
              mechanisms are affected by the different changes in membrane composition that
              are represented in the mutants.  The improved understanding of chloroplast
              membrane structure and photosynthetic function that will result from this work
              is an important prerequisite to modifying these processes for increased plant
              productivity.

