Title       : Indentation Mechanics of Monocrystalline Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0084948

Award Number: 0084948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro D. Peralta pperalta@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0084948
Peralta
Instrumented sharp indentation provides valuable information
              on the mechanical properties of materials and is the test of choice when small
              volumes are involved. This is usually the case in single crystal studies, since
              they are often produced in small quantities and can be too delicate for
              conventional testing. Single crystal behavior is intrinsically anisotropic and
              so is the response of textured polycrystals and thin films, which are also
              often characterized using indentation. However, most of the models used to
              analyze hardness are isotropic and, therefore, cannot capture all the aspects
              of the anisotropic behavior of monocrystalline and/or strongly textured
              materials. Furthermore, models to account for crystallographic slip around
              indents on monocrystals do not seem to be available. It is then necessary to
              perform experimental and theoretical work to relate load-penetration data, slip
              and hardening behavior around indents on single crystals to their mechanical
              properties.
A dual experimental/theoretical approach can be used to understand
              the effect of anisotropy on the indentation mechanics of materials.
              Monocrystals will be grown from selected materials and instrumented indentation
              tests performed on high symmetry planes. Profilometry, atomic force microscopy
              and reference grids will be used to determine surface displacements. The slip
              behavior around indents will be characterized using slip trace analysis and
              transmission electron microscopy. Meanwhile, small-scale yielding models for
              sharp indenters will be developed for anisotropic elasticity as well as models
              to account for plasticity due to crystallographic slip. These models will be
              used to obtain load-penetration curves and the evolution of the contact area
              between the sample and the indenter. Finally, correlations between the
              experimental data and basic material properties in single crystals, such as the
              elastic moduli and critical resolved shear stresses, will be established
              through the models. This project will also actively involve undergraduate and
              graduate students in experimental and theoretical research. 
***

