Title       : Prokaryotic Diversity of a Salt Marsh/Estuarine Complex at the University of
               Georgia Marine Institute, Sapleo Island
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0084164

Award Number: 0084164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1002179            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
              Feng Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Hodson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William B. Whitman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A microbial observatory is being established to study the diversity and
              ecological roles of coastal marine bacteria.  The project study site is Sapelo
              Island, a barrier island off the coast of Georgia that supports some of the
              most extensive and pristine salt marshes in the United States.  Prokaryotes
              play critical ecological roles in these marshes, carrying out decomposition of
              the salt marsh grasses, serving as the basis for an extensive microbial food
              web, and driving the cycling of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, and other major and
              minor elements.  Despite these important roles, relatively little is currently
              known about the identity and diversity of coastal marine prokaryotes.  The
              study will undertake a comprehensive inventory of bacteria in the waters and
              sediments of the marshes and adjacent estuaries, using both culture-based
              approaches (i.e., methods that rely on growing bacterial colonies in the
              laboratory) and culture-independent approaches (i.e., methods that rely on
              retrieving bacterial DNA directly from the environment).  Selected prokaryotes
              that play important ecological roles in the marsh ecosystem and are amenable to
              culturing in the laboratory will serve as the focus for detailed physiological
              and genetic studies.  These studies will develop tools to link specific
              prokaryotic groups with the biogeochemical functions they perform. 
              Understanding the diversity of prokaryotes and their functional roles will be
              important for meeting environmental challenges in the coming decades.  Coastal
              marshes and estuaries are particularly relevant environments in this effort
              because of their location at the interface of terrestrial and marine ecosystems
              and the growing pressures they experience from human activities.  
