Title       : The Designer's Outpost: A Task-centered Tangible Interface for Web Site
               Information Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0084367

Award Number: 0084367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268355             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Landay landay@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6846      UNIVERSAL ACCESS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Research has shown that for some tasks computer input is best performed by
              manipulating physical objects.    This project will explore the integration of
              paper and pixels for collaborative web design.   The PI will investigate
              tangible and pen interaction techniques to support collocated collaboration for
              creating information hierarchies, as well as tools and interactions that
              support versioning of a physical artifact as well as manipulation of the
              artifact when all or part of the physical representation is unavailable.   The
              PI will try to better understand virtual representations of a tangible
              information space for remote collaboration by creating a desktop GUI that
              allows remote users to see and manipulate the information space.   He will
              explore the use of a "two-board UI" for hybrid tangible/virtual interaction,
              where designers in physically distant places can collaborate through the
              artifact under design.  A strength of this project lies in its foundation in
              actual work practice, as observed by both the PI's  research group and others. 
              To insure the utility of the prototype system, the PI will conduct extensive
              evaluation of different areas of the system, and iterate system design based on
              these evaluations.  He will have designers create actual information
              architectures on the prototype running in the lab, and will also perform long
              term usability studies by deploying a working prototype of the system in a web
              design firm.   An outcome of the project will be a publicly available vision
              toolkit that can be used for tracking physical objects on a flat surface, and
              which will enable HCI researchers to create vision-based tangible user
              interfaces absent domain knowledge in computer vision.   The work will
              contribute a better understanding of techniques for combining tracked physical
              objects with an interactive display surface, and will also contribute new
              techniques for collocated and remote collaboration, as well as a better
              understanding of the means of interacting with large, physical information
              architectures.
