Title       : GOALI: Adjustment and Monitoring Methods for Multiple-Stream and
               Process-Oriented Quality Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2000 
File        : a0084909

Award Number: 0084909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell R. Barton rbarton@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Drain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique Del Castillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9147,9290,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Multivariate statistical process control research has produced tools that can be
              used to identify when irregularities in production occur and to characterize
              the components of this variation.  The diagnosis and control actions, in the
              sense of process adjustment, are not modeled and it is up to the process
              engineer to interpret and correct causes of variation.  The presence of quality
              characteristics that drift with time (auto-correlation) and that vary in
              similar ways across several characteristics (cross-correlation) makes
              multivariate statistical process control a difficult task. For these reasons,
              interest exists on integrating process adjustment techniques with statistical
              process monitoring tools.  The major components of variation in quality data
              can be found by decomposing the data according to principal component analysis,
              but this is a data-oriented approach and not based on any process knowledge,
              which makes interpretation difficult. The process-oriented basis representation
              (POBREP) analysis uses process knowledge to decompose quality data into
              cause-associated components.  In POBREP, each potential production problem is
              associated with one basis element. This research investigates the thesis that
              POBREP can provide an effective tool for process adjustment.  It has been shown
              previously how POBREP can be used for process monitoring purposes.  For process
              adjustment, the following questions, among others, will be investigated:  (1)
              What are the appropriate statistical models for adjustment that incorporate
              POBREP knowledge?  (2) When is POBREP likely to provide a performance
              advantage? and (3) Can POBREP be applied effectively to a wafer fabrication
              process? 

There are several benefits associated with this research.  A
              monitoring and adjustment strategy based on anticipated problems and
              disturbances can transform the ineffective performance of an omnibus control
              strategy.  The work includes collaboration between researchers at Arizona
              State, Intel, and Penn State.  The collaboration includes eight-month
              internships at Intel for Penn State and Arizona State graduate research
              assistants, visits to Intel by Penn State faculty, and regular visits to Intel
              by Arizona State faculty. There are extensive infrastructure benefits related
              to this collaborative approach:  (1) synergistic benefits of coordinated
              research from four previously separately sponsored NSF researchers; (2) GOALI
              benefits, including engineers in the classroom, faculty visits to industry,
              etc.; (3) the opportunity to leverage results using existing laboratory
              equipment; and (4) to enhance existing courses in Applied Statistics at Penn
              State and Arizona State.

