Title       : Microbial Diversity in Lakes of the Hawaiian Archipelago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0084236

Award Number: 0084236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206873             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maqsudul Alam alam@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The islands of the Hawaiian Archipelago occupy a unique geographic location, and
              thus offer a rare opportunity for studies of microbial diversity. Situated at
              the center of the Pacific Ocean, they have formed through volcanic activity
              that has over millennia shaped, and continues to shape a myriad of unique
              habitats. Very different habitats occur on each Hawaiian Island, but the flora
              and fauna may differ in the same type of habitat on even the same or adjacent
              islands. To investigate how microorganisms may have diversified in widely
              distributed habitats of the same type in Hawaii, the first, comprehensive study
              of microbial diversity in the five natural lakes in the Hawaiian Archipelago
              will be conducted. Each lake is unique in terms of morphology, elevation,
              chemistry and macrobiota. In all, the lakes range over 3960 m (13000 ft)
              elevation and 1150 nautical miles. Four lakes occur in isolated volcanic
              craters, including Lakes Kauhako and Waiau, the fourth deepest and third
              highest lakes in the United States, respectively. Lake Kauhako also has the
              highest ratio of depth to surface area of any lake in the world.  Microbial
              diversity in the waters, sediments and selected invertebrates of these lakes
              will be determined through culturing techniques and molecular tools.
              Preliminary work on only 2% by depth of the Lake Kauhako water column has shown
              the presence of remarkably diverse microbial populations. These studies will
              1). Describe microbial diversity in physically and chemically diverse
              lacustrine habitats throughout an oceanic archipelago. 2). Bring into culture
              and describe bacteria, yeast and fungi from different phylogenetic groups.
              Considering the chemical and physical diversity of the lakes in question, and
              their geographic isolation, it is likely that novel strains will be isolated.
              3). Screen Bacteria and Archaea from each habitat for enzymes of
              biotechnological interest. 4) Establish a collection of bacteria, yeast and
              fungi, and an internet-based archive of data pertaining to each culture. This
              archive will be accessible by other researchers. A new experimental
              Undergraduate laboratory course, "Microbial Diversity in the Hawaiian
              Archipelago" will be established, through which students will conduct fieldwork
              and process samples from collection to discovery. This project will address for
              the first time, a comprehensive microbiological study of a diverse habitat
              throughout the Hawaiian Archipelago.
