Title       : Constructing Nanoscale Molecule Sorters Powered by F1-ATPase Motors

Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0084732

Award Number: 0084732
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlo D. Montemagno   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of the proposed research is to construct a nanoscale
              molecule
sorter powered by F1-ATPase (see illustration below). Five milestone
              goals have been
established as part of this overall objective:
1.) Evaluate
              the physical and chemical properties affecting the binding/elution of
target
              molecules to the collector;
2.) Design and fabricate the collector portion of
              the molecule sorter, and demonstrate
its ability to specifically bind
              molecules;
3.) Design and fabricate the storage portion of the collector;
4.)
              Integrate of F1-ATPase with fabricated structures to assemble the final
              molecule
sorter; and
5.) Demonstrate the functionality of the integrated
              molecule sorter, and evaluate its
performance and efficiency.
The molecule
              sorter will consist of two parts: the active collector and the
              connected
storage units. The engineered nanoscale collector will be coated
              with a-green fluorescent
protein (GFP) IgG molecules, and will be actuated by
              F1-ATPase motors positioned in
nickel posts. This collector unit will remove
              GFP from the surrounding solution, and
transfer them into the storage units
              (containing an oil-based medium) through changes in
hydrophobicity and
              electrical potential at the liquid interface. Connective conduits lined
with
              electrodes will generate an electric gradient, and thus act as an osmotic pump
              to
concentrate GFP in the end reservoirs. The rate and efficiency of
              collection will be
evaluated using fluorescent imaging of the end reservoirs.
              Construction of this device
will establish an adaptable system for
              constructing intracellular-based molecule sorters
capable of directly
              interfacing and utilizing cell physiological responses

