Title       : FSML: Seawater System Upgrade for Bodega Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0084439

Award Number: 0084439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernest S. Chang eschang@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Connors  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for the improvement of the seawater system at the
              Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML), a research unit of the University of California
              at Davis located on the Sonoma coast 70 miles north of San Francisco. The
              laboratory's existing seawater system consists of a seawater intake, pumphouse,
              storage tanks, treatment systems, and a network of transport and distribution
              lines to dozens of labs throughout BML. The seawater system incorporates
              elements of filtration, sterilization, temperature conditioning, aeration and
              mixing.  Growth in research demand for seawater from resident and visiting
              scientists at BML has taxed the capacity of the present system, which now
              suffers from problems with supersaturation, biofouling, and insufficient
              filtration, temperature control and sterilization.  Improvements aided by the
              award will include additional intake lines; increased pumping capacity; a new,
              large, Seawater Clarifier employing degassing, filtration and clarification
              through gravity-induced particle settlement and filtration media impaction; a
              sterilization upgrade using two-stage ozone and chlorine processes to sterilize
              seawater leaving the marine pathology lab; an increase in chiller capacity for
              temperature control; and an expansion of the computerized control of the
              system. 

The BML lies within the Bodega Marine Reserve (BMR); a 362-acre
              protected field site with a diverse set of marine and terrestrial coastal
              habitats. Adjacent subtidal areas are protected and available for study within
              the Bodega Marine Life Refuge.  The laboratory provides opportunities for field
              and laboratory research on a rich flora and fauna in close proximity to the
              Laboratory buildings. BML has well-equipped laboratories, strong on-site
              support staff and a firm commitment from the UC Davis campus to continue
              developing the facilities and support needed by the growing number of resident
              and visiting researchers


Growth in research demand for seawater from
              resident and visiting scientists at BML has
taxed the capacity of the present
              system, which also suffers from problems with supersaturation, biofouling, and
              insufficient filtration, temperature control and sterilization.  This award
              will allow BML to significantly expand and upgrade the seawater system to meet
              current and future needs. These changes will include additional intake lines;
              increased pumping capacity; a new, large, Seawater Clarifier employing
              degassing, filtration and clarification through gravity-induced particle
              settlement and filtration media impaction; a sterilization upgrade using
              two-stage ozone and chlorine processes to sterilize seawater leaving the marine
              pathology lab; an increase in chiller capacity for temperature control; and an
              expansion of BML's Monitoring/Control Network. This last element will simplify
              routine maintenance, increase reliability, and provide remote trouble-shooting
              and control, and will provide options for remote monitoring of Life Support
              Systems in individual labs by researchers using the BML network and the
              Internet.

