Title       : Simulation of Dissipation in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0084581

Award Number: 0084581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adnan Akay akay@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1623,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI's Name, Institution : Adnan Akay, Carnegie Mellon University
Proposal
              Number
Proposal Title: Simulation of Dissipation in Solids
Project Abstract 
              

This project concerns modeling and simulating dissipation in solids.
              
Although common forms of dissipation such as internal damping and contact
              damping have a very important role in dynamics, dissipation is still treated as
              an empiricalphenomenon without a description based on first principles. 
              Dissipation in solids often describes  conversion of kinetic energy to heat as
              in, for example, a sound wave passing through a solid exciting its atoms, and
              raising their energy level. The increased kinetic energy of the oscillations of
              atoms define the heat capacity of a solid  with the assumption that they are
              in
thermal equilibrium.  Simulation of dissipation in a solid involves a 3-D
              lattice of oscillators that represent atoms connected to each other with
              springs. Springs represent displacement-dependent forces that
result from the
              nonlinear potential between the atoms.  The specific research tasks to
              accomplish this goal begin with a one-dimensional array of nonlinearly
              connected oscillators to investigate numerically the conditions of
              irreversibility and equipartitioning. The simulations will then be extended to
              nonideal lattices that include impurities to describe real solids to
              investigate their role in wavenumber (and frequency)
conversion. 

An
              important aspect of this effort will  be to determine the lower limit of the
              size of simulations to correctly
describe dissipation in a solid and determine
              means to quantify dissipation characteristics of solids. The proposed
              investigation will also help clarify the theoretical requirements inherent in
              fuzzy damping by putting them on a more fundamental footing regarding energy
              equipartition and irreversible absorption of energy.
