Title       : National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0084173

Award Number: 0084173
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Hugh M. Van Horn                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87716900           (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack E. Crow crow@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1743      NATIONAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9164,9166,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) is operated by a
              consortium composed of the University of Florida, Florida State University, and
              Los Alamos National Laboratory. Florida State University administers the
              Laboratory as a national user facility, available competitively to users on the
              basis of merit. Established in 1990 and dedicated in 1994, the Laboratory
              through an extraordinary state-federal partnership with multi-agency
              participation has developed unique facilities in support of magnet-related
              research at the highest attainable magnetic fields. The Laboratory is
              structured around four major thrusts: (1) user facilities
developed in
              response to users' needs that are opening new frontiers for science
              opportunities, (2) magnet science and technology developed in partnership with
              the private sector to enhance U.S. competitiveness, (3) basic science research
              driven by a partnership between external and in-house users that drives new
              opportunities in high magnetic field science and technology, and (4) the
              integration of research and education at all levels, and partnership with
              academia, industry, government and international institutions to advance
              research and technology in the area of high magnetic fields.

Over the first
              ten years the NHMFL has put in place a unique range of instruments and
              facilities for research in high magnetic fields, including continuous field,
              pulsed fields, and magnetic resonance research. During this time the Laboratory
              has established itself as the world's leading center for multi-disciplinary
              research using high magnetic fields. It has developed an outstanding
              educational program and built strong collaborations with academic, industrial,
              government and international partners. The focus of the Laboratory is now
              shifting from a primary emphasis on magnet technology and development to
              include increased support for service to users from a wide range of scientific
              and engineering disciplines.  The Laboratory is now building on the federal and
              state investment to realize the full scientific potential of the new facility,
              while the science and magnet technology programs expand the current
              capabilities, develop new magnet systems, and drive new science discoveries at
              the highest fields and at extremes of pressure and temperature. The Laboratory
              provides continuous fields (up to 45 tesla) in the magnetic field region
              formerly thought to be reserved for only pulsed magnets, and reversible pulsed
              fields (60 tesla for tenths of a second and up to 79 tesla for milliseconds).
              The availability of opportunities in magnetic resonance at 900 MHz and beyond
              will be a critical aspect of the Laboratory's efforts to build a users' center
              of excellence in very high field magnetic resonance spectroscopies. The
              in-house science program has been developed in cooperation with the external
              users and addresses a wide range of research areas including highly-correlated
              electron systems, magnetic materials, magnetic resonance spectroscopies applied
              to the chemical, physical, and biological sciences, and the development of
              novel instrumentation to take advantage of the magnet facilities available to
              users.

