Title       : Smart Assemblies for Robust Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0084880

Award Number: 0084880
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan R. Parkinson parkinson@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth W. Chase  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1669,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to develop a new approach for robust design
              called  "smart assembly."  A smart assembly has features, not otherwise
              required by the function of the design, which allow the design to absorb or
              cancel out the effects of variation.  The research will investigate both
              passive and active smart assemblies.  A passive assembly requires external
              adjustment and cannot absorb variation after being set. An active assembly can
              automatically adapt itself to variation which changes over time.  The  research
              will elucidate and place within a framework principles of smart assembly design
              so that a methodology for such design can be developed.  Computer-based
              analytical tools for tolerance propagation will be modified to facilitate the
              modeling and design of smart assemblies.  This will require that the capability
              of absorbing variation be included in the modeling strategy.  Another task will
              be to investigate the possibility of indirect absorption--of locating the
              feature to absorb variation away from the point at which it occurs. This may be
              beneficial for cost or manufacturing reasons. 

If successful, the research
              will provide designers with additional means for controlling variation in
              mechanical assemblies.  Although numerous methods have been proposed for
              developing robust designs, none have focused on the development of features
              which can absorb variation, even though such approaches have been used in
              industry.  The research will provide the design engineer with a methodology and
              analytical tool to control variation when it is not possible in any other way. 
              The proper control of variation in assemblies has a direct link to product
              quality and is crucial in the development of competitive worldwide products.
              


