Title       : Simulation Platform for the Earthquake Response of Reinforced Concrete
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0084598

Award Number: 0084598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaspar J. Willam willam@bechtel.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charbel Farhat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiao-Chuan Cai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Benson Shing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1623,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Motivation:
Reinforced Concrete Structures, RCS, are strongly heterogeneous
              composites, the performance of which depends on the subtle interaction of the
              brittle concrete and the ductile reinforcement. Under extreme seismic events,
              the interplay between the two components is critical for the safety and
              survival of RCS as demonstrated by dramatic failures recent earthquake in
              Turkey, Taiwan, Japan, and the USA.
Objectives:
It is proposed to develop a
              3-dim simulation platform for the earthquake response, SPER, to model
              progressive failure of RCS subjected to seismic events. The parallel finite
              element architecture of FEMS-FETI, which was developed by the team of Dr.
              Farhat for the solution of large fluid-structure interaction problems, provides
              the basic platform for the proposed earthquake simulation environment. SPER
              will feature a novel nonlinear solver using incomplete elimination, and an
              innovative interface model to capture localized cracking and shear failure in
              concrete. For proof of concepts, a RC column will be examined in which
              quasi-static failure takes place in the form of a cascade of events, such as
              spalling of the concrete cover, progressive debonding of the reinforcement,
              yielding and rupturing of the transverse stirrups, and subsequent buckling of
              the axial reinforcement. As an illustrative example on system analysis, a
              two-span RC bridge structure will be selected to highlight the 3-dim
              interaction between the bridge super-and the pier and to showcase the
              scalability of SPER. The long-term objective envisions multilevel substructure
              models of elevated transportation systems exemplified by the Hanshin Express
              Way, which exhibited dramatic multiple segment failure during the 1995 Kobe
              earthquake.  
Methodology:
The proposed SPER software will be based on a
              combination of multilevel/multigrid, domain decomposition and incomplete
              nonlinear elimination methods. Roughly speaking, in these algorithms, (i)
              domain decomposition provides the parallelism, (ii) multilevel provides a
              scalable computing environment with respect to problem size and the number of
              processors on parallel computers, while (iii) incomplete elimination removes
              the sensitivity of the nonlinear solver to localized singularities. 
              
Relevance:
Progressive degradation of RCS is a matter of great importance in
              earthquake engineering. The current design philosophy has moved to a
              performance-based approach which requires reliable assessment of the structural
              behavior beyond the elastic range. SPER is designed to simulate the seismic
              performance of existing RCS which have been built according to older and often
              non-conservative earthquake provisions, and to assist the development of rapid
              and cost-effective rehabilitation procedures.  
Outreach:
SPER will be
              disseminated through a web site which will document the progress and outcome of
              the model-based earthquake simulation software of RCS. In the long haul, the
              intention is to eventually incorporate the 3-dim capabilities of SPER into the
              forthcoming NSF Network for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES), and to
              develop therein an internet-based capability for earthquake simulations which
              may be used by colleagues in academia and the earthquake engineering
              community.
Human Resources and Education:
The exploratory research will
              involve three graduate research assistants from the Civil Engineering, Computer
              Science and Aerospace Engineering, respectively, which will be guided and
              supervised by the four Co-Pi's in three departments. They will work in an
              interdisciplinary environments that encompasses civil infrastructure systems,
              parallel computing technologies, and numerical solution schemes. The simulation
              platform SPER will be used as an education tool in a number of undergraduate
              and graduate courses that are being offered in the Civil Engineering Program at
              the University of Colorado, such as the Design of Reinforced Concrete
              Structures, Earthquake Engineering, and Computational Mechanics. SPER will also
              serve as a demonstration tool for public outreach, especially to high school
              teachers and K-12 students, on earthquake disaster awareness. This effort will
              take advantage of the new Integrated Teaching and Learning laboratory (ITLL) at
              the University of Colorado which has received national attention because of its
              novel approach to learning through discovery.  

