Title       : Research Conference: Chemical Process Control VI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0084707

Award Number: 0084707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Rawlings jbraw@che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               ABSTRACT

PI: James B. Rawlings 
Institution: University of
              Wisconsin
Proposal Number: 0084707

"Chemical Process Control (CPC) VI" will
              bring together engineers and scientists from universities and industry.  It
              will provide a forum for assessing the current status and the future needs and
              challenges in the field of process control.  The first five CPC conferences
              were successful in establishing a constructive dialogue between control
              theoreticians and industrial practitioners.  Common research goals were defined
              and steps were taken to narrow the gap between the theory and practice of
              process control.  As a continuation of these efforts, CPC VI will examine
              recent advances in process control vis a vis the current trends in the chemical
              and allied industries, and attempt to define the needs and intellectual
              research challenges for the next decade.

In addition, this CPC will explore
              the evolving "Researcher - Manufacturer - Vendor" tripartite relationship that
              is emerging as a viable paradigm for the efficient development and deployment
              of novel process control technologies for broad application in the
              manufacturing industries.  The theme of the conference is: "Future Needs and
              Challenges in Process Control."  Specific goals of CPC IV are:
 	
           
              -	To gain an appreciation of the state of process operations and control
              practice in industries                               currently or potentially
              employing, and supported by, process control engineers and chemical            
                          engineers with systems backgrounds.
            - Present tutorial
              overviews for nonspecialists in each of the important areas of   
            
                systems and control theory, particularly emerging and new areas.
          
              - Provide a forum for in-depth discussions between university researchers,   
              
                industrial practitioners and commercial control technology
              vendors.
           - Provide practitioners and vendors with a current
              understanding of the new   
              and significant tools emerging from
              the research community in order to 
              stimulate wider
              implementation.
              Provide a forum for assessing promising research
              directions for the next    
              decade.
          - Assess needs
              and challenges in the process industries, as well as evaluate   
            
              opportunities for increased activity and application in non-traditional   
   
                        industries.

