Title       : Dislocation-Mediated Lattice Curvature in Crystalline Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0084304

Award Number: 0084304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305677             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Martin milty@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Curvature deformations have been previously observed in thin films of
              optoelectronically active polymers and in single crystals showing uniform
              twist.  However, the detailed manner in which three-dimensionally ordered
              polymer and molecular crystals are distorted by curvature remains to be clearly
              established.  Direct imaging of the mechanisms of curvature will obtained using
              low dose high-resolution electron microscopy (HREM).   Samples of organic
              molecular and polymer crystals with a variety of degrees of curvature will be
              prepared by depositing droplets onto solid surfaces, evaporating droplets in a
              column, electrospinning samples into nanometer diameters with oscillations in
              diameter, and by electric-field alignment of thin silicon nitride membranes. 
              HREM images of the lattice spacings both parallel and perpendicular to the
              direction of curvature will be obtained and examined in detail.  Theoretical
              considerations show that by examining the distance between partial dislocations
              that mediate curvature, and by measuring the characteristic distance between
              stacking faults, it is possible obtain estimates of the stacking fault energy
              on various crystallographic planes.  These result will be compared with the
              predicted geometric distortions in the vicinity of the dislocation core as
              obtained by molecular modeling.
%%%
The results of this work will be useful
              in the design, synthesis, and processing of new organic materials with
              precisely controlled nanostructures.  This research will facilitate the ongoing
              development of inexpensive, soft electronic devices.  By elucidating the
              detailed means by lattice curvature is accommodated in synthetic molecular
              crystals, it should also be possible to learn how natural biological systems
              develop useful structures with similar symmetries.

