Title       : Analytical Laboratory Equipment at Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0084143

Award Number: 0084143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60063              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Kloeppel   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Vose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Coleman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Results of more than sixty years of scientific investigation at the Coweeta
              Hydrologic Laboratory have established the LTER site as a national and
              international center for forest ecosystem and hydrologic research. When
              combined with other research activities, more than 150 investigators are
              currently conducting studies at Coweeta. This tremendous site use by visiting
              investigators has greatly out-paced logistical support and there is a need to
              improve all aspects of Coweeta facilities. A comprehensive multi-phase
              facilities plan has been developed to meet current and future research,
              education, and training needs. The 2185-ha laboratory, located in the southern
              Appalachian Mountains of North Carolina, is USDA Forest Service property where
              cooperative research is jointly administrated by the Southern Research Station
              (SRS) and the University of Georgia (UGA). Within the past five years, the
              research program has substantially broadened to include regional analyses of
              causes and consequences of land-use change in the southern Appalachians as part
              of the LTER program.

This award will support implementation of Phase II of
              the Facilities Development Plan for Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory.
              Specifically, the sample cold room and drying oven space will be replaced and
              expanded. Current refrigerators and small drying ovens are outdated,
              malfunctioning, much smaller than what is needed, and expensive to operate and
              maintain. Completion of the development plans will provide the logistical
              support needed to sustain and build the science program of Coweeta Hydrologic
              Laboratory.

