Title       : Community of Excellence in Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0084964

Award Number: 0084964
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomasena H. Woods                      
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4975891            (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Mackiel mackielj@ops.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol T. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia Ginger Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rebecca M. Nichol  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Omaha Public Schools
	      3215 Cuming Street
	      Omaha, NE  681312024    402/557-2400

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Community of Excellence in Mathematics and Science (CEMS) will build on
              the work of the Banneker Partnership (CPMSA). It will use innovative, best
              practice strategies to reform the educational patterns that limit student such
              and achievement in mathematics and science. The core approach for teaching,
              learning, staff development, and community involvement is the base for this
              reform.

Omaha's initiative is designed to complete the implementation of a
              standards-based curriculum and assessment model that will enhance the teaching
              and learning of mathematics and science. The K-12 core--curriculum will focus
              on student outcomes and be implemented by restructured graduate and
              undergraduate professional development in mathematics and science, and increase
              the effectiveness of partnerships among parents, community members and
              educators.

CEMS will greatly increase the number and diversity of students
              who succeed in science and mathematics and graduate prepared for advanced
              studies. It will substantially increase professional knowledge and skill of
              2759 teachers and engage them in selecting and using teaching strategies that
              assure all students will increase achievement. It will use proven methods of
              engaging parents, businesses, and the general community for improving
              achievement and perseverance In mathematics, science and technology. 1t will
              Influence long term changes in the way teachers are prepared for urban
              education at the University of Nebraska Omaha. It will strengthen data-based
              decision making and problem solving skills in schools

