Title       : Information Aggregation of 3-Dimensional Coordinate Data and Multiple-Sensor
               Planning for Agile Metrology and Precision Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0084865

Award Number: 0084865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chia-Hsiang Menq   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of information aggregation
              technologies and automated sensor planning algorithms that support information
              automation of multiple-sensor integrated systems for agile metrology and
              precision manufacturing.  The developed information automation technology will
              be demonstrated using a multiple-sensor integrated coordinate measuring
              machine.  This integrated system consists of a high precision coordinate
              measuring machine, a motorized probe, and a three-dimensional vision system. 
              In the multiple-sensor integrated system, the active vision system will be
              employed in the early stage of coordinate acquisition to simultaneously acquire
              thousands of data points over a large spatial range, therefore capturing the
              global information of an object's surface geometry and feature topology will be
              possible.  The obtained coordinate points (view cloud) will then be processed
              in real time by the proposed information aggregation technologies so as to
              extract high-level geometric abstractions, including feature boundary, feature
              position and orientation, feature geometry, and feature topology.  These
              high-level geometric abstractions will provide the global information that can
              be used either to locate objects and to control critical dimensions when
              Computer Aided Design models are available or to form a preliminary description
              of the surface geometry and feature topology of an unknown object.  The
              obtained preliminary description of the object will be subsequently used by the
              automated sensor planning algorithms to locate the most informative view of the
              vision system, to automatically guide the contact probe for rapid coordinate
              data acquisition, and to strategically control the coordinate measuring machine
              for high precision sampling of critical surface area.

If successful, the
              results of this research will be a significant advancement in sensor
              integration and metrology.  By integrating advanced information aggregation
              technologies as well as automated sensor planning algorithms with the state of
              the art equipment, a fully automated, high speed, high precision, coordinate
              acquisition system will be developed for agile metrology and rapid surface
              digitization.  In addition, since the developed system will be fully automated,
              it will be possible to integrate the developed technologies into various
              precision manufacturing processes for part localization and real-time
              calibration, and for the control of critical size, location, and precision
              dimension.  This work will also have potential applications in a whole spectrum
              of manufacturing problems with a major impact on metrology,  dimensional
              control, and reverse engineering.


