Title       : An Exciting "ERA" for Change: Eliminating Random Arrows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0084836

Award Number: 0084836
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: James R. Oglesby                        
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4771412            (Estimated)
Investigator: William Weitzel wfweitzel@okcps.k12.ok.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy M. Sconzo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              F LeRoy Walser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma City Public Sch
	      900 North Klein
	      Oklahoma City, OK  73106    /   -

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Oklahoma City Public Schools proposes a courageous project to improve
              math, science, and technology achievement for all students. This objective will
              be accomplished by implementing three driving goals, all resting on a
              standards-based curriculum and district wide reform agenda referencing the
              Malcolm Baldrige Criteria for Performance Excellence guidelines.  Goal one of
              this initiative is to enhance the quality of teaching and learning for all
              students.  

This goal concentrates on professional development and will be
              accomplished through extensive teacher pre-service and in-service plan in
              collaboration with four partnering universities, Langston University, Oklahoma
              State University, University of Central Oklahoma, and University of Oklahoma.
              Goal two will refine and further develop the standards-based mathematics,
              science, and technology curriculum and improved curriculum alignment, both
              vertically and horizontally.  

This will be accomplished with ninety (90)
              school-based teams, each at a school site working with a cadre content coaches
              and professional consultants.  Goal three will use continuous instructional
              improvement strategies in classrooms to enable students, assisted by teachers,
              to research and measure their own progress and identify immediately areas of
              accomplishment and measures for continuous improvement.  Special measurement
              tools and techniques will assess individual student progress, strategies, and
              class performance.  All goals will aim arrows at the same target of closing
              gaps in student academic achievement.

The cost share for this project is
              $2,481,250



