Title       : SGER: Molecular Identification of Functionally Significant Nitrogen Fixing
               Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a0084526

Award Number: 0084526
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : January 1,  1900     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75012              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Lovell lovell@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0084526
Lovell
All ecosystems are dependent on nutrient supply and
              regeneration by microbial communities.  These communities are thought to be
              very sensitive to variations in environmental conditions, changing species
              diversity and/or activity levels in response to environmental changes. 
              Important environmental functions may be maintained since microbial communities
              contain a sufficient diversity of species in each major functional group (i.e.
              functional redundancy) to negate species losses.  However, dramatic decreases
              in function that are correlated with changes in community structure have been
              observed in some studies.  The plasticity of natural microbial communities,
              particularly in physically structured environments such as vegetated soils and
              sediments, and the connections between microbial diversity and ecological
              function are clearly not well understood.  
A major hurdle impeding progress
              in this area has been our inability to determine which species within a given
              functional group (such as the nitrogen fixing bacteria) are actually performing
              the vital function in question. In this SGER project the investigators will
              extract messenger RNA encoding the nifH gene product, the nitrogenase iron
              protein, directly from Spartina root and rhizosphere samples, convert the mRNA
              sequences to double stranded DNA, and determine the nucleotide sequences of
              these copy DNA molecules.  These sequences will be compared to those recovered
              directly from existing DNA extracts of nitrogen fixers in a Spartina marsh, to
              identify which of the many species are actively fixing nitrogen. The responses
              of the functionally dominant species to experimental manipulations and to
              seasonal changes in environmental conditions will be determined, to directly
              assess the importance of functional redundancy to maintenance of the
              ecologically important process of nitrogen fixation.  This study will be among
              the first to link the environmental function of a key microbial functional
              group directly to the species responsible for this function.  The approach
              taken here will be broadly applicable to understanding the significance of
              microbial diversity in a functional context and will provide one of the first
              direct examinations of the significance of functional redundancy for a natural
              bacterial assemblage in a complex, natural environment. 

