Title       : Genetic Dissection of Photoprotection and Characterization of NPQ Mutants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0084189

Award Number: 0084189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur R. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
During mid-day, plants are absorbing much more light energy than they can use
              to fuel photosynthesis.  This excess absorbed light energy photosensitizes
              pigments in plants and can cause extreme damage to cells because of the
              oxidation of various cellular building blocks such as proteins and lipids. To
              alleviate this situation plants and algae have developed efficient mechanisms
              for eliminating excess absorbed light energy as heat.  One of these mechanisms
              can be measured as a change in the chlorophyll fluorescence of the cell, or
              nonphotochemical quenching of chlorophyll fluorescence. Using measurements of
              chlorophyll fluorescence, mutant strains of the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
              were isolated that could not dissipate excess light energy as efficiently as
              wild-type or normal cells.  A number of these strains appeared to be more
              sensitive than wild-type cells to high light; they bleach and die upon exposure
              to high light.  Analyses of these mutants have led to the identification of
              both pigment and protein molecules that are critical for the elimination of
              excess absorbed light energy in photosynthetic organisms.  Developing a greater
              understanding of how plants respond to high light and the mechanisms used to
              eliminate excess light energy offers the possibility of engineering specific,
              agronomically important plants to survive longer periods of time under harsh
              environmental conditions, where plants are often absorbing excess light energy.
               This may extend the range of environments in which certain crop plants can
              grow, which in turn could increase the yields of specific crops. 

