Title       : Collaborative Research: Combining Expert Judgments for Environmental Risk
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a0084372

Award Number: 0084372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180339             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Hammitt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1386,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This collaborative project with Clemen (0084383) and Gelman (0084368) will
              develop and demonstrate improved methods for using expert judgment in
              environmental risk analysis.  Risk-analytic models rely heavily on parameter
              estimates obtained using either informal or formal expert judgments.  Such
              methods can be sensitive to two problems: biases in experts coding their
              knowledge into probability distributions (such as overconfidence bias), and the
              typically uncertain degree of dependence in judgments between experts (e.g.,
              each expert's judgment combines his reading of a common scientific literature
              and his own experience and interpretations).  The project will analyze the
              properties of two state-of-the-art methods for combining expert judgments: the
              "classical" method developed by Roger Cooke and colleagues at Delft University
              of Technology and the "copula" method developed by Robert Clemen and colleagues
              at Duke University.  It will compare the methods mathematically and by
              evaluating their performance on synthetic and actual expert judgment data sets.
               In addition, the project will develop improved methods for combining
              distributions based on fully Bayesian methods for incorporating overconfidence
              and dependence among experts, and compare them with the two existing
              methods.

The project will lead to better methods and an improved
              understanding of alternative methods for combining expert judgment in
              environmental risk analysis.  Many parameters in a risk-analysis model cannot
              be measured directly, for physical or ethical reasons (e.g., one typically
              cannot trace pollutants far from their source nor conduct toxicity studies on
              humans).  As a result, parameter estimates are often based on expert judgment. 
              In most cases, the expert judgment is applied informally, as when the model
              builders use their own "best guess" estimates of parameter values.  In some
              cases (such as risks associated with nuclear power), judgments (in the form of
              probability distributions) are elicited from a panel of experts.  However,
              there is at present no standard method for combining judgments from multiple
              experts, and limited understanding of the properties of alternative methods. 
              This research will lead to better understanding of alternative methods and,
              ultimately, to better use of expert judgment.


