Title       : Feedback Synthesis for Infinite Dimensional Systems Dominated by Nonlinearities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0084469

Award Number: 0084469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miroslav Krstic krstic@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines a comprehensive program in an emerging area of control of
              nonlinear distributed parameter systems.  The motivating practical problems
              come from stabilization of unstable fluid flows, ubiquitous in today's advanced
              consumer products and automotive, aerospace, and marine vehicles.  These
              applications abound with nonlinearities of superlinear growth and instabilities
              in the interior of a spatial domain where controls can act only from the
              boundary.  These issues have successfully been dealt with in a
              finite-dimensional setting, and are uniquely positioned to address them for
              distributed parameter systems.

This proposal advocates the development of
              two types of methods.  First, methods based on backstepping, which employ
              either the measurement of the state in the interior of the spatial domain, or a
              nonlinear observer, for stabilization of highly unstable systems with boundary
              controls.  The control action is typically propageted from the boundary into
              the interior of the domain by viscosity/diffusion mechanisms present in many
              disstributed parameter systems.

The second method is based on simple
              feedbacks involving only boundary measurements.  Such feedbacks are in the form
              of Jurdjevic-Quinn feedback laws that add damping for asymptotic stabilization
              of systems with known control Lyapunov functions.  An example is shown of a
              fluid flow problem in which a J-Q type controller is developed for low Reynolds
              number and demonstrate its effectiveness for a high, realistic value of
              Reynolds number, many orders of magnitude higher than the design value.  In the
              same setting, this proposal proposes to go beyond equilibrium stablization, to
              enforcement of non-equilibrium quasi-steady motion.  An example of such a
              control objective is mixing in fluids where one wants to achieve random motion
              of particles by deterministic means.  This proposal plans to dramatically
              depart from conventional approaches to this problem which are all of
              open-loop/motion-planning type.  A feedback law will be shown  that raises both
              the turbulent kinetic energy and the vorticity of the fluid (uniformly in
              space).

Several theoretical advances have been produced in stabilization of
              uncertain nonlinear systems (resulting in several best paper awards and a new
              book on this topic), as well as transition (industrial experiments with our
              control algorithms and a patent offered for licensing consideration to a
              leading aeroengine manufacturer.
