Title       : Collaborative Research: Species Discovery and Population Dynamics of coccoid
               Algae in Itasca State Park, Minnesota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0084197

Award Number: 0084197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60195              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Bailey Baileyc@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Among all eukaryotic organisms, the diversity of microscopic algae is perhaps
              the least understood.  Yet coccoid algae are extremely important primary
              producers in many freshwater systems.  It has been demonstrated that Chlorella
              sp. contributes over 70% of the total carbon fixed in some lakes.  It is
              estimated that as many as 1 million species of algae remain to be discovered. 
              This problem is probably most acute for the unicellular autosporic coccoid
              algae, where a lack of morphological characteristics has severely hampered
              species identification.  These algae are all nearly spherical in shape, lack
              any flagellate stage, and do not sexually reproduce.  Coccoid algae that are
              green in color and represent at least three evolutionarily divergent types of
              organisms: xanthophytes (Xanthophyceae), eustigmatophytes (Eustigmatophyceae),
              and green algae (Chlorophyta).  These organisms can not be distinguished from
              each other (even at the class level) by light microscopy and thus have
              typically been identified as "little green balls", or (usually incorrectly)
              Chlorella spp.  Coccoid algae are present in high numbers in oligotrophic,
              mesotrophic, eutrophic, and dystrophic lakes.  However, because the organisms
              have not been identified, studies of the coccoid algae have been very limited
              in scope.  Researchers have generally assumed that there are only a few widely
              distributed species of coccoid algae.  This collaborative (with Drs. Marvin W.
              Fawley and Karen Phillips at North Dakota State University Fargo, Award
              0084188) project is investigating the diversity, population dynamics, and
              physiological ecology of green-colored autosporic coccoid algae in Itasca State
              Park, Minnesota.  Itasca possesses a high diversity of lakes, ponds, and bogs
              that are ideal for this study. The project encompasses several specific goals,
              including the 1) discovery of new taxa of coccoid algae; 2) development of
              reliable genetic criteria for the identification of coccoid algae; 3)
              establishment of a reference collection of coccoid algae; 4) determination of
              the distribution patterns of coccoid algae in different lake types; 5) study of
              the population dynamics of coccoid algae; 6) investigation of the higher-level
              systematics of coccoid algae; 7) investigation of the physiological tolerances
              of the coccoid isolates; and 8) development of a database of identification
              criteria and distribution data.  Other phycologists working with additional
              algal groups will be involved. These studies should revolutionize the
              understanding of the temporal distribution, environmental requirements, and
              population dynamics of these important organisms.  This project will provide
              conclusive evidence for new, more realistic hypotheses concerning populations
              of coccoid algae.
