Title       : Biocomplexity: Victoria Land, Antarctica, Coastal Biome -- Marine-Terrestrial
               Interaction Across a High Latitudinal Environmental Gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0084037

Award Number: 0084037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61589              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Arthur Berkman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1366,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Marine and terrestrial ecosystems in coastal zones around the Earth are
              particularly vulnerable to local and global impacts from natural and
              anthropogenic sources.  The Antarctic coastal zone, while utilized by humans to
              a limited extent, is among the most pristine regions on the planet for
              unambiguously assessing global environmental changes.   The primary objectives
              for the proposed workshop are related to the interpretation of Antarctic
              terrestrial-marine biocomplexity along the latitudinal environmental gradient
              of the Victoria Land Coastal Biome (from ~72 degrees S to ~78 degrees S in the
              western Ross Sea) as a global climate barometer.  The workshop will be convened
              within six months of project funding at the Byrd Polar Research Center. 
              Participants will include 20 United States and 4 foreign scientists from
              ecosystem, environmental, computational, educational and social science
              disciplines.  Workshop priorities are as follows: (1) compiling existing
              information regarding the components, dynamics and chronologies of terrestrial
              and marine ecosystems and environments - which have been studied largely with
              integration since the beginning of the 20th century; (2) assessing
              marine-terrestrial ecosystem coupling related to sea-ice coverage and regional
              hydrology over seasonal to millennial time scales; (3) assessing
              marine-terrestrial ecosystem dynamics associated with environmental gradients
              and transition zones across the Victoria Land Coastal Biome which reflect
              global climate dynamics; and (4) identifying potential emergent phenomena that
              would provide 'sentinels' for predicting local human impacts and global
              environmental changes (such as increased temperature and ultraviolet radiation
              feedbacks).  Each participant will be expected to bring data, maps,
              photographs, publications and other research products that are relevant to
              integrating environmental and ecosystem biocomplexity along the latitudinal
              gradient of the Victoria Land Coastal Biome.  Overall, the interdisciplinary
              dimensions of studying this high latitude gradient will contribute to our
              understanding of global environmental changes and the role of science in our
              society.
