Title       : An Experimental Study of Biopolymer Reduction of Cohesionless Soil Permeability
               for Landfill Cover Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0084916

Award Number: 0084916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73872              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey R. Martin geomar@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this CAREER initiative is to investigate the mechanisms
              governing the performance of alternative, evapotranspirative cover systems for
              waste containment applications while, at the same time, to develop alternative
              educational modules that will expose a wide range of populations (pre-, post-,
              and college students) to the challenges of environmental geotechnics. It is
              expected that this integrated research and education initiative will provide
              significant contributions through advancements in: (1) basic understanding of
              complex unsaturated flow processes, (2) combined centrifuge and numerical
              modeling, (3) design of waste cover systems in arid and semi-arid environments,
              (4) integration of research into engineering education, (5) teaching of design
              and of environmental geotechnics, and (6) outreaching strategies for minority
              high school students and the profession.

Even though field monitoring
              programs and numerical simulations have provided invaluable insight into the
              behavior of earthen cover systems, the important task of validating predictive
              numerical tools remains, at best, incomplete. The research plan herein is then
              to use centrifuge modeling as an additional source of geotechnical data in
              order to gain further understanding into the complex unsaturated processes that
              take place in evapotranspirative covers. Centrifuge modeling will allow
              systematic control of the relevant variables, combination of weather and soil
              conditions critical for design, and significant reduction in the time needed
              for acquisition of experimental data. Of major relevance is the fact that,
              instead of generic soils, actual soils from two of the nation's most
              significant hazardous waste sites (California's OII Superfund Landfill and
              Colorado's Rocky Mountain Arsenal) will be used in the centrifuge models. These
              two sites are, respectively, currently implementing and seeking implementation
              of evapotranspirative cover systems. Rather than attempting to replicate actual
              prototype covers in the centrifuge, this research pursues validation and
              calibration of analytical tools used in cover analysis. Consequently,
              comprehensive unsaturated flow numerical simulations of the centrifuge
              experiments will be undertaken, followed by a careful parametric evaluation of
              generic prototype covers. This investigation will capitalize on the PI's past
              experience as centrifuge modeler and as designer and numerical modeler of the
              evapotranspirative cover at the OII Superfund site. Some of the major issues to
              be investigated through combined centrifuge and numerical modeling include the
              proper representation of surface flux boundary conditions, the sensitivity of
              the cover behavior to hysteresis in soil hydraulic properties, and the
              appropriate selection of the lower boundary condition in numerical
              simulations.

	Two educational modules, which are significantly related to
              and draw major strength from the research plan, will be developed as part of
              the education plan. The very same two modules will be used to achieve four
              specific engineering educational goals relevant to different populations. This
              effort will attempt to "bring the site to the campus" by developing: (i) a
              Multimedia Case History Series, and (ii) a Field Alternative Cover
              Demonstration. These educational modules will be used to address the needs for:
              (1) enhanced design experience for civil engineering undergraduate students,
              (2) curriculum development in environmental geotechnics for graduate students,
              (3) effective recruitment of underrepresented minority high school students
              into engineering programs, and (4) active outreach to the professional
              community, both locally and internationally. Through implementation of
              alternative, though still structured programs, the education plan will not only
              promote current advances in geoenvironmental engineering, but it will also
              address general deficiencies in engineering education. 

