Title       : Laser-Assisted Prediction of Acoustic Radiation and Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0084723

Award Number: 0084723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean F. Wu swu@me1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Sean F. Wu, P.I.
Wayne State University
NSF Proposal No.
              0084723
Laser-Assisted Prediction of Acoustic Radiation and
              Scattering


Project Abstract

This research aims at developing a highly
              accurate and efficient methodology for predicting acoustic radiation and
              scattering from an arbitrary object. A non-invasive three-dimensional laser
              Doppler velocimetry (LDV) is used to scan and measure velocity vectors of
              suspended particles in an insonified fluid medium over a control surface that
              completely encloses the structure under consideration. The measured velocity
              vectors are taken as input to an explicit integral formulation to calculate the
              acoustic pressure field. This methodology is superior in that: (1) it
              correlates the field acoustic pressure directly to the particle velocity
              distribution; (2) it provides unique solutions for acoustic pressures in all
              frequencies; and (3) it enables one to solve transient acoustic radiation
              problems conveniently. Applications of this new technology can be found in
              predicting sound radiation and scattering from any structure. In particular, it
              is suitable for a flexible or lightweight structure, or for a structure that
              does not allow for conventional contact measurement devices. 
This project is
              carried out jointly between Mechanical Engineering Department and Electrical &
              Computer Engineering Department of Wayne State University. This joint research
              has a far-reaching impact on computational acoustics. It is expected to
              revolutionize the current way of calculating acoustic radiation and scattering
              from an arbitrary object, and significantly improve the efficiency in numerical
              computations. This is especially true for a complex structure for which the
              fluid-loading effect must be considered. Applications of this new technology
              can be found in the analyses of the sound field generated by an underwater or
              ground vehicle. Using this new method, engineers can assess the performance of
              noise transmission into an aircraft cabin or vehicle passenger compartment, or
              vehicle pass-by noise levels. The knowledge thus gained will enable them to
              tackle aircraft and vehicle vibration and noise problems in a cost-effective
              manner.






