Title       : Environmental Genomics and Microbial Observatories: Analysis of Genetic
               Variability, Gene Content, and Genomic Potential in Uncultivated Marine
               Picoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a0084211

Award Number: 0084211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1290074            (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Heidelberg jheidel@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward F. DeLong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan A. Eisen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Picoplankton, small planktonic microorganisms ranging in diameter from 0.2 to
              2.0 mm, are the most abundant cellular organisms in the world's oceans. At
              concentrations of ranging from 10,000 to 1,000,000 cells /ml worldwide, these
              microorganisms consume an estimated 20-50 % of marine primary productivity.
              Planktonic microbes are also biochemically versatile, mediating most of the key
              chemical transformations of carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur that occur in the
              oceanic biosphere.  However, very little is known about the biology, physiology
              and genetics of these globally important microbes - mainly because some of the
              most dominant types have resisted cultivation.  This project will characterize
              cosmopolitan and abundant, but uncultured, picoplankton species using newly
              developed genomic technologies. Specifically, the project will sequence,
              annotate and analyze large insert chromosomal DNA libraries prepared from
              naturally occurring planktonic microorganisms. These data will provide hitherto
              unavailable information on uncultured microorganisms that have a high abundance
              and ubiquitous global distribution. Genomic organization, gene content, and
              functional protein distributions of planktonic microbes will become available
              for the first time. Furthermore, the new approaches and tools developed will
              significantly advance and extend current Microbial Observatory efforts in the
              ocean and other diverse environments. Our approach will significantly increase
              the general understanding of uncultivated microorganisms that largely mediate
              the flux of energy and matter in the world's oceans. Data resulting from this
              effort will also provide the foundation necessary for constructing DNA
              microarrays, designed for high throughput monitoring of the variability and
              gene expression of diverse, globally significant marine microbial species.
              Ultimately, the approaches developed in this research will provide detailed
              insight into the variability, activity, and significance of important microbial
              communities from any site.
