Title       : Biocomplexity: The Evolution and Radiation of Eucaryotic Phytoplankton Taxa
               (EREUPT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2002   
File        : a0084032

Award Number: 0084032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3999995            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Falkowski falko@imcs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Oscar Schofield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Costantino Vetriani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1366,1650,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this multidisciplinary research program is to understand the
              historical origins and environmental conditions that led to selection and
              radiation of the major eucaryotic phytoplankton taxa, and the ecological
              processes that contribute to their continued success in the contemporary ocean.
              The research utilizes a combination of geological, molecular biological,
              ecological, and modeling approaches to address an important and complex puzzle
              in Earth system science. The primary goal is to develop the first quantitative
              models of eucaryotic phytoplankton community structure in the contemporary
              oceans based on paleoecological and evolutionary inference. The central
              question raised in this project is: Why have three phylogenetically diverse
              groups of eucaryotic, unicellular algae been so ecologically successful and
              what does their evolutionary history tell us about the history of Earth and the
              ability of eucaryotic phytoplankton to accommodate to change in the
              future?
The study seeks to test a set of three related hypotheses, from which
              a conceptual model for evolution and ecological success (dominance) of key
              phytoplankton taxa in the contemporary ocean will be developed. Thus the
              research program contains three basic elements: (1) A geological/geochemical
              team focussing on reconstructing the paleoecology at key periods in the
              Mesozoic; (11) A molecular biology/biochemical team engaged in elucidating how
              paleoecological processes have selected specific phenotypic traits that led to
              the origin and subsequent tempo of evolution of the major groups, and (111) An
              experimental ecophysiology/modeling group that quantitatively evaluates how
              phenotypic traits relate to the ecological success of specific taxa in the
              historical and contemporary ocean. These three elements will be integrated
              across traditional disciplinary lines and will include coordinated field,
              laboratory and modeling efforts. Modeling efforts will be directed towards
              hindcasting and forecasting the success of key phytoplankton groups using
              observational and experimental information.
The research program is also
              coupled to a strong educational effort, designed to provide a broad exposure
              and opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as a K-12 and
              teacher training program designed to integrate Earth system science in primary
              and secondary school curricula.

