Title       : High Axial Resolution Grazing Incidence Interferometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0084965

Award Number: 0084965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. Patterson spatters@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funds for the verification  of theoretically predicted
              distortion in grazing incidence interferometric measurements and for the
              development of a method for elimination of imaging distortion, variable
              sensitivity and low axial spatial resolution present in current techniques of
              grazing incidence interferometry.  Verification of the errors will involve both
              calculation of the expected effects of different sample geometries and
              experimental measurements of the distortion. Measurements will be carried out
              using a diffractively coupled grazing incidence interferometer designed to
              measure nominally flat parts. Specific geometries will be created on the parts
              using single-point diamond turning. The results of the verification studies
              will be used to develop a design for a distortion-corrected grazing incidence
              interferometer.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to
              improvements in the design of industrial metrology instruments using the
              principles of grazing-incidence interferometry. The primary goal of this
              research is to allow the design of  grazing-incidence interferometers with the
              ability to resolve features with both small height and small lateral extent.
              Such interferometric metrology capability would allow high-resolution
              in-process metrology for quality control of a wide variety of manufactured
              parts.
