Title       : Discovery and Characterization of Uncultivated Bacteria, Archaea and Protista
               from the San Pedro Channel Time Series
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0084231

Award Number: 0084231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1259667            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed A. Fuhrman fuhrman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Caron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award establishes a microbial observatory at an ocean site located midway
              between Los Angeles and the University of Southern California's Wrigley Marine
              Science Center on Santa Catalina Island to discover and study previously
              undescribed microorganisms.  Marine microorganisms play crucial roles in the
              biology and chemistry of the sea and thus have a strong influence on processes
              ranging from the development of toxic algal blooms to carbon cycling in the
              ecosystem, and thus ultimately on fisheries and other uses of the coastal
              ocean.  The tiny size and lack of easily distinguishable morphological
              features, plus the difficulty and expense of cultivating microorganisms in the
              laboratory, have made it extremely difficult to identify most of these species
              until very recently.  This situation has been particularly true of marine
              archaea, bacteria, and the smallest microalgae and protozoa.  Therefore,
              important details are lacking regarding the kinds of microorganisms present in
              the water column, how they vary in time and space, and exactly what they might
              be doing.  This project will apply newly developed molecular biological
              approaches that will permit us to discover and identify even the smallest
              microorganisms by their genetic characteristics, directly from field samples
              and without the need to grow them in laboratory culture. The different
              microbial types will also be quantified directly from field samples with
              state-of-the-art fluorescence probe technology, and a combined
              isotope-fluorescence probe technology will be applied to investigate the
              physiological characteristics of the dominant identified organisms within their
              mixed natural communities.  Measurements will be taken biweekly for most of the
              4-year project.  Access to the study site will be facilitated by the USC
              Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies which operates an oceanographic
              time series station with biweekly sampling, and also by boats traversing
              between LA and USC's marine laboratory twice weekly.  The project will take
              full advantage of the physical, biological, and chemical data already being
              collected for the ocean time series.  It is anticipated that this study will
              discover new species of microorganisms (based on previously unreported genetic
              signatures), indicate new approaches for bringing these newly discovered
              microbes into laboratory culture (based on phylogenetic analyses of their DNA
              sequences), and thus answer many questions concerning the composition and
              activities of one of the most abundant yet poorly understood groups of
              organisms on the face of the planet.
