Title       : Binary SuperGrating Optics - An Enabling Concept and Explorations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0084710

Award Number: 0084710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmy Xu Jimmy_Xu@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The Binary SuperGrating (BSG) is a novel concept enabling a new class of
              guided-wave devices: wavelength-selective optics, which offers customized WDM
              filtering, WDM coupling/routing, and wavefront and spectral shaping.
              Conceptually, BSG can be regarded as an extension of the Bragg grating to
              frequency space, much like the photonic bandgap concept can be viewed as an
              extension of the Bragg grating to 3D real space. 
The BSG utilizes a simple
              two-level equal-size implementation, turning this constraint into an asset:
              fabrication tolerances are greatly eased, and performance is virtually immune
              to process non-linearities and defects. The BSG concept can readily be applied
              to a wide variety of optical devices and functionalities, with greatly improved
              and often unprecedented performance characteristics.

We propose to build on
              our first conceptual and experimental demonstrations, to develop the BSG
              concept into an enabling technology for a broad class of wavelength-selective
              devices. Using passive channel waveguides, we will implement BSG designs
              synthesized with techniques adapted from digital signal processing, and explore
              the corresponding performance limits. In the active regime, we will implement
              self-collimated multi-wavelength lasers (SCMWLs), to examine BSG behaviour with
              complex refractive index. We will also develop pattern-transfer methods that
              would permit mass-production of BSG devices, facilitating industry acceptance.
              It is our hope that these efforts will produce the broadened understanding
              necessary to take full advantage of this exciting new technology.


