Title       : Mesoscopic Electronics and Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0084501

Award Number: 0084501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred D. Stone douglas.stone@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0084501
Stone
This grant supports theoretical research topics related to the
              behavior of electrons and photons in confined geometries for which the spatial
              confinement scale is large compared to the wavelength but small enough (in many
              cases) that quantum or wave effects are important.  A unifying theme of this
              research is that the confining potential is either disordered or complex enough
              to generate chaotic classical motion, so that one must employ techniques from
              quantum transport theory and/or semiclassical methods for classically chaotic
              systems ("quantum chaos theory").  Most of the specific proposals relate to two
              categories of systems: dielectric micro-cavity resonators and micro-lasers, and
              semiconductor quantum dots.

For optical resonators, the theory of asymmetric
              resonant cavities (ACR's) will be further developed.  ACR's are cylindrical or
              spherical dielectric resonators smoothly deformed from rotational symmetry. 
              The resonances of such systems are non-perturbatively related  to those of the
              symmetric system.  In such a case semiclassical methods are very powerful since
              photons are non-interacting (in the linear regime) and these methods will be
              developed further.  Within this theory, we will attempt to describe such
              effects as chaos-assisted tunneling and dynamical localization of photons.  In
              addition, we expect to make substantial progress on the basic resonator theory
              of ARC's, developing a full quantitative theory of the output directionality
              and Q-value in various different parameter regimes, and understanding the
              conditions of single and multi-mode lasing.  Finally, we will for the first
              time address the non-linear and quantum-optical properties of these resonators
              and micro-lasers.  

For the case of semiconductor quantum dots the problem
              is more difficult because treatment of the strong electron-electron
              interactions is essential.  Here the focus will be on the role of disorder
              and/or chaos in causing interaction fluctuations which are not captured by
              mean-field theory.  Specifically we intend to explore our recent discovery that
              interaction fluctuations play a major role in suppressing spontaneous
              magnetization in a model for a disordered quantum dot, i.e., the interaction
              fluctuations generically oppose the Stoner instability of itinerant electron
              systems.  These effects appear to increase as the conductance decreases, so
              that they may also play an important role near the metal-insulator or
              superconductor-insulator transitions.  In the regime where mean-field theory
              does work, we will study the evolution of the self-consistent spectrum using
              semiclassical methods applied to the self-consistent potential.
%%%
This
              grant supports theoretical research on the nanoscience of electrons (electrical
              charge) and photons (light).  The topics are related to the behavior of
              electrons and photons in confined geometries for which the spatial confinement
              scale is large compared to the wavelength but small enough (in many cases) that
              quantum or wave effects are important.  A unifying theme of this research is
              that the confining potential is either disordered or complex enough to generate
              chaotic classical motion, so that one must employ techniques from quantum
              transport theory and/or semiclassical methods for classically chaotic systems
              ("quantum chaos theory").  Most of the specific proposals relate to two
              categories of systems: dielectric micro-cavity resonators and micro-lasers, and
              semiconductor quantum dots.  The topics are both of deep intellectual interest
              and of great potential application.
***


