Title       : Biocomplexity (Incubation Activity): Impact of Industrial Products and Processes
               on Biocomplexity - A Multidisciplinary Approach with Applications to Fiber
               Products and Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0084102

Award Number: 0084102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mahmoud M. El-Halwagi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Conner Bailey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard A. Clonts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia M. Morton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Industrial products and processes exert some of the most profound and
              irreversible changes on the ecosystem. They contribute to biocomplexity by
              altering the delicate balances of biological, physical, and social systems via
              the usage of natural resources, the reintroduction of new materials to the
              environment, and the influence on behavior patterns and stimulating responses
              of living species. The primary objective of this incubation activity is to
              enable, orient, and integrate the multidisciplinary endeavors of a group of
              researchers to define the major issues, system interactions, critical needs,
              opportunities and future directions pertaining to the impact of industrial
              systems on biocomplexity.  A pool of excellence will be formed to include 26
              multidisciplinary faculty members from Auburn University and Tuskegee
              University along with their associates and students, and leading authorities
              from other academic institutions, Federal agencies and labs, and industry.
              These individuals provide a truly diverse background (engineering, chemistry,
              biology, microbiology, forestry, agronomy, business economics, sociology, and
              psychology) to address the proposed biocomplexity research for the first time
              in an integrated, systematic, and truly multidisciplinary framework.  The
              requested NSF fund along with its institutional and industrial matching funds
              will be used to develop research networking, interactions, and management
              plans, to support a two-semester weekly seminar series, a focused retreat, an
              international conference with topical symposia and published proceedings, and
              three special issues in leading journals.


