Title       : Evolutionary Updating of Model Structure and Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0084573

Award Number: 0084573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133152             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Zimmerman dzimmerman@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1623,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The validation of structural analytical models in practice is mainly based
on
              comparing both experimental static and dynamic data with model
              predictions.
The objective of this project is to develop an algorithmic
              framework suitable
for distributed processing which updates both the model
              structure (constitutive
laws, modeling idealizations, discretization) and
              model parameters (material
parameters) to produce a test validated model
              capable of predicting the
response/character of the structure when subjected
              to a wide range of inputs
and design changes.

The algorithmic framework is
              based on the Genetic Algorithm (GA) optimization
paradigm.  The GA paradigm
              loosely implements Darwin's "survival of the fittest"concepts and attempts to
              evolve better solutions to a given problem statement.
The GA paradigm is being
              used because it does not require sensitivity
information (which doesn't exist
              for model structure changes) and can seamlesslyhandle both continuous and
              discrete design variables.  Several GA formulations
are being developed which
              address the computational efficiency of the algorithm
based on what
              experimental data is available and the model structure and 
parameter changes
              that are allowed.

Even with advances in computational power, model updating
              can be applied to
realistic problems only if a suitable approximation theory
              relating changes
in vibration properties to changes in model structure and
              parameters is 
developed.  An iterative structural dynamics modification
              theory is under
development which provides accurate approximations in a
              computationally
efficient manner.

The major impact of this project is that
              upon completion a framework for 
developing test verified structural models
              which can be used with confidence
in model-based simulations will be
              established.  The ability of engineers
to rely on model-based simulations will
              have a profound impact in a wide
range of areas, including product
              design/development, product safety
evaluation, national security and
              infrastructure assessment.



