Title       : Collaborative Research: Species Discovery and Population Dynamics of Coccoid
               Algae in Itasca State Park, Minnesota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0084188

Award Number: 0084188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin W. Fawley marvin.fawley@ndsu.nodak.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Phillips  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Dakota State U Fargo
	      P O Box 5405
	      Fargo, ND  581055405    701/231-7211

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1089,9104,9150,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Among all eukaryotic organisms, the diversity of microscopic algae is perhaps
              the least understood.  Yet coccoid algae are extremely important primary
              producers in many freshwater systems.  It has been demonstrated that Chlorella
              sp. contributes over 70% of the total carbon fixed in some lakes.  It is
              estimated that as many as 1 million species of algae remain to be discovered. 
              This problem is probably most acute for the unicellular autosporic coccoid
              algae, where a lack of morphological characteristics has severely hampered
              species identification.  These algae are all nearly spherical in shape, lack
              any flagellate stage, and do not sexually reproduce.  Coccoid algae that are
              green in color and represent at least three evolutionarily divergent types of
              organisms; xanthophytes (Xanthophyceae), eustigmatophytes (Eustigmatophyceae),
              and green algae (Chlorophyta).  These organisms can not be distinguished from
              each other (even at the class level) by light microscopy and thus have
              typically been identified as "little green balls", or (usually incorrectly)
              Chlorella spp.  Coccoid algae are present in high numbers in oligotrophic,
              mesotrophic, eutrophic, and dystrophic lakes.  However, because the organisms
              have not been identified, studies of the coccoid algae have been very limited
              in scope.  Researchers have generally assumed that there are only a few widely
              distributed species of coccoid algae.  This collaborative (with Dr. Jeffrey
              Bailey at the University of North Carolina, Wilmington, Award 0084197) project
              is investigating the diversity, population dynamics, and physiological ecology
              of green-colored autosporic coccoid algae in Itasca State Park, Minnesota. 
              Itasca possesses a high diversity of lakes, ponds, and bogs that are ideal for
              this study. The project encompasses several specific goals, including the 1)
              discovery of new taxa of coccoid algae; 2) development of reliable genetic
              criteria for the identification of coccoid algae; 3) establishment of a
              reference collection of coccoid algae; 4) determination of the distribution
              patterns of coccoid algae in different lake types; 5) study of the population
              dynamics of coccoid algae; 6) investigation of the higher-level systematics of
              coccoid algae; 7) investigation of the physiological tolerances of the coccoid
              isolates; and 8) development of a database of identification criteria and
              distribution data.  Other phycologists working with additional algal groups
              will be involved. These studies should revolutionize the understanding of the
              temporal distribution, environmental requirements, and population dynamics of
              these important organisms.  This project will provide conclusive evidence for
              new, more realistic hypotheses concerning populations of coccoid algae.
