Title       : Performance Assessment and Performance-Based Design Metholodogy for Composite
               Construction with Application to Concrete-Filled Steel Tube Structural Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0084848

Award Number: 0084848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome F. Hajjar hajjar@struc.ce.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              In recent years, performance-based seismic design methodologies have been
              developed with increasing success for steel, concrete, masonry, and timber
              structures. However, there are few performance-based design guidelines in the
              U.S. for composite steel/concrete structures.  This proposal outlines research
              on establishing a methodology for performance-based design of composite
              structures.  To focus the work, the research will apply specifically to frames
              incorporating concrete-filled tube (CFT) beam-columns.  In performance-based
              design, critical force and deformation design parameters are used to quantify
              building performance for an anticipated seismic hazard level. The primary
              objectives of this research are:  1) assess seismic demand in composite CFT
              frames through a set of parametric frame analyses; 2) consolidate worldwide
              test results in CFT beam-columns, connections, and frames, and use these
              results to assess capacity of key components of CFT frames; 3) use the
              quantified assessments of demand and capacity for all design parameters to
              formulate a reliability-based performance-based design methodology for
              composite structures, specifically CFT frames.  These frame analyses and the
              performance-based design methodology together will yield valuable information
              required for understanding the seismic demands of composite CFT frames, for
              providing a first step towards comprehensively improving composite CFT design
              specifications, and for accelerating the trend to use CFTs in common frame
              structures.
