Title       : Preparation and Testing of Microporous Glass Membranes for Gas Separations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0084155

Award Number: 0084155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280783             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Gavalas gavalas@cheme.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-0085480
Preparation and Testing of Microporous Glass Membranes for Gas
              Separations 
George R. Gavalas
California Institute of
              Technology


Abstract

         Supported glass membranes suitable for gas
              separations are developed using phase-separated-glass casting techniques.
              Membranes are made by first dip-coating flat or tubular porous alumina supports
              in a suspension of the glass components (Na2O-B2O3-SiO2-Al2O3). The particle
              coating is then heated to react the components into a continuous glass film
              5-10 mm thick. Upon cooling, the glass separates into two intertwined phases,
              one soluble in acid and the other insoluble. Leaching in acid removes the solid
              phase, leaving behind the insoluble phase as a porous film with pore sizes
              varying from below 1 nm to 10 nm depending on the initial composition as well
              as on the processing conditions. To achieve high membrane selectivity it is
              essential to identify compositions that give pore size below 1 nm. For this
              purpose membrane specimens are being prepared over a broad range of glass
              compositions. Such an effort is prohibitive using conventional
              membrane-preparation techniques. In this project parallel processing is used to
              explore quickly and thoroughly a large multicomponent composition space. 
              Specifically, arrays of several small circular membranes, each of different
              composition, are deposited simultaneously on a single alumina disk. After
              thermal treatment and leaching the membranes are characterized by scanning
              electron microscopy and tested for permeance and selectivity with various gas
              mixtures, including CO2-CH4 and combinations of C1-C4 hydrocarbons. The
              permeation testing is carried out serially using a mass spectrometer probe.
              Approximately fifty disks, each containing upwards of thirty membranes, are
              being processed in the course of this project. 
       
         Inorganic
              membranes offer a practical and energy-efficient technology for gas separations
              needed in industrial processing of materials such as natural gas and
              petrochemicals and in fuel cells. One type of such durable membranes consists
              of thin microporous glass films supported on porous ceramic plates or tubes. 
              To achieve good membrane properties it is necessary to bring the pore sizes
              down to molecular dimensions, and for this purpose it is necessary to test a
              wide range of preparation conditions. This necessarily extensive experimental
              effort would be extremely time consuming by conventional techniques. In this
              project techniques for simultaneously depositing and testing  a number of
              membrane formulations on a single support disk is being developed. The
              increased productivity afforded by this parallel, or combinatorial, processing
              permits evaluation of over one thousand membrane compositions in order to
              optimize their separation properties. Such optimized membranes will contribute
              to improved efficiency and economy in separations pertaining to the natural-gas
              and petroleum industries.



