Title       : FSML - Analytical Laboratory at the Caribbean Marine Research Center Facility at
               Lee Stocking Island, Bahamas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0084004

Award Number: 0084004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113837             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Marr   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Jury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig Dalhgren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Perry Institute for Marine
	      250 Tequesta Drive
	      Tequesta, FL  334692766    561/741-0192

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports establishment of an analytical laboratory at the Caribbean
              Marine Research Center (CMRC) on Lee Stocking Island. This laboratory will
              accommodate biochemical procedures and instrumentation for study of the
              biochemistry, physiology and genetics of marine organisms and for related
              oceanographic research.  Awarded funds will be used to purchase building
              materials, research equipment and related items typical of analytical
              laboratories used for biochemical procedures. The new laboratory building will
              1) provide workspaces for scientists to utilize biochemical procedures in a
              separate laboratory from scientists performing experiments with live organisms
              in the present laboratory, 2) provide a clean and dry environment for advanced
              analytical instruments that is not subject to the corrosive seawater aerosols
              found in existing laboratory space, and 3) increase laboratory space for
              visiting researcher and education groups. 

CMRC is one of six National
              Undersea Research Centers with responsibility for conducting undersea research
              in the Caribbean region. The  research station at Lee Stocking Island was
              created in 1984 by the Perry Institute for Marine Science to support long-term
              marine research in tropical and subtropical environments.  The station affords
              a unique opportunity to study a variety of tropical habitats, including shallow
              and deep coral reefs, subtidal and intertidal mud and sand flats with
              mangroves, submerged carbonate terraces, subsea caves, blue holes, grassbeds,
              ooid shoals, stromatolites, and tidal channels.  Using the facility and
              surrounding area, scientists conduct a diverse array of research on recruitment
              processes, coral reef ecology, life histories, fisheries oceanography, physical
              oceanography, marine carbonate geology, paleo-oceanography, and long-term
              monitoring of oceanographic and meteorological conditions.  Because of its
              recent designation as a no-take marine reserve, the still pristine habitats in
              the surrounding area remain protected for research that takes advantage of
              these unique scientific and explorative opportunities. 

