Title       : The Sensitivity of Concentration-Response Functions to the Explicit Modeling of
               Space-Time Dependence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0084213

Award Number: 0084213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142521             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Murdoch murdoch@utdallas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Dallas
	      P O Box 830688
	      Richardson, TX  750830688    972/883-2313

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1386,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research will assess the gains from explicitly incorporating space-time
              dependence in traditional air pollution concentration-response functions.  It
              has a methodological and an application component.  The methodological
              component involves evaluating the benefits and costs of various models that are
              based on sometimes conflicting statistical paradigms; e.g., Bayesian vs.
              frequentist time series extensions, geostatistical vs. lattice spatial models,
              and analytical vs. computational models.  The application concerns the
              measurement of the effects of air pollution on human health, as measured by
              hospital admissions, in California's South Coast Air Basin.  Previous
              applications have ignored the spatial variation in the data, losing potentially
              valuable information.  The research requires (1) space-time interpolation to
              obtain reliable surfaces of pollutant concentrations; (2) exploratory spatial
              data analysis (ESDA) and visualization of model fit; and (3) estimation of
              space-time linear statistical models.  The research agenda is designed to
              uncover and highlight the most promising areas where space-time analyses can
              contribute to policy analysis.

An important aspect of research underlying
              U.S. environmental policy is concerned with the precise measurement of the
              relation between the ambient concentrations of criteria pollutants and
              socio-economic and health outcomes.  The anticipated increase in precision and
              accuracy from space-time analysis facilitates an assessment of several key
              policy questions, including: what are the best empirical measures for air
              pollution concentrations; what is the role of various pollutants in explaining
              responses; are there no observable effects thresholds in concentration-response
              functions; and what is the range of uncertainty in the predictions from the
              various models.  To the extent that, as a result of this methodological and
              empirical investigation, society gains insight into the accuracy and
              uncertainty from estimated models, this research will contribute to the
              refinement of the analysis of the costs and benefits of US environmental
              policy.

