Title       : Central Computer Network at the University of Montana Field Research Station at
               Fort Missoula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0084365

Award Number: 0084365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth P. Dial kdial@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Erick P. Greene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hutto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide funding for a core computer network that will serve as
              the "central nervous system" for the new Field Research Station of The
              University of Montana located at Fort Missoula. The station is located on 100
              hectares of land about 15 minutes away from the main University campus, and
              will provide a bridge between the existing University research facilities and
              the largest expanse of wilderness surrounding any university in the lower 48
              states. The facility currently lacks computers, and thus is not fully
              functional. The computer network to be established with the aid of this award
              consists of a central high-power and high-speed server, which will run a local
              area network (LAN) at the field facility, and allow backup and storage of large
              data files. This central computer will be linked to a network of workstations
              that will allow different users to simultaneously collect, store, retrieve, and
              analyze massive data sets. A second computer server will allow researchers
              throughout the world access to several data sets on the distribution, nesting
              habitat, and reproductive success of birds in North America. These databases
              are among the largest and most important sources of such information in the
              world. 

The principal investigators share interests in avian biology, and
              their research programs span a diverse set of disciplines that includes
              behavior, flight biomechanics, life history strategy, community ecology,
              physiology, communication and signaling, and conservation biology. In addition
              to significantly enhancing these investigators' research, the computer network
              will allow unprecedented, innovative, multi-disciplinary collaborations on a
              wide range of questions pertaining generally to animal design, life history,
              and behavioral activity patterns. Moreover, this facility and associated
              faculty is expected to serve as a magnet for attracting sabbatical
              professorships, summer researchers, post-doctoral associates, and outstanding
              graduate students. The computer network and associated research facility will
              also enhance the already existing collaborations between the faculty, private
              industry and governmental organizations, as well as broad community outreach
              programs and developing educational collaborations with regional K- 12 science
              teachers. With the aid of the equipment to be purchase with these funds, the
              Field Research Station will be fully integrated into the University of
              Montana's educational priorities to provide student-directed research
              opportunities. 

