Title       : Interactive Product Development in a Virtual Environment Utilizing Haptics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a0084876

Award Number: 0084876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy M. Vance jmvance@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a virtual reality-based tool
              to be used in the design of products that are subject to critical stress and/or
              fluid flow constraints.  The primary goal of this research is to develop a
              methodology that couples computer-aided-design (CAD) models with analysis
              models and allows shape changes to be performed in real time in a
              three-dimensional virtual environment.  This tool will couple the CAD geometry
              model to the analysis model of a product and provide a three-dimensional
              environment to allow for investigation of the effect that shape changes have on
              the stress or fluid flow distribution within the product.  A critical component
              to this research is the development of fast approximation or calculation
              methods for stress analysis and fluid flow analysis that will allow for
              immediate display in the virtual environment.  A method of transferring the
              final shape of the product back to the CAD environment will be developed.
              Haptics, in the form of force feedback, will be an integral part of the virtual
              environment and will provide additional information to the participants
              concerning the feasibility of the design and the impact that the shape changes
              have on assembly with other parts in the product design.

If successful, the
              results of this research will lead to improvements in concurrent design methods
              and result in reduced product development time.  Participants from diverse
              backgrounds such as engineering, marketing, and manufacturing will benefit from
              the use of this methodology in the virtual environment because the environment
              more closely mimics the real world than does the traditional monitor, mouse and
              keyboard computer interface. Providing this design/analysis environment will
              encourage the quick investigation of many possible shape changes and how they
              affect the final product assembly and operation. 


