Title       : Toward Model-Based Simulation of Earthquake-Induced Soil Liquefaction Effects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0084591

Award Number: 0084591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148659             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mourad Zeghal zeghal@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jacob Fish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tarek H. Abdoun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark S. Shephard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo Dobry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1623,1636,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A new framework will be developed for reliable computational simulations of
              earthquake-induced soil liquefaction effects on soil and soil-structure
              systems. This is an important problem of great economic implications, which
              remains largely unsolved due to its complexity. Water-saturated sands and other
              soils that liquefy are characterized by particle interactions at their contacts
              as well as with pore water and with structural surfaces. The pore water changes
              in pressure and moves within the soil mass and out of it during and after
              earthquake shaking. When the sand liquefies the particles separate and the
              physics change. Other changes of physics include the formation of water
              interlayers at soil and soil-structure boundaries, instances of nonlaminar
              flow, and formation of shear bands, separation and other localized phenomena in
              the soil and at soil-structure boundaries. In the current state-of-the-art,
              typically homogenized constitutive relations are used in a Biot-type
              phase-coupled formulation. 
The proposed new simulation framework will be
              multiphysics, multiscale and adaptive, with two coupled scales used for the
              soil. One of these scales will remain homogenized, while the second scale will
              explicitly consider the particle scale in the critical regions, such as shear
              bands and boundary layers. The investigation will include strong experimental,
              mathematical and computational components, linked by a systematic use of system
              identification techniques, adaptive analysis techniques, and feedback loops as
              well as comparative visualizations of computational and physical simulations,
              and synthesized within a general framework. Both mathematical and computational
              components will include micromechanical studies needed for both homogenized and
              micro-scale model development and simulation, including treatment of pore water
              and its interaction with the soil particles. This study will initiate the
              development of an operational adaptive multiscale multiphysics computational
              simulation framework based on first principles for the study of
              earthquake-induced soil liquefaction and its effects.


