Title       : Design and Analysis of Algorithms for Coping with NP-Hardness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0084857

Award Number: 0084857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorit S. Hochbaum dorit@hochbaum.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The grant is to study three approaches for devising algorithms and analyzing
              their effectiveness for obtaining solutions to hard optimization problems. 
              These three approaches:  (1) probabilistic analysis of heuristic algorithms; 
              (2) worst case analysis of heuristic algorithm; and (3) (implicit) enumerative
              algorithm design-are often pursued separately, since the techniques involved
              are usually quite different. The first two approaches are often considered
              theoretical in nature, yet they can have profound practical implications.  It
              is proposed that considerable insight can be gained by employing all three
              approaches in parallel.  Algorithm design is largely an ad hoc procedure,
              whether the goal is to devise an algorithm with good performance based on its
              average or worst case performance, or to provide bounding procedures within a
              branch-and-bound context. The grant is to devise unified techniques applicable
              to certain problem classes and expand the range of applications of the
              developed unified techniques.

The research is to address, among other
              topics, a specific technique, which called factor-2-transformations.  This
              technique has enormous potential for deriving constant factor approximations
              and tight bounds that are useful for enumerative algorithms applicable to a
              wide range of problems.  In addition, the technique leads to so-called
              "persistency" results that permit the fixing of some variables within an
              enumerative procedure and thus limiting the search space.  This technique has
              already been shown to have a wide range of applications in diverse areas
              ranging from scheduling, to layout problems, to geometric planning and packing
              problems, to location problems and to generalize satisfiability problems.

