Title       : Reliability-Based Simulation for Performance-Based Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0084590

Award Number: 0084590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Ellingwood   (Principal Investigator current)
              Takeru Igusa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,1623,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              During the past decade, significant changes have occurred in building design and
              construction: the move toward limit states design; revolution in the use of
              advanced computation as a tool in structural design; revolution in the use of
              advanced computation as a tool in structural design: and the introduction of
              innovative high-performance materials. At the same, time, the performance of
              many structures designed by traditional methods and criteria and subjected to
              extreme natural hazards has been judged increasingly inadequate. The problem is
              that in current design codes the prevention of structural collapse has been
              used as the primary criterion of acceptable performance. It has been found,
              however, that less drastic forms of structural damage as well ass the
              functional disruptions resulting from natural hazards can lead to economic
              losses that approach the cost of the structure itself.

Current design
              practice focuses on the characteristics and behavior of a new facility.
              However, the continued satisfaction of the building owner and occupants depends
              on the performance of the building over an extended period.  In the past,
              durability of materials usually has been addressed through material selection,
              detailing and finishing at the design and construction stage. This approach has
              not always led to satisfactory results in service, and is likely to even less
              successful as innovative materials are introduced into building construction.
              To achieve better solutions in performance-based engineering, material
              selection and durability issues must be better integrated into the design
              process. Methods to do this are only in a rudimentary stage of development. 
              

For performance-based engineering to achieve its full potential, the
              following ingredients must be available: computational tools to evaluate the
              performance of integrated systems; relations that define performance in terms
              of structural response quantities that engineers can compute using available
              methods; databases to measure uncertainties in the engineering parameters of
              interest; system reliability analysis procedures to provide the framework for
              managing these uncertainties and quantitative risk targets.

