Title       : Understanding Protein Folding: Quantitative Connections Between Energy Landscape
               Theory and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0084797

Award Number: 0084797
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $750000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose N. Onuchic jonuchic@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1108,1228,9134,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Onuchic
MCB 0084797
		
The success of energy landscape theory and the funnel
              concept during the last  several years has been tremendous and has changed the
              general understanding of the protein folding problem. It has been demonstrated
              that topological effects are central in determining the structural details of
              the transition state ensemble for protein folding. Most of these results,
              however, have been obtained with C-alpha off-lattice models with energetically
              unfrustrated sequences. Although these models are able to predict the
              geometrical features of the folding mechanism, they are unable to determine
              appropriate energetic properties, such as folding barrier heights and stability
              of the native state or intermediates.  In this project, new simulation and
              analytical methods will be developed  with the help of a family of off-lattice
              minimalist models with different levels of detail in the protein
              representation, varying from simple C-alpha chains to all-atom descriptions,
              and various choices of potentials.  By exploring the folding at different
              levels of detail, a quantitative understanding of how the interplay between
              energetics and topology controls folding mechanisms will be obtained. To verify
              the applicability of these models, a suite of different proteins, with
              different levels of complexity, will be studied. Some of these proteins have
              the same native structure but show distinct folding mechanisms.
 
Proteins
              comprise the machinery that controls most of the functions in living organisms.
              The fact that their activity depends on their three-dimensional structure and
              dynamics and not directly on their amino-acid sequences presents novel
              conceptual challenges for studying protein function.  Energy landscape theory
              and the funnel concept are at the center of the theoretical framework needed
              for a quantitative understanding of the protein folding question. This
              theoretical endeavor is now sufficiently advanced that it is possible to
              establish a quantitative understanding of the protein folding problem. The
              initial connections between this approach and experiments, that demonstrate
              that topology plays a central role in determining the folding mechanism, are
              encouraging. By further improving the theoretical and computational efforts, a
              quantitative understanding of how the interplay between energetics and topology
              controls the folding will be obtained.  Such advances are needed, if one hopes
              to answer a central question: at what level will a model be sufficiently good
              to predict the folding mechanism of a protein for which no experimental
              information is available?
This project is supported by the Molecular
              Biophysics Program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
              Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Division of Physics in the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. 



