Title       : Nonstationary Spatial Modeling for Multiple Point Sources, with Applications to
               Enviromnental Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2000 
File        : a0084378

Award Number: 0084378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline M. Hughes-Oliver hughesol@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sujit K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1386,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This research develops, assesses, and provides convenient tools for implementing
              parametric modeling of processes that are driven by point sources. The project
              uses a hierarchical Bayesian approach to an extension of a process
              decomposition model that was recently introduced in the context of modeling the
              effect of point sources.  The process decomposition model decomposes the
              observed process into a trend surface, a baseline error process, and additional
              error processes (one for each point source) that may be viewed as shocks to the
              baseline. This approach allows flexibility and autonomy to modeling the
              individual sources. The Bayesian approach properly accounts for uncertainty in
              parameter estimates when evaluating prediction uncertainty, easily incorporates
              prior information, and is more flexible for assigning ranks according to the
              impact of several point sources. A Markov random field or conditional
              autoregressive model based on a distance-to-source neighborhood structure is
              used for the error processes. A multivariate distribution of weights describes
              the relative ranks of the sources.  Because all models are parametric,
              significance testing is easily accomplished. The project accomplishes the
              following technical goals: A. test the impact of several point sources, where
              exact locations of the point sources are known; B. rank several point sources
              according to impact; C. provide models that are useful for determining
              appropriate corrective action for altering an observed process or for
              optimizing a designed process; D. provide predictions, and appropriate measures
              of prediction uncertainties, at unsampled sites by accounting for the effects
              of point sources.  The educational component of the project involves teaching
              high school students the rudiments of the methodology developed and its
              relevance to major issues such as environmental equity.

The Clean Air Act of
              1970 and its 1977 and 1990 amendments defined a pollution source as "any place
              or object from which pollutants are released. A source can be a power plant,
              factory, dry cleaning business, gas station or farm. Cars, trucks and other
              motor vehicles are sources, and consumer products and machines used in industry
              can be sources too."  The effects of these sources on human health are
              well-documented, as is the importance of modeling these effects. This project
              responds to this need by developing, assessing, and providing convenient tools
              for modeling processes that are driven by point sources. The resulting
              methodology is applied to address a public health and welfare concern of the
              Environmental Protection Agency, namely to determine which nitrogen oxide (NOx)
              and sulfur dioxide (SO2) emission sites are most responsible for site-specific
              ambient concentrations far from the emission sites. These site-specific ranks
              will help determine which emission sites require stricter regulations for
              controlling their impact at different spatial locations. More generally,
              project results may impact the regulation of point sources, the assignment of
              equitable consequences to several point sources within the vicinity of an
              ecological or environmental disaster, and help in determining appropriate
              corrective actions. Furthermore, the creation of teaching modules aimed at high
              school students will improve the readiness of these students for studies in the
              mathematical, physical, and biological sciences. 

This project is jointly
              supported by the Statistics Program in the Division of Mathematical Sciences
              and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS.

