Title       : Indoor Geolocation Science for 4G Wireless Information Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2000 
File        : a0084112

Award Number: 0084112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaveh Pahlavan kaveh@ee.wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0084112
Pahlavan

Indoor geolocation science is vital for the implementation
              of the fourth generation (4G) wireless information networks.  The 4G wireless
              indoor networks are expected to provide geolocation services to locate people
              and important portable equipment and support multi-media services to
              interconnect a wide range of equipment with a wide range of QoS and dynamic
              data rate requirements at a very low cost.  Geolocation applications supported
              by these networks will provide a number of innovative and vital technologies
              for commercial, public safety, and military applications.  In commercial
              applications for residential and nursing homes environments indoor geolocation
              technology will provide for tracking the elderly and children who are away from
              visual supervision, for navigating the blind and other special need people, and
              for locating in-demand portable equipment in hospitals.  In the public safety
              and military applications, indoor geolocation systems will provide for tracking
              the inmates in prisons and navigating policeman, fire fighters, and soldiers to
              safely complete their rescue operation inside buildings.  Although the myriad
              of indoor geolocation applications have already attracted public attention to
              the extent that it has been addressed in several mass media scientific
              programs, there has been no serious attempt to develop a scientific basis to
              evaluate the physical limitation of these systems.

The existing geolocation
              system (GPS) do not work in indoor areas and there is a need for new and
              innovative signal processing and locating algorithms to handle positioning in
              indoor area.  However, there is no scientific framework that accurately and
              quantitatively relates the multipath characteristics of the indoor radio
              channel to excessive positioning error observed in geolocation systems
              operating in indoor environments.

The principal research goal of this
              project is to provide a foundation for the indoor geolocation science that must
              provide for the design and performance evaluation of indoor geolocation
              systems.  Two specific research objectives to be met to achieve this goal
              are:

Objective 1: To analyze the multipath characteristics of the indoor
              radio propagation that affects the performance of indoor geolocation systems
              through empirical broadband measurements in typical sites, and design of
              statistical measurement based and geometrical models for the behavior of the
              channel.

Objective 2: To use the results of objective 1 to lay a foundation
              for the design and performance evaluation of distributed indoor geolocation
              systems capable of locating objects in smart indoor spaces where numerous
              unreliable sources interact to provide an accurate location of each
              element.

The novel methodologies developed to meet the above objectives can
              be further extended to other evolving 4G wireless information network
              applications providing both geolocation and telecommunication services and
              operating in severe multipath environments such as those observed in urban
              canyons.

Keywords:  indoor geolocation, indoor navigation, multi-media
              wireless, indoor radio propagation, angle of arrival, time of arrival,
              intelligent homes, wireless information networks.



