Title       : Collaborative Research: Submillimeter Studies of the Cosmological Star Formation
               and AGN Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0084816

Award Number: 0084816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nigel Sharp                             
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37159              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lennox L. Cowie cowie@ifa.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0084816
Cowie, Lennox L.

Submillimeter Studies of the Cosmological Star
              Formation and AGN Histories

This work has as its goal the analysis of new
              information about the dust-obscured star formation and AGN activity at
              high-redshifts which was recently  discovered with the Submillimeter Common
              User Bolometer Array (SCUBA) on the 15 m James Clark Maxwell Telescope (JCMT)
              in Hawaii. The project scientists plan to extend their observations to cover
              galaxy counts for sources in the flux range of 0.5 to 20 mJy at submillimeter
              wavelengths. They expect these low flux sources to comprise the bulk of the
              light seen in the far infrared background. They will use deep centimeter radio
              maps from the VLA and hi-resolution, hard x-ray images from the Chandra
              satellite to determine the multi-wavelength properties of these distant,
              heavily dust-obscured sources. This data in turn will be used to identify
              objects for further study with the Keck, Subaru, and Gemini
              telescopes.


These studies focus on the properties of galaxies  during an
              interval of cosmic time when most of the stars we see today were being formed.
              In the early stages of formation, stars are enshrouded in dust and this dust
              blocks visible light.  However, very energetic electromagnetic radiation, such
              as X-rays, or very low energy radiation, such as submillimeter (far infrared)
              or radio waves can penetrate the dust and  allow us to "see" the stars as they
              form. The newly developed "SCUBA" detector at the 15 m JCMT in Hawaii can be
              used to detect very faint submillimeter sources, which may be dust enshrouded
              stars (starbursts) or may be active galactic nuclei (AGNs), by using
              intervening clusters of galaxies to "lens", or enhance the brightness, of the
              faint sources. By combining these observations with ones in the X-ray region
              (from the Chandra satellite) and other observations in the radio region (using
              the VLA) Cowie and Barger will be able to sort out the  starbursts from the
              AGNs and determine the relative importance of the two types of activity for
              galaxies in the early stages of evolution.
Funding for this project was
              provided by the NSF program for Extragalactic Astronomy & Cosmology
              (AST/EXC).

***




