Title       : Numerical Nonlinear and Optimal Control Using Wavelets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0084954

Award Number: 0084954
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis Tsiotras   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI's Name: Panagiotis Tsiotras

Institution: School of Aerospace Engineering,
              Georgia Institute of Technology

Proposal Number: 0084954

Proposal Title:
              Numerical Nonlinear and Optimal Control Using Wavelets

Abstract: The
              development of optimal feedback control laws for nonlinear systems has been the
              topic of intense research over the past half a century. The cornerstone of this
              theory is the so-called Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman partial differential equation,
              the solution of which provides an analytic expression for the optimal feedback
              control. Unfortunately, the analytic solution of the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
              equation is a formidable task. Solutions can be obtained only for some special
              cases of very low dimension. Even traditional numerical methods for solving the
              Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation are often inadequate due to the ``curse of
              dimensionality''. That is, the number of computations involved increases
              tremendously with the state of the system. In this project, we propose to use
              wavelets for solving the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation numerically. Wavelets
              are orthogonal basis functions that use the concept of multiresolution.  
              Namely, they are able to capture the local behaviour of signals both in
              frequency and time. Using translations and dilations, they decompose the
              solution space into finer and finer subspaces and the final solution is
              computed as an aggregation of the solutions in these finer subspaces.   Only
              the subspaces which significantly contribute to the solution have non-zero
              coefficients in the final Fourier/Wavelet series expansion. Therefore, given a
              level of accuracy for the solution, only few non-zero Fourier coefficients are
              needed to capture the exact solution.  As a result, solutions can be obtained
              much more efficiently than with other methods. This research will have an
              immediate impact on the area of embedded control systems. Dedicated computer
              chips running the developed algorithms will be able to calculate optimal
              feedback control laws on-line, thus achieving unprecedented levels of
              intelligence, autonomy and versatility for several applications such as,
              automobile control, aircraft navigation, autonomous mobile robot control, etc.
              In addition, the multiresolution property of wavelet expansions implies a
              decoupling of the solutions in the different resolution levels. Therefore,
              wavelet-based solutions are uniquely suited to parallel processing for computer
              implementation.

