Title       : Multi-User Cyanobacterial Resource (MCR)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0084457

Award Number: 0084457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Burnap burnap@biochem.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Louis A. Sherman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 genomic sequence will be used to develop DNA
              microarrays, thus enabling efficient techniques to monitor global patterns of
              differential transcription in this important model system. The project will
              produce and utilize a PCR-generated gene set representing the entire 3168 genes
              of the Synechocystis sp. PCC6803 genome, a unicellular, transformable
              cyanobacterium that is an important model organism for the study of
              photosynthesis and environmental gene regulation. The amplified gene set will
              be arrayed on microscope slides to be probed with fluorescently-labeled cDNA
              produced from mRNA for the purpose of analyzing global patterns of differential
              transcriptional activity. The PCR-generated gene set will have utility beyond
              the primary application of differential transcriptional profiling, because the
              PCR amplification oligonucleotides incorporate a pair of common adaptamer
              sequences connected to the gene-specific sequences. The ordered library of
              PCR-generated gene fragments will thus be flanked by adaptamer sequences. The
              presence of these adaptamers will have two important functions. First, it will
              allow re-amplification of 'master-sets' of the primary gene fragment sets from
              common PCR primers, thereby maximizing yields of printable product and
              minimizing the depletion of the original stock of gene-specific PCR primers.
              This will provide ample DNA for these arrays and allow experimentation, for
              example, with different coupling chemistries for the DNA hybridization
              microarrays. Second, this approach allows in-frame directional cloning of the
              amplified genes, thus permitting the future connection of these nucleic
              acid-based procedures with high-throughput protein analysis. The resulting
              availability of DNA microarrays for global transcriptional profiling will
              provide researchers with a powerful new tool to address fundamental problems in
              many different areas of biological research.
