Title       : Minimization of Health Risks Due to Metalworking Fluid Microbes and Biocides: An
               Optimal Control System using Microfiltration and Flow Cytometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2000  
File        : a0084796

Award Number: 0084796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Skerlos skerlos@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,1669,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of an automated and
              cost-effective control system to minimize occupational health and safety risks
              posed by microorganisms and excessive reliance on biocides in metalworking
              fluid (MWF) systems.  First, the research aims to understand the mechanisms
              that permit membrane-based microfiltration technology to remove microorganisms
              and associated endotoxin from biocide-free MWFs without disrupting chemical
              integrity.  The research will examine the interactions between MWF chemistry,
              membrane transport, and ingredient retention.  Second, the research will
              examine a novel application of flow cytometry technology for real-time
              microbial detection in MWFs.  The research will evaluate the physicochemical
              conditions that maximize flow cytometry performance in MWF applications. 
              Third, an optimal control system will be developed based on flow cytometry and
              microfiltration.  The control system will utilize artificial intelligence
              methodologies on-line to dynamically predict the required microbial removal
              rate and optimal microfiltration operating parameters.

The control system
              aims to eliminate microbial-based health risks to approximately 1.2 million
              workers in the United States.  The system would also significantly improve the
              competitive position of the United  States machine tool industry by reducing
              environmental impact, lowering total machining costs, and minimizing MWF
              performance variability by enabling contaminant removal and recycling.  These
              considerations are of increasing importance since legislative pressure is
              mounting at the national level to compel the industry to address the
              environmental and health risks associated with MWF applications (e.g., EPA
              Metal Products and Machinery Rule and NIOSH Recommended MWF Exposure Criteria).
               Recent studies have also demonstrated that total MWF system costs, including
              acquisition, disposal, and maintenance, are significant in machining, in many
              cases far-outweighing the cost of tooling.  Owing to the technical difficulty
              removing MWF from manufacturing processes, these drivers will continue to push
              industry demand for biocide-free microbial control systems and recycling of
              MWFs to reduce health risks, cost, environmental impact, and performance
              variability.
