Title       : FSML: Laboratory and Telecommunication Improvements for White Mountain Research
               Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  2003     
File        : a0084147

Award Number: 0084147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99670              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Powell fpowell@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support to the White Mountain Research Station (WMRS) to (1)
              improve laboratory resources for modern biological research and (2) establish
              voice and data telecommunication links between its high altitude laboratories
              and the rest of the world. WMRS is located on the western edge of the Great
              Basin with four laboratories spanning an elevation transect that exceeds 3100
              meters in just 20 kilometers. The region is rich in topographical and
              biological diversity and is accessible to research because 97% of the land is
              publicly owned.  With the aid of this award, the Station will develop a modern
              biology laboratory at the Owens Valley Laboratories (at 1,235m above sea
              level), the site of the Station's headquarters in Bishop, CA.  The laboratory
              will provide the essential tools for conducting field research and stabilizing
              biological samples for transport to other laboratories with specialized
              instrumentation.  In addition, the Station will establish telecommunication
              links between the high altitude laboratories (Barcroft at 3,801m and Crooked
              Creek at 3,094m) and the headquarters where there is a dedicated connection to
              the Internet. The new system will (a) provide a transparent extension of the
              Owens Valley Laboratories' local area network to Barcroft and Crooked Creek
              using a combination of wireless and cable data transmission, and (b) provide
              internet and telephone connectivity between the high altitude laboratories and
              the outside world.

Currently, research at the Station includes efforts in
              wildlife and conservation biology, physiological ecology, animal energetics and
              ecology at high altitudes, animal behavior, evolutionary biology, plant
              genetics, and paleobiology. The extent and quality of these research efforts
              will be aided by modern biological laboratory facilities at the Station. Recent
              educational use of the Station has included visiting field classes, programs
              such as the WMRS Supercourse in Environmental Biology, the UC Conservation
              Biology Summer Symposium, and WMRS Undergraduate Internships. Establishing a
              data communication link to the high altitude laboratories will bring them
              "on-line" for educational programs as well as enabling research programs
              requiring uninterrupted monitoring and telemetry of remotely sensed data.

