Title       : Genetic Analysis of Complementary Chromatic Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0084297

Award Number: 0084297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Kehoe dkehoe@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major photosynthetic light harvesting structures of cyanobacteria are
              phycobilisomes, complexes that can constitute 40% of the total soluble protein.
              The composition of these structures is altered by numerous environmental
              conditions, including changes in the wavelength (color) of the ambient light. A
              process called complementary chromatic adaptation allows many filamentous
              cyanobacteria to respond to such changes by restructuring both the chromophore
              and protein composition of their phycobilisomes, permitting them to continually
              maximize the absorption of the predominant wavelengths of light available for
              photosynthesis. Numerous mutants that are aberrant in chromatic adaptation have
              been isolated, based on their color phenotypes, from the filamentous
              cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon. The complementation of black mutants
              resulted in the discovery of RcaE, the first of a new class of prokaryotic
              photoreceptors. RcaE contains a transmitter module found in sensor kinase
              proteins of two component regulatory systems, and a chromophore binding domain
              found in plant photoreceptors called phytochromes. Complementation of two
              different classes of red mutants led to the identification of two separate
              response regulator proteins called RcaF and RcaC. RcaF is a small, single
              domain, CheY-like protein; RcaF is much larger and contains two response
              regulator input domains, a DNA binding motif, and a HPt motif, the hallmark of
              complex types of two component systems. A preliminary model has been proposed
              for the early steps in the chromatic adaptation regulatory pathway: RcaE is
              proposed to be a photoreceptor and act upon RcaF, which in turn regulates RcaC.
              Based on in vivo site directed mutagenesis studies, this pathway is proposed to
              be  phosphorylated in red light and dephosphorylated in green light. Finally,
              recent biochemical evidence has demonstrated that a tetrapyrrole chromophore is
              covalently attached to RcaE and functional studies suggest that another,
              red-light absorbing chromophore may be involved in regulating chromatic
              adaptation. The goal of this project is to add to our understanding of the
              regulation of chromatic adaptation. This will be done by detailed analyses of
              RcaE and its interactions with RcaF and RcaC, as well as through the
              identification of new regulatory elements controlling this process. There are
              three specific objectives in this project. First, the hypothesis that a second
              chromophore, and photoreceptor, controls chromatic adaptation will be tested by
              gel filtration and immunoprecipitation studies. If a second photoreceptor is
              found to regulate this process, a putative chromoprotein encoded by a gene
              located in the genome near rcaE will be tested, using site directed mutagenesis
              and gene replacement studies, for a possible role in chromatic adaptation.
              Second, in vivo biochemical studies will be initiated to test the hypothesis
              that RcaE is a light-regulated histidine kinase and that phosphoryl group
              transfer occurs between specific histidine and aspartate residues within RcaE,
              RcaF, and RcaC. Third, genes containing lesions will be identified, isolated,
              and characterized from currently existing chromatic adaptation regulatory
              mutants using transformation approaches. Proteins related to both RcaE and the
              response regulators isolated thus far have also been found in a wide range of
              non-photosynthetic prokaryotes and photosynthetic eukaryotes. Thus, the
              findings from this work are expected to have broad  implications for advancing
              our understanding of signal transduction processes in both bacteria and land
              plants.

