Title       : Conference on Force Transduction in Biology; Arlington, VA.; July 24 - 26, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2001    
File        : a0084451

Award Number: 0084451
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144900             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Weitz weitz@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for an NSF-sponsored Workshop on Force Transduction
              in Biology, to be held in Arlington, VA, July 24-26.  The transduction of
              mechanical force into biological response occurs at many length scales, ranging
              from the molecular to the macroscopic.  This Workshop will examine mechanisms
              of force transduction that span these multiple length scales.  Or particular
              interest are hierarchical aspects of force transduction, or common themes that
              may unify concepts at the cellular, sub-cellular, tissue, organ and organism
              levels.  Also important are specific force-response events that may occur
              within the cell, between cells, among tissues, etc.  The major themes of the
              conference will be (1) force transduction at the molecular, cellular tissue,
              and organism levels, (2) relations between molecular structure and mechanical
              properties, and (3) relations between mechanical forces and biological
              function.  The Workshop is interdisciplinary and is intended to encourage and
              facilitate communication at the Physics/Biology interface.  Participants come
              from a wide range of disciplines, including bioengineering, biology,
              mathematics, physics, and the neural sciences.  Support will be provided for
              younger faculty and advanced graduate students.  The results of the workshop
              will be presented in a Workshop Report, which will be discuss opportunities and
              challenges in the general area of force transduction in biology.
%%%
This
              award provides support for an NSF-sponsored Workshop on Force Transduction in
              Biology, to be held in Arlington, VA, July 24-26. The Workshop is
              interdisciplinary and is intended to encourage and facilitate communication at
              the Physics/Biology interface.  Participants come from a wide range of
              disciplines, including bioengineering, biology, mathematics, physics, and the
              neural sciences.  Support will be provided for younger faculty and advanced
              graduate students.  The results of the workshop will be presented in a Workshop
              Report, which will be discuss opportunities and challenges in the general area
              of force transduction in biology


