Title       : Gemini 8 Meter Telescope
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0084699

Award Number: 0084699
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: G. W. Van Citters                       
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160357049          (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Smith wsmith@smtp.aura-astronomy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AURA/Nat Optic Astron Obse
	      1200 New York Avenue NW, Suite 3
	      Washington, DC  200053929    202/483-2101

NSF Program : 8241      GEMINI TELESCOPES-CONSTRUCTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0084699 
Smith

This award from the Division of Astronomical Sciences
              supports the operation of the International Gemini Observatory, under the
              management of the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc. 
              This observatory will operate two 8-meter optical/infrared telescopes in a
              collaboration consisting of the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada,
              Australia, Chile, Argentina, and Brazil.

The Gemini 8-meter telescopes are
              designed to work effectively at optical and infrared wavelengths.  They are
              located at sites with superlative astronomical observing conditions, one in the
              northern hemisphere on Mauna Kea in Hawaii, and one in the southern hemisphere
              on Cerro Pachon in the Andean foothills of central Chile.  Gemini's scientific
              mission is focused on fundamental questions, using new technologies and new
              observational and operational approaches.  These key scientific themes
              include:

1.	The origin of Planetary Systems - a detailed mapping of dusty
              disks around nearby stars will enable planetary formation to be studied
              directly.

2.	The identification of Extrasolar Planets - exploiting Gemini's
              infrared facilities and advanced instrumentation to observe directly planets
              around other stars.

3.	The origin of Stars - Gemini's near infrared
              capabilities will enable the direct study of protostars and young stars
              shrouded in dust.

4.	The Internal Structure of Stars - high-resolution
              spectroscopy of nearby stars will enable the observation of stellar oscillation
              modes that will provide insight into the internal structure of stars.

5.	The
              Origins of the Chemical Elements - high precision, high resolution spectroscopy
              of distant, faint objects will allow the study of absorption and emission lines
              that trace the enrichment of chemical elements as a result of stellar
              evolution.

6.	The Origin of Quasars and Active Galactic Nuclei - high
              sensitivity spectroscopic observations of dense gas clouds surrounding super
              massive black holes will enable the masses and structures of active galactic
              nuclei to be studied.

The award provides funds for operations and
              maintenance, for the development of new instrumentation and for facilities
              renewal.  The observatory will also engage in an ambitious program of education
              and public outreach in Hawaii and in Chile, and provide support for similar
              efforts in the partner countries.

