Title       : Impact of Metamodel-Driven Visualization on Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0084918

Award Number: 0084918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297383             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Simpson tws8@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary I. Frecker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell R. Barton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding to examine the impact of high speed, distributed
              graphical design environments on the efficiency, effectiveness, and
              satisfaction of the decision-making process during design optimization.  These
              graphical design environments will be implemented using metamodels (simplified
              models of more complex models) to enhance the speed of the visual design
              interfaces.  The effect of response delay and the availability of a graphical
              representation of a design and its performance on design time, design quality,
              and the design process will be examined using metamodel-driven graphical design
              environments.  Students in both graduate and undergraduate courses will help
              assess various aspects of the graphical design environments within the context
              of three examples: the design of a bimorph actuator for minimally invasive
              surgical tools, the design of a desk lamp, and structural design using topology
              optimization.  The desk lamp example will also involve collaboration with
              researchers from Ecole Centrale Paris in France to examine the effectiveness of
              graphical design environments for distributed design optimization.

If
              successful, the results of this research will help guide the development of
              future graphical design environments to improve design optimization.  The
              proposed research will provide objective and substantive evidence of the
              impact, both positive and negative, of various components of current graphical
              user interfaces, leading to improved graphical design environments.  The rapid
              feedback on design performance combined with graphical representations of a
              design and its performance will help designers improve their understanding of
              the relationship between a design and its performance, making designers more
              knowledgeable and, therefore, better decision-makers.  Furthermore, by
              integrating the proposed research within several graduate and undergraduate
              courses, students will be better educated to work in a distributed design
              environment.
