Title       : Collaborative Research: A Computational Framework for Agent-based Contracting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0084234

Award Number: 0084234
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bamshad Mobasher mobasher@cs.depaul.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePaul University
	      1 East Jackson Boulevard
	      Chicago, IL  606042218    312/341-8000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to investigate and develop computational methods
              for supporting automated negotiation of contracts in business-to-business
              E-commerce applications. Such processes require the ability to negotiate over
              contracts that have scheduling constraints, interact with a highly distributed
              web of suppliers with different capabilities through the completion of the
              contracted work, and deal with failures in contract execution. These problems
              are modeled using a community of self-interested agents with limited
              rationality, each representing a business entity or a decision-maker.
              Algorithms and decision strategies will be developed for effective bid
              construction, bid evaluation, supplier selection, execution monitoring, and
              renegotiation of contracts among multiple agents. A distributed computational
              testbed will be developed and used for simulation, and analysis. The results of
              this research will contribute to the development of general computational
              models for multi-agent contracting. The research efforts will also produce a
              highly distributed market infrastructure with an agent population that can be
              used by industry and researchers for further investigations, as well as by
              educators as a tool for training the next generation of e-commerce specialists.
              The potential payoff of the research is high, given the projected size of the
              business-to-business and make-to-order e-commerce.
