Title       : Integrated, scalable MBS for flow through porous media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0084554

Award Number: 0084554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitrios V. Papavassiliou dvpapava@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry J. Neeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Musharraf M. Zaman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1624,1634,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Fluid flow through porous materials is critical for understanding and predicting
              the behavior of systems as diverse in function and scale as hydrocarbon
              reservoirs, aquifers, separation tower and
reactor units with packed beds,
              filters, membrane separators and even catalytic converters.  Recently, there
              has been a thrust to incorporate more physics in reservoir simulations, as well
              as a
call for substantial improvements in computational capability through the
              use of High Performance Computing (HPC), in order to improve reservoir
              management. This need has
become particularly critical as oil and gas prices
              have fluctuated within one year from the lowest
level of the past two decades
              to the highest. The goal of this project is to develop an integrated
simulator
              for flow through heterogeneous porous materials using a hierarchy of
              simulations.
Current approaches involve the use of simulations having a single
              physical scale. However,
recent advances in HPC have made it possible to
              increase significantly the problem size and to
use more sophisticated
              approaches. The challenge is to combine the individual simulations into
              an
integrated multiscale system that will be able to include all physical
              scales and will self-adjust in
accordance with the input data. Emphasis will
              be placed on the portability, scalability, efficiency
and extensibility of the
              final product. The proposed simulator will be an improved prediction tool
for
              hydrocarbon reservoir management and will be ready for use on integrated grid
              architectures,
as they become available.

Flow through porous media is a
              multi-scale phenomenon. Microscopic scale simulation, based on
Lattice
              Boltzmann Methods, will be used for the direct simulation of flow through
              porous materials. Microtomographic digital images of rock samples will be used
              to realistically
represent the spatial domain subjected to flow, taking
              advantage of the flexibility of Lattice
Boltzmann Methods. At the mesoscopic
              scale, stochastic methods will be used for the systematic
isolation and study
              of the effects of microscopic features of rock structure on the flow field.
              The
stochastic approach will also be used to develop a method for rock
              property characterization. A
macroscopic simulation, based on conventional
              finite difference methods, will be used to test the
impact of modified flow
              models on hydrocarbon production at reservoir scale. The
              macroscopic
simulation will incorporate the behavior of production/injection
              wells (which form singularities in
a reservoir model) over the life of a
              reservoir. It will also incorporate coupling of flow with
geomechanics
              (porosity-dependent permeability and non-Darcy coefficients). The
              education
effort resulting from this project will emphasize the training of
              undergraduate students in the use
of HPC resources.

This research will: (i)
              improve our understanding of the fundamental flow mechanisms;
(ii) update the
              model for non-Darcy flow through anisotropic porous materials; and (iii)
              integrate
the presence of discontinuities, such as wells and fractures, in the
              simulation. The innovations of
the proposed study include: (a) use of
              state-of-the-art simulations at different scales; (b) use of
experimentally
              measured quantities to deduce the properties of the porous medium and to
              update
flow models; (c) integration of the individual components of a set of
              prototype software into a
seamless simulator for industrial use; and (d)
              application of a hybrid of shared-memory and
distributed parallelism to
              achieve scalability on a variety of HPC architectures.  The research project
              will be extremely valuable for the educational experience of the graduate
              students involved. Its educational aspect will also involve the incorporation
              of HPC  applications in the undergraduate curricula of three Departments and
              the development of research projects for Research Experience for
              Undergraduates. It will, thus, prepare a large group of the technical workforce
              of our State to the useful aspects of HPC applications and to interact with HPC
              infrastructure.

