Title       : Rotary-Linear Hybrid Axes for Meso-Scale Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0084981

Award Number: 0084981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Trumper trumper@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sanjay E. Sarma  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop novel hybrid machine tool axes as key components of
              new manufacturing machines for meso-scale parts.  Hybrid means that some of the
              axes of motion of the machine are compounded within a single component. 
              Meso-scale parts are defined as having a size on the order of fractions of a
              millimeter up to centimeters, and thus falling between the domains of
              microfabrication and standard machining.  On the small end of the scale, such
              parts include micromechanical devices; on the large end of the scale are
              elements such as dental restorations and turbine blades.  The project
              participants will design and build a promising hybrid axis in which a
              cylindrical element is driven in both rotation and linear translation.  This
              hybridization allows the minimization of machine inertias and thereby the
              optimization of acceleration in order to produce parts rapidly and accurately. 
              Such a hybrid axis can form the core of novel machines for fabricating
              meso-scale parts and thus catalyze the development of the manufacturing
              infrastructure for such devices.  In developing this axis, the project
              participants will design, prototype, and test the mechanical actuation,
              sensing, and control elements of the device.

One challenging meso-scale
              application is the cutting or grinding of metal and ceramic dental
              restorations.  A project objective is to make it possible to rapidly produce
              the complex geometries of these elements with a 5-axis machine incorporating
              two of the proposed hybrid axes, one carrying the part, the other carrying the
              cutting tool.  This proposed machine will be designed in detail, and selected
              components fabricated and tested in order to verify the value of the developed
              concepts.  The project participants will work with researchers and
              manufacturers in the machine tool and dental fields in order to see the
              developed concepts utilized in practical devices and thereby have a significant
              impact on these and other industries.
