Title       : Automated Design of Mechatronic Systems Using Bond Graphs and Genetic
               Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0084934

Award Number: 0084934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik D. Goodman goodman@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kisung Seo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald C. Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research grant supports exploration of potential methods of using genetic
              programming to allow design of mechatronic systems, based on joining multiport
              models of devices.  The research objectives are:  (1) to find a problem
              representation and set of operators which will, with high probability, allow
              the genetic programming system to generate multiport models of mixed-domain
              dynamic systems that satisfy causality constraints, (2) to create efficient
              ways of evaluating model performance relative to the problem's functional
              design specifications, (3) to conduct experiments to improve the globality of
              the search of the design space and the speed with which good designs are found,
              and (4) to determine the capabilities and limitations of the automated design
              system created.  The desired output of the system will be sets of candidate
              solutions among which the design engineer can choose according to criteria
              specific to the implementation domain.  

The results of this research will
              ultimately lead to improved design capabilities for new mechatronic devices and
              systems, and will, in the shorter term, provide guidance for potential
              implementors of commercial mechatronic design automation systems.  These
              results will be usable across the spectrum of applications of mechatronic
              systems, in such industries as automotive, computer peripherals, and durable
              goods (appliances such as washing machines, refrigerators, etc.).  An excellent
              example is the automotive industry, which is greatly expanding its use of
              mathematical modeling in the design of subsystems and vehicles.  Automotive
              applications for the multiport-modeling/genetic-programming approach will
              include such areas as vibration reduction, increased efficiency in power
              transmission, and perhaps also entirely new and patentable applications of
              mechatronics.

