Title       : Seismic Performance and Design of Reinforced Soil Structures with Reference to
               Lessons Learned from the 1999 Earthquakes of Taiwan and Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0084449

Award Number: 0084449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69233              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hoe I. Ling Ling@civil.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dov Leshchinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
CMS0084449
Title: "Seismic Performance and Design of Reinforced Soil
              Structures with Reference to Lessons Learned from the 1999 Earthquakes of
              Taiwan and Turkey"
PI: H. I. Ling
Institution: Columbia
              University

Abstract:
Reinforced soil structures are an emerging technology
              that allows rapid and economic construction of retaining walls, slopes and
              embankments.  Many reinforced soil structures are constructed in difficult
              terrain or in urban areas where space is limited.  The performance of
              reinforced soil structures under normal loading conditions is known to be
              satisfactory.  During the Northridge and Kobe earthquakes their performance was
              better than conventional gravity and cantilever retaining walls. However,
              during the Northridge Earthquake, the reinforced soil structures were at a
              distance from the epicenter and thus they were not subjected to high seismic
              loading.  Reinforced soil structures constructed in Japan have rigid facing and
              they are different from those present in other parts of the world.  In
              particular, reinforced soil structures with modular-block facing, commonly used
              in the United States, Turkey and Taiwan are not constructed in Japan.
              Therefore, the earthquakes of Taiwan and Turkey provided a unique opportunity
              to examine the performance of versions of reinforced soil structures commonly
              found in the United States. 

The PIs visited the earthquake-affected areas
              in Taiwan and Turkey to identify damaged reinforced soil structures which are
              similar to the U.S. proprietary system.  The proposed research involves
              investigating the mechanism of failure through collaboration with researchers
              and practicing engineers from Taiwan and Turkey.  The proposed research aims to
              achieve the following objectives within the given one-year time
              framework:

1. To assess the performance of reinforced soil structures during
              the earthquakes of Taiwan and Turkey.

2. To obtain the technical details of
              the reinforced soil structures in the earthquake-affected areas, including wall
              configuration, reinforcement layout, soil and reinforcement properties, and
              earthquake characteristics.

3. To evaluate simplified seismic analysis
              procedures for the identified reinforced soil structures. 

4. To organize an
              international workshop on the issues of seismic design of reinforced soil
              structures. 

5. To suggest improvements to current design procedures based
              on the results of study and workshop.

The failure of reinforced soil
              structures during recent earthquakes may indicate that existing design
              procedures are inadequate. Alternatively, it might be a result of improper
              design/construction.  Thus, the proposed research will lead to significant
              technological benefits to researchers and practicing engineers in the United
              Staes and worldwide.


