Title       : A Microbial Observatory in the Duke Forest: Exploring Fungal Diversity in
               Response to Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a0084207

Award Number: 0084207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411854             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rytas Vilgalys fungi@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In many large-scale ecological studies the diversity of fungi and their roles in
              ecosystem function and change are almost totally ignored.  Recent advances in
              the fields of DNA sequencing, bioinformatics, and phylogenetic analysis have
              made possible many advances in studies of microbial diversity.  A system for
              performing routine surveys of fungal biodiversity in Duke Forest (Durham, NC)
              based on molecular systematics is being developed. The Duke Forest lies near
              the eastern edge of the North Carolina piedmont plateau and supports diverse
              plant species (over100 tree species), soils, and land use conditions and
              research projects currently underway include surveys of arthropod diversity,
              studies of the effects of environmental change including elevated carbon
              dioxide, different land use histories, and the dynamics of naturally evolving
              forest communities.  The Duke Forest Mycological Observatory (DFMO) will permit
              the study of those fungal communities which form the core group of saprophytic
              and mycorrhizal fungi in temperate forests.  As a pilot project, plots
              representing a range of forest types will be surveyed in order to establish a
              baseline data set of basidiomycete diversity from the forest.  Plots located
              within several long-term studies including the recently initiated Free-Air
              Carbon dioxide enrichment (FACE) experiment will next be studied.  Early data
              from the FACE study indicate shifts in the microbial population in the soil,
              but as yet there have been no surveys of microbial diversity by FACE.  Shifts
              in the abundance, activity and diversity of mycorrhizal fungi are particularly
              likely (in response to a greater supply of root exudates in the FACE plots) and
              may play an important role in long term forest/ecosystem health and stability. 
              This study will develop a DNA-sequence database framework (based on ribosomal
              ITS sequences) linked with sites within the Duke Forest. Extensive molecular
              databases are already available for most fungal groups, making it possible to
              identify isolates to the genus in most instances and often to the species
              level. The focus will be on soil, litter and mycorrhizal samples from these
              sites, which will provide a more unbiased estimate of microbial diversity than
              estimates based 'above ground' sampling of fruit bodies or cultivable
              diversity.  These data will then form a basis for the long term monitoring of
              fungal microbial diversity within the Duke Forest and FACE site.  This project
              will provide baseline data about soil-inhabiting, mycorrhizal, soil, and
              litter-fungi from a variety of habitats.  This project will also be one of the
              first studies of fungal community structure to assess the impacts of various
              environmental variables such as increases in carbon dioxide concentration on
              fungal diversity.
