Title       : Nanocrystalline Thin Films of New Ultra-Hard Borides for Microelectromechanical
               Systems (MEMS) and Tooling Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a0084969

Award Number: 0084969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Palaniappa A. Molian molian@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this grant is to develop a fundamental understanding of
              synthesizing nanocrystalline thin films of ultra-hard borides with
              predictability and reproducibility.  Ultra-hard borides, recently discovered by
              the co-Principal Investigator, are the new, second hardest materials on earth
              with a projected cost of manufacture approximately 10% of the cost of diamond
              and cubic BN.  Research will focus on the development of a novel Ti:Sapphire
              femtosecond (fs) pulsed laser deposition (PLD) technique for preparing
              ultra-hard boride thin films on silicon and cemented carbide substrates for
              Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) and hard turning applications
              respectively.  The films will be compared to those deposited by conventional
              nanosecond (ns) PLD.  The research will investigate the laser-boride
              interactions as a function of pulse width and the interactions of plasma with
              the surface of substrate that affect the evolution of structure, composition,
              and growth of films.  Nanoindentation and scratch tests will be used for
              mechanical characterization that includes hardness, Young's modulus, and
              adherence.  Hard coating applications in tools and MEMS will be
              explored.

The research has potential for enormous payoffs.  This pioneering
              work will set the stage and serve as a catalyst for rapid and innovative
              advances in the new boride materials for numerous tool and hard coating
              applications including bulk cutting tools, hard and erosion resistant coatings,
              wear-resistant electrical switch contacts, and conductive thin films for MEMS. 
              In addition, these coatings can serve as high-temperature solid lubricants. 
              The integrated experimental and analytical approach is expected to transfer the
              next-generation hard material as well as advanced laser process technology to
              industry and supply high-quality products to manufacturing industries. 
              Graduate and undergraduate students from both Mechanical Engineering and
              Materials Science and Engineering will benefit from hands-on research
              experience in preparation of nanocrystalline borides, advanced laser deposition
              of thin films, advanced machining, and MEMS fabrication.
