Title       : GOALI: Constituitive Modeling for Polycrystalline Aluminum Alloy Extrusions and
               Application to Hydroforming of Thin-Walled Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a0084992

Award Number: 0084992
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhang Pourboghrat pourbogh@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederic Barlat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In these Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project,
              the investigators will jointly develop and use polycrystalline and
              phenomenological constitutive models for hydroforming process simulations of
              aluminum alloy thin-walled extrusions.  The predictive capability of the
              phenomenological models will be fine-tuned and validated with a combination of
              polycrystalline modeling results and experiments.  Hydroforming of thin-walled
              hollow extrusions has become popular with automotive and materials industries
              for making complex structural components, such as instrument panel beam and
              engine cradle.  The main advantage of tube hydroforming, in comparison with
              conventional stamping, is the potential to replace an assembly of parts by only
              one component.  This leads to a reduction of the number of welding operations
              and to substantial gains in manufacturing costs. Components manufactured from
              aluminum alloy tubes would translate into significant weight saving for the
              structure as well.  In order to optimize the conditions for a given
              hydroforming operation, numerical simulations of the process are carried out.
              However, realistic predictions can be achieved only with accurate mathematical
              descriptions of the material behavior (constitutive models), specifically for
              aluminum alloy tubes.  To date, most of the hydroformed parts are made with
              steel and very little research has been performed on hydroforming of aluminum
              alloy tubes.

The ultimate goal of the project is to develop the most
              accurate phenomenological equations and a set of guidelines to provide, within
              the constraints existing in industrial environments, the best possible material
              description for hydroforming of aluminum alloy thin-walled extrusions.  This
              should accelerate the proliferation of hydroformed parts for these materials.

