Title       : Biocomplexity Incubation Activity: Complex Systems: Cities in Their Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0084341

Award Number: 0084341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99694              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Rockwell Richard.Rockwell@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman W. Garrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Gilmour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1366,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Human-managed systems are arguably the most complex and fragile of complex
              systems.  Usually poor in biodiversity, they display most other characteristics
              of complex systems, including feedback loops, step functions and other
              nonlinearities, surprises, and unpredictability.  The most complex
              human-managed system is the modern city of the developed world.  Its complexity
              may well be of benefit to the environment; more complex cities may prove to be
              even more benign.  The rapidly growing cities of the developing world, in
              contrast, are often insufficiently complex, lacking even basic elements of
              infrastructure such as water and sewage systems.  Their vulnerability as forms
              of human organization and the vulnerability of their residents to poor quality
              of life, disease, and death are often extremely high, and are likely to be
              severely tested by environmental changes at the local, regional, and global
              levels.  This Biocomplexity Incubation Activity award will support work in
              association with the International Human Dimensions Programme on Global
              Environmental Change (IHDP) to develop an international, interdisciplinary
              research project under the auspices of the IHDP-Industrial Transformations core
              research program.  That project will address the issue of whether and how it
              would be possible to decouple the improvement of human well-being from the
              negative environmental effects of the production and consumption systems that
              sustain life in cities.  Noting that humankind is now a majority urban species
              and will be even more so within 50 years, the project will focus on the form of
              human social organization that will probably have the greatest impact on the
              environment at local, regional, and global scales throughout the next century. 
              It will design an implementation plan for interdisciplinary research on cities
              as complex systems, drawing upon insights from other disciplines about forms of
              biocomplexity.  It will give special attention to urbanization in the
              developing world, where most of the world's megacities are now being built, and
              particularly to the Asia-Pacific region, because of the rapid rates of
              urbanization in countries of the region and the large population size of many
              countries in the region.  The project will initially focus on two subsystems
              through which humans have large effects upon their environments: the subsystem
              by which humans utilize water, affect the hydrological cycle, and produce
              pollution of various forms, and the subsystem by which humans achieve mobility
              of goods and persons, usually consuming substantial amounts of energy in the
              process and emitting several forms of environmentally active substances.  Each
              subsystem may contain tractable solutions to the problem of combining the
              improvement of human well being with the reduction of human impacts on the
              environment.  The incubation project will provide for capacity building through
              workshops, small seed grants, international collaboration, and the production
              of an implementation plan.  It also will facilitate the involvement of
              interested investigators from the natural and social sciences and engineering
              will be sought.

