Title       : FSML: Data Management and Communication Enhancement at San Diego State
               University Field Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0084157

Award Number: 0084157
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39130              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy S. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Reynolds  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sedra S. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Walter C. Oechel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award supports purchase and installation of computer and communications
              equipment and software to be used for data management and communications at two
              San Diego State University (SDSU) field stations, Santa Margarita Ecological
              Reserve (SMER) and Sky Oaks Biological Field Station (Sky Oaks). Currently
              there is a wealth of data regularly being collected instrumentation at the SDSU
              Biological Field Stations for both research and educational programs.  This
              includes weather data from both Sky Oaks and SMER, eddy covariance and 
              micrometeorology data from Sky Oaks, and other data collected from biological
              monitoring programs at the two sites. The biological monitoring activities have
              been expanded so that, through time, the data from these field stations can be
              points of comparison for regional conservation plans.  The improvements
              supported by this award will allow the data from Sky Oaks and from SMER to be
              integrated and sent to a main database server at SDSU where it will be
              available through the internet to researchers and educators at other
              institutions. 
The two SDSU field stations are located 160 km north of San
              Diego, but have distinct mixed-chaparral Mediterranean vegetation and differ in
              elevation and marine influences (temperature, rainfall) as well as slope and
              aspect. These differences produce measurable variations in microclimate, solar
              radiation, carbon dioxide concentrations and various other environmental
              factors that are reflected in plant and animal communities.  The data obtained
              at the stations is of use in monitoring of global change, and in educational
              efforts related to global change and physiological ecology.

