Title       : FSML Planning for a Biological Field Station at Milford Point
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2000   
File        : a0084126

Award Number: 0084126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Milan G. Bull   (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Milton  (Principal Investigator former)
              David T. Osgood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johan C. Varekamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Julian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randolph M. Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Connecticut Audubon Soc
	      
	      Fairfield, CT  06430    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With this award, the Connecticut Audubon Coastal Center (CACC), which
              administers the Milford Point Ecosystem Project (MPEF), will undertake a
              year-long systematic, comprehensive planning program. This program is a major
              step towards achieving the five-year CACC goal to develop a model field station
              for the study of coastal ecosystems at Milford Point. To initiate the planning
              process, the CACC, and its Science Advisory Committee (SAC), has identified
              three objectives:
1. Upgrade data management and communications systems to
              state-of-the-art status in order to foster strong multidisciplinary research
              and education programs.
2. Identify the needs of institutes of higher
              education to conduct multidisciplinary ecosystem field research and training at
              CACC facilities; design and implement activities to fill needs
3. Create a
              framework for partnering in regional research that will draw a broad spectrum
              of scientists to the Center for research and for research-based education
The
              CACC will build on its strong foundation and will use its 32-member expert SAC
              (section IIIA) to conduct a dynamic, yet logical, planning process to meet
              these objectives. Activities and products include:
1. Four strategic planning
              workshops. Each workshop will include invited
consultants, will concentrate on
              a single aspect, and will produce a product aimed at
accomplishing the
              five-year goal: a) assessment of communications and data management systems and
              of scientific equipment needed to attract and foster interaction among an array
              of users; prioritized recommendations for next steps; b) development of a
              series of training workshops and research programs for a multidisciplinary
              ecosystem approach, with a plan for their implementation; c) guidelines for
              seeking funding opportunities for research and training and a plan of
              development; d) framework and five-year plan for building regional partnerships
              with outside scientific researchers and research facilities.
2. Activities
              think tank. An outline of activities to complement educators' course offerings
              will be produced at this meeting.
3. Best practices field study. Innovative
              models for the integration of estuarine research and education will be
              explored. In addition, managers and research directors from leading field
              station sites will be invited to assist the CACC in developing long-term plans
              for scientific research and training.
4. Communications plan. A plan will be
              developed to inform potential users about
MPEP and the use of the CACC as a
              field station. 

The CACC is dedicated to salt marsh, coastal and estuarine
              research.  Because of its location at the mouth of the Housatonic River, next
              to a new and rapidly accreting salt marsh, CACC is well situated to provide
              access for research and training in coastal ecology.  In addition, the CACC has
              a strong associations with teachers, colleges, universities and school systems
              in its own and adjacent counties and along the Housatonic River. This
              professional infrastructure, along with CACC's unique location, has the
              potential for making a significant impact on field research and training in
              urban and suburban coastal ecology.

