Title       : A Tropical Microbial Observatory: Collaborative Research on on Microbial
               Diversity in Caterpillars.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0084222

Award Number: 0084222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $838049             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Goodman Rgoodman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jon C. Clardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Holly M. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jo E. Handelsman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               

MCB-0084222
Robert M. Goodman
Jo Handelsman
Holy M. Simon

Research
              teams headed by Drs. Robert M. Goodman (University of Wisconsin-Madison),
              Anna-Louise Reysenbach (Portland State University have been awarded
              collaborative grants to establish a tropical microbial observatory for
              collaborative research on microbial diversity (Bacteria, Archaea, Fungi,
              Protists) associated with caterpillars. The observatory will be based in the
              Area de Conservacion Guanacaste (ACG) in northwestern Costa Rica, which has
              been identified as a "hotspot" for biological conservation.  The project is
              logistically based on the network of biological stations established throughout
              the ACG, where another NSF-funded team is conducting a large, long-term survey
              and inventory of caterpillars.   Studies of the microbial observatory will
              focus on the detection, characterization, and inventory of cultured and
              non-cultured microbiota, the latter which is expected to be vastly more diverse
              than that revealed by traditional culturing methods alone. The long-term goal
              is to study the dynamics and function of microorganisms (most of which will be
              new to science) in the feeding preferences, habits, development, and nutrition
              of herbivorous caterpillars.  In short, to determine if microbial diversity
              parallels animal and plant species diversity in this tropical forest
              system.

The research teams will use groundbreaking methods in environmental
              microbiology to accomplish these goals, including metagenome cloning and tools
              such as DNA microarrays. The molecular studies will be integrated with the
              cultivation-based studies and, together, these two approaches will lead to a
              better understanding of the nature and dynamics of assemblages of
              microorganisms associated with caterpillars at the observatory.  The results
              are expected to allow scientists to tap into the biochemical and genetic
              capabilities of the microorganisms that may lead to the discovery of
              potentially new and useful natural products. This observatory will also foster
              U.S.-Costa Rican collaboration through training of US and Costa Rican
              undergraduate and graduate students, close collaboration with US and Costa
              Rican conservation biologists, database linkages to the Instituto Nacional de
              Biodiversidad Costa Rica (INBio), and direct collaboration with researchers at
              the University of Costa Rica at San Jose. All cultures and DNA obtained from
              this project will be stored in both US and Costa Rican collections, which will
              provide an organismal and genetic foundation for future screening of novel
              products or genes. This study will set the framework for additional microbial
              diversity inventories in this species rich area, and its results are expected
              to have extensive local and global impacts for both cross-disciplinary
              scientific training and public outreach and education.

