Title       : A Tropical Microbial Observatory: Collaborative Research on Microbial Diversity
               in Caterpillars.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0084224

Award Number: 0084224
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $638702             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna-Louise Reysenbach reysenbacha@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB-0084224
Anna-Louise Reysenbach
Linda Amaral Zettler

Research teams
              headed by Drs. Robert M. Goodman (University of Wisconsin-Madison), Anna-Louise
              Reysenbach (Portland State University), and Greg Thorn (University of Western
              Ontario) have been awarded a grant to establish a tropical microbial
              observatory for collaborative research on microbial diversity (Bacteria,
              Archaea, Fungi, Protists) associated with caterpillars. The observatory will be
              based in the Area de Conservacion Guanacaste (ACG) in northwestern Costa Rica,
              which has been identified as a "hotspot" for biological conservation.  The
              project is logistically based on the network of biological stations established
              throughout the ACG, where another NSF-funded team is conducting a large,
              long-term survey and inventory of caterpillars.   Studies of the microbial
              observatory will focus on the detection, characterization, and inventory of
              cultured and non-cultured microbiota, the latter which is expected to be vastly
              more diverse than that revealed by traditional culturing methods alone. The
              long-term goal is to study the dynamics and function of microorganisms (most of
              which will be new to science) in the feeding preferences, habits, development,
              and nutrition of herbivorous caterpillars.  In short, to determine if microbial
              diversity parallels animal and plant species diversity in this tropical forest
              system.

The research teams will use groundbreaking methods in environmental
              microbiology to accomplish these goals, including metagenome cloning and tools
              such as DNA microarrays. The molecular studies will be integrated with the
              cultivation-based studies and, together, these two approaches will lead to a
              better understanding of the nature and dynamics of assemblages of
              microorganisms associated with caterpillars at the observatory.  The results
              are expected to allow scientists to tap into the biochemical and genetic
              capabilities of the microorganisms that may lead to the discovery of
              potentially new and useful natural products. This observatory will also foster
              U.S.-Costa Rican collaboration through training of US and Costa Rican
              undergraduate and graduate students, close collaboration with US and Costa
              Rican conservation biologists, database linkages to the Instituto Nacional de
              Biodiversidad Costa Rica (INBio), and direct collaboration with researchers at
              the University of Costa Rica at San Jose. All cultures and DNA obtained from
              this project will be stored in both US and Costa Rican collections, which will
              provide an organismal and genetic foundation for future screening of novel
              products or genes. This study will set the framework for additional microbial
              diversity inventories in this species rich area, and its results are expected
              to have extensive local and global impacts for both cross-disciplinary
              scientific training and public outreach and education.

