Title       : GOALI: Development of Advanced Molding Technology for Polymer
               Micro-/Nano-Fabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0084919

Award Number: 0084919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $384766             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ly James Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc J. Madou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kurt W. Koelling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Kerouac  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1467,1468,1504,5761,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research
              project is to investigate thermoplastic polymer-based molding technologies,
              i.e. high speed/ high pressure (thin wall) injection molding, and
              micro-embossing, because of their great potential for low cost mass production.
               In high speed/high pressure (thin wall) injection molding, the polymer melt
              may flow under a pressure twice as much as in conventional injection molding,
              and the shear rate can be more than 10 times higher.  Current commercial
              simulation codes which are typically used to evaluate moldability and cycle
              time do not accurately predict mold filling at these extremely high pressures
              and shear rates.  An experimental data base of the high shear rate and high
              pressure rheology of polycarbonate will be created and used as input in a
              commercial software called C-MOLD.  The effect of high shear stresses on mold
              wear and 'molded-in' stresses will also be investigated in detail. C-MOLD will
              be used to simulate the molding of micro-scale features.  The simulation
              software is capable of predicting flow patterns, pressures and shear stresses
              on the mold surface.  In micro-embossing,  the plan is to carry out detailed
              thermorheological study around the glass transition temperature of selected
              polymers. The molding cycle will be designed according to the rheological
              behavior of polymers, instead of arbitrarily chosen molding temperatures.  The
              thermorheology results will also be used in FEM simulation to calculate the
              stress distribution in the mold and in the molded polymer product.  Predicted
              shear stresses on the micron scale mold features will be correlated with the
              experimentally observed level of mold wear and 'molded in' stresses. The
              simulations and experimental results (pressures, temperatures, shear stresses,
              fill time, and cooling time) will also be used to design a process window as a
              function of feature size/aspect ratio, mold material, and processing
              conditions.  

The goal is to develop an efficient mass production method
              with cycle time similar to or less than that in conventional injection molding
              and embossing.


