Title       : DIMETHYL SULFIDE CYCLING IN OPEN LEADS DURING THE ARCTIC OCEAN EXPEDITION 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0084455

Award Number: 0084455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400826             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai pmatrai@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Global climate is intimately connected to variability in sea ice, open ocean
              biogeochemical cycling and circulation, atmospheric radiation, and clouds over
              the Arctic Ocean. Uncertainty in the formulation of interactive air-sea-ice
              processes results in large differences between the arctic, and global, climates
              simulated by different global climate models. In particular, the effects of
              long, narrow channels (meters to hundreds of meters wide and kilometers long)
              in pack ice, also called leads, upon the atmosphere and the formation of new
              aerosol particles in the Arctic Ocean must be more accurately represented in
              climate models to allow possible feedbacks between them.

The Swedish Polar
              Research Secretariat has presented the research community with a unique
              platform (Icebreaker Oden) as part of its third expedition to the summer Arctic
              in 2001 entitled "Sources of airborne particles over the remote Arctic Ocean
              and their climatic relevance". This effort will allow a concerted study of
              chemical and related processes from the sea-ice/air interface to the
              cloud-topped boundary layer in a climatically and environmentally sensitive
              region. The international program is designed as an integrated package, which
              includes both a field experimental phase and a closely coupled modeling effort.
              The overall aim of the program is to identify and quantify the role of the
              biological, chemical, physical and meteorological processes that control the
              formation, evolution, and properties of the aerosol relevant to radiative
              forcing and climate in the Arctic region. A further objective of the
              international program is to incorporate the results in both regional and
              global-climate models and to improve the overall accuracy in the calculation of
              climate forcing by aerosol particles.

Selection of the central Arctic Ocean
              as the preferred site for an attempt to provide better information on the role
              of aerosols on climatic change is based on its climatic sensitivity given the
              importance of its sea ice in controlling mass and energy fluxes at the surface,
              the relatively sparse existing databases and the possibility of following the
              entire aerosol-cloud-radiation system with very little interference from
              continental or anthropogenic sources.

Currently, a great deal of attention
              is being given to the thinning and decreased extension of pack ice, perhaps
              increasing the generation of leads. Leads facilitate the exchange of both heat
              and materials, coupling the atmosphere with the Arctic Ocean.

The focus of
              this proposal is on the summer season when melt is maximal and leads are most
              prevalent . This project will specifically address the question of "What
              compounds of biological origin are present in the ice and in the water column
              next to or below it, and that may be involved in the production of airborne
              particles?" To this effect, the project will quantify the abundance and
              production of DMS, DMSP, and S-amino acids as potential aerosol precursors in
              surface seawater in open leads and also determine the biological content of the
              open leads and the chemicals and particles (i.e., POC, PON, POS, chlorophyll a,
              microplankton composition) in the water. These parameters will also be
              measured, when pertinent and possible, in ice and surface film samples
              collected by other investigators. Other European investigators will address
              issues concerning how the marine particles and derived products become
              airborne, whether they lead to new particle formation or growth in the
              atmosphere and under what circumstances.

