Title       : Computability of Material Instabilities - New Methods and Case Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2000 
File        : a0084664

Award Number: 0084664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142576             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Finno r-finno@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ted Belytschko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1623,1634,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed work is to examine the computability of solid
              mechanics problems in the simulation of failure. The issue is addressed in the
              context of the failure of slopes, foundations and excavations but we will also
              examine computability in other areas of failure simulation.  The computation of
              the bearing capacity of soils is considered as a case study.  Such computations
              have become commonplace for large projects where the ground movements
              associated with a supported excavation are a primary design parameter.  For
              example, in the Central Artery/Tunnel Project in Boston, which is estimated to
              cost $16 billion, a significant percentage of the cost is in the temporary
              support of excavations.
The simulation of these problems is difficult because
              failure in these problems usually arises due to material instabilities. 
              Material instabilities are very sensitive to the models and data of the
              problem, and it is not understood how accurately they can be simulated or how
              to bound the behavior.
In the proposed work, methods for extracting bands of
              likely response will be developed.  Techniques will be developed for modeling
              inhomogeneous data and obtaining the extremes in responses via
              anti-optimization methods.  As part of this work, new finite elements for
              modeling arbitrary discontinuities will be developed.  In these methods,
              discontinuities in functions and their derivatives can be modeled independent
              of mesh alignment so that arbitrary shear bands and cracks can be modeled.
The
              results of this work will be applicable to a large class of simulation
              problems. In manufacturing, processes such as sheet-metal forming, extrusion,
              and metal cutting are subject to material instabilities.  Material
              instabilities are also important in seismic analysis, where they are manifested
              as liquefaction, and in the fracture of structures.



