Title       : Diversity and Ecology of Bdellovibrios-like Organisms in Nature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0084265

Award Number: 0084265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $537860             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry N. Williams hnw001@dental.umaryland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              O.Colin Stine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to determine the range in diversity and role of the
              bdellovibrio-like organisms (BLOs) in aquatic environments. Our specific aims
              are: 1) to reveal and characterize the genetic, cultural and physiological
              diversity of the predatory, bdellovibrio?like organisms (BLOs) in nature and to
              show a correlation between strain diversity and prey range; 2) to reveal the
              predominant uncultured and cultured strains of BLO, those most likely making
              the greatest contribution to bacterial mortality in nature, and show their
              spatial and temporal distribution in aquatic ecosystems; and 3) to monitor the
              population dynamics of BLO in phytoplankton/ bacterial blooms and assess their
              potential role in bacterial mortality. Genetic diversity will be analyzed for
              both cultured and uncultured BLOs. The initial effort will be to complete the
              diversity analysis on the 50 strains currently in the laboratory that have been
              recovered from water samples collected from lakes, oceans, seas, ponds and
              streams in the United States and abroad. Samples will be processed to detect
              both cultured and uncultured BLOs. The uncultured organisms will be identified
              by using molecular techniques employing BLO?specific oligonucleotide probes.
              The cultured strains will be recovered using the double agar overlay technique.
               In particular, we will sample to determine the potential interaction of the
              BLO community with phytoplankton blooms at the LEO? 15 site  (a Long?Term
              Ecosystem Observatory site on the continental shelf offshore from the Rutgers
              University Marine Field Station) during upwelling-stimulated blooms.  This work
              will be done in collaboration with Dr. Lee Kerkhof at the Institute of Marine
              and Coastal Sciences at Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey.
