Title       : Conference on the Neurobiology of Music; Rockefeller University; New York, New
               York; May 20-22, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a0084256

Award Number: 0084256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rashid Shaikh rshaikh@nyas.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Acad of Sciences
	      
	      New York, NY  11021    /   -

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

The New York Academy of Sciences conference titled The
              Neurobiology of Music will examine the increase in scientific work motivated by
              the idea that music offers a unique opportunity to better understand the human
              brain.  Like language, music exists in all human societies.  Like language,
              music is a complex, rule-governed activity that is specific to humans. 
              Similarly, music appears associated with specific brain architecture.  However,
              unlike most other high-level functions of the human brain, only a minority of
              individuals become proficient musicians through explicit tutoring, although
              sensitivity to musical structure develops early in life without conscious
              effort in the large majority of the population.  The goal of this conference is
              to bring together leading scientists who are working on music and who are using
              a wide range of different methodologies from the cognitive sciences and the
              neuroscience.  The originality of the conference will be to favor integration
              across disciplines and methodologies, by grouping presentations under seven
              major themes:

I. The Origins of Music
All societies have music.  It was not
              invented by some groups and spread to others, like the alphabet writing system.
               Instead, music seems to have emerged spontaneously in all forms of human
              societies.  Moreover, this emergence is not recent in human evolution.  Music
              emerged as early as 40,000 to 80,000 years ago.  Music competence is exhibited
              in infancy, as early as four to six months of age, when infants may show a
              predisposition for processing aspects of auditory patterns that are specific to
              music.

I. The Neurons of Music
The neural hardware of the brain allows all
              musical processes to take place, but also constrains perceptual and motor
              functions relevant for music.  In turn, musical behavior also changes neural
              pattering.  The specific ways in which neural architecture determines and
              interacts with musical structure is the subject of debate.

II. The Musical
              Mind
Music is not a monolithic function that one has or has not; it involves
              multiple processing systems that are, to a large extent, shared by
              non-musicians and musicians alike.  To map these abilities onto the human
              brain, we must know what abilities are essential, and how they are functionally
              organized.

III. The Musical Brain
First steps in understanding auditory
              processes occurred in the late 19th Century.  There is abundant evidence that
              music perception fractionates along several processing components, each of
              which may be differentially localized in the brain.  To properly map musical
              functions within the brain, scientists are now using a wide range of
              technologies, such as brain imaging (MRI and PET) to visualize functional
              aspects of the normal musical brain. 

IV. Music as an Emotional
              Language
The majority of experimental studies have been devoted to the study
              of musical structure as a nonverbal language, but only rarely as an emotional
              language.  Recent work has shown that some emotions elicited by music are both
              amenable to study experimentally, and relatively consistent across individuals.
               Moreover, emotions are associated with cerebral and physiological responses
              that may be specific to the domain.

V. Musical Expertise/Brain
              Plasticity
Music provides the opportunity to study the effects of early versus
              late learning on brain plasticity.  It has been shown that the primary motor
              cortex and cerebellum can be modified by early practice of music, and that the
              shape or size of receptive areas traditionally associated with language may
              correlate with specific musical skills.  The key question is to specify to what
              extent these brain changes confer qualitative gains to the musician, and hence
              help us to understand the nature of musical talent.

VI. Modularity for
              Music
We have treated music as if it were an autonomous system, having its own
              operational rules.  This modularity position is not universally shared.  For
              others, music has neither specific brain sites nor computational specificity. 
              Key proponents of these opposite positions will defend their views.  





