Title       : Microbial Biogeochemistry and Functional Diversity across the Forest-Tundra
               Ecotone in the Rocky Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0084223

Award Number: 0084223
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven K. Schmidt schmidts@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew P. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Drs. Steven K. Schmidt and Andrew P. Martin have been awarded a grant to
              establish a microbial observatory to study the distribution and functioning of
              microorganisms that live in soils of high-elevation tundra and forests of the
              Rocky Mountains.  They will concentrate on microorganisms that are involved in
              environmentally important processes such as soil nitrogen transformations and
              methane (natural gas) exchange between soil and the atmosphere.  These
              processes are important because they can contribute to global warming and
              pollution of drinking water down stream from high mountain areas.  Emphasis
              will be placed on studying the microbes that carry out these functions during
              the winter under deep snow packs of the Rocky Mountain region.  Their
              preliminary work shows that soils under deep snow are actually very
              biologically active and that important environmental transformations of
              nitrogen and methane take place under the snow.  Almost nothing is known,
              however, about the identity of the cold-adapted organisms that carry out these
              processes under the snow pack.  Drs. Schmidt and Martin will measure the
              production and consumption of various nitrogen compounds and methane across the
              landscape during summer and winter.  They will simultaneously use DNA
              sequencing and probing methods to determine the identity of the dominant
              microorganisms that carry out these important biogeochemical processes.


