Title       : FSML; Classroom and Laboratory Improvements for Archbold Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0084141

Award Number: 0084141
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125848             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hilary M. Swain hswain@archbold-station.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Menges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Reed Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Bohlen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Archbold Biological Statn
	      P.O.Box 2057
	      Lake Placid, FL  338522057    813/465-2571

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Archbold Biological Station (Archbold), established in 1941, is a not-for-profit
              independent research institution dedicated to long-term ecological research.
              Staff, visiting investigators, and students conduct research primarily focused
              on the organisms and environments of the Lake Wales Ridge and adjacent central
              Florida. Areas of research strength are population ecology and conservation
              biology, emphasizing ecological changes over local and regional scales, and
              demographic shifts in ecologically sensitive species. Although Archbold is not
              an affiliated university field station and has no formal college-level teaching
              program, it is heavily used for education. In the last five years education
              programs have involved research training for 40 graduates and 44
              undergraduates, extensive use by visiting college classes (over 1000
              instructional use days) and an active K-12 education program (7,421 K-12
              visits). Current facilities for teaching and for visiting investigators are
              limited.
 
This award will allow Archbold to renovate three existing rooms (a
              poorly equipped teaching classroom, a storage area, and a display/storage area)
              into four custom facilities: (a) 650 ft2 multi-user classroom with dissecting
              scopes, modern audio-visual capabilities and integrated computer networking;
              (b) a 140 ft 2 purpose built storage area for K-12 displays and equipment; and
              a 475 ft 2 area including (c) a new Wet Lab area; and (d) a Multi-Purpose
              Laboratory with extensive general use equipment - including a drying oven,
              balances, and a compound and dissecting microscope linked to camera/computer
              output and classroom display via remote monitor. These classroom and laboratory
              improvements will significantly enhance Archbold's research and education
              infrastructure and increase opportunities for college classes, K-12, continuing
              education, as well as visiting investigators and students. The new facilities
              will (1) increase the efficiency of space expanding the numbers and range of
              classes and visiting investigators that can be accommodated simultaneously; (2)
              enhance student understanding of the ecosystem and improve the teaching
              environment, for example allowing classes to view and manipulate specimens and
              conduct computer-aided taxonomic identification; (3) capitalize on Archbold's
              existing high-end computer network to promote greater use of Intranet,
              Internet, and www technologies directly in the classroom and provide classroom
              AV equipment for modern multi-media  presentations; (4) better accommodate
              studies of freshwater ecology in a new Wet Lab area; (5) improve safety by
              providing a centralized Safety/First Aid area; and (6) reduce the use of the
              current Chemistry Lab, with associated risk, to those who need full facilities.
              These renovations will also provide a more conducive research environment for
              visiting investigators and graduate students who currently rely on space and
              equipment in resident investigator labs.  Two complementary items, a growth
              chamber and germinator, will expand the capabilities of the Plant lab and its
              collaborators and allow them to study: abiotic factors controlling
              reproduction/seed ecology of plants; microbiotic ecosystems including fungi and
              algae endemic to the native soils and crusts; and to incubate algae from Lake
              Annie and seasonal wetlands. This award will also increase Archbold's abilities
              to link its research programs with regional education, conservation and land
              management activities.

