Title       : Thin Film Solid Oxide Fuel Cell
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1992   
File        : a9160890

Award Number: 9160890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49817              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Analytic Power Corporation
	      268 Summer Street
	      Boston, MA  02110    617/542-6352

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The use of fuel cells for the economical production of                         
              electrical                                                                     
              power has not been fully realized.  Fuel cells offer many                      
              advantages over standard power production systems, including                   
              full                                                                           
              cycle efficiencies of 60%, a wide range of useable fuels, and                  
              environmentally sound combustion with very low emissions.                      
              Factors                                                                        
              such as cost and low performance have held these systems back.                 
              A                                                                              
              low cost fuel cell power system with high performance would                    
              find                                                                           
              applications in power production ranging from on site                          
              cogeneration                                                                   
              in the kilowatt range all the way to full sized power                          
              production                                                                     
              plants with capacities of hundreds of megawatts.  This Phase                   
              I,                                                                             
              Small Business Innovation Research project is aimed at                         
              developing                                                                     
              a solid oxide fuel cell (SOFC) with a unitized, bipolar design                 
                                                                                             
              using low resistivity thin solid oxide films produced by                       
              reactive                                                                       
              magnetron sputtering techniques.  These features should reduce                 
                                                                                             
              production costs and system complexity as well as allow                        
              operation                                                                      
              at temperatures of 600 to 700oC.  This cell can operate on                     
              internally reformed hydrocarbon fuels and air, thereby                         
              increasing                                                                     
              power plant efficiency.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Several different SOFC's will be fabricated and tested over a                  
              range                                                                          
              of operating temperatures in order to evaluate the feasibility                 
              of                                                                             
              using such cells in fuel cell power plants.  Each individual                   
              cell                                                                           
              will have a unitized structure with no loose parts.  It may be                 
                                                                                             
              possible to produce a unitized stack as well, thereby greatly                  
              reducing the number of stack parts.  Alternatives to the                       
              standard                                                                       
              solid oxide electrolyte yttria stabilized zirconia will be                     
              tested                                                                         
              in order to reduce electrode polarizations and cell                            
              resistance.                                                                    
              Use of gadolinia doped ceria and baria stabilized bismuth                      
              oxide                                                                          
              will be investigated during this research program.
