Title       : Combustion Synthesis of Silicon Carbide for Advanced Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1991  
File        : a9160896

Award Number: 9160896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hartwell F. Calcote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : AeroChem Research Labs
	      P. O. Box 12
	      Princeton, NJ  085420012    609/921-7070

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1407,
Abstract    :
              Fine, ultrapure particles are desirable starting materials for                 
              production of high-performance advanced ceramic products.                      
              AeroChem has previously demonstrated the combustion synthesis                  
              of silicon nitride products from the reactants silane and                      
              hydrazine.  In this program, combustion synthesis of silicon                   
              carbide will be investigated.  The flav-flame burner to be                     
              used is the same as used in conventional hydrocarbon-air flame                 
              studies, and the flame appearance is quite similar.  Two major                 
              differences are that no oxygen is used in the flame synthesis                  
              of silicon carbide (or nitride) and the major product is a                     
              powder which must be separated from the coflowing product                      
              gases.  In the current study, AeroChem will investigate the                    
              preparation of silicon carbide via reaction of silane with                     
              acetylene on this flat-flame burner.  The major issue here is                  
              the formation of a pure silicon carbide product without the                    
              presence of either silicon or carbon contaminants.                             
              Thermodynamic calculations indicate that this can be achieved                  
              by operation in a narrow reactant ratio range near                             
              stoichiometric, where the yield of silicon carbide is                          
              calculated to be 100% based on the silane feed.  Experiments                   
              and further theoretical analysis will be pursued to confirm                    
              that a high-purity SiC product can indeed be produced at close                 
              to 100% yield.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              High quality silicon carbide powders have a large potential                    
              market in the preparation of advanced ceramic materials via                    
              sintering or hot pressing.  Present progress in production of                  
              advanced ceramics is currently limited by the unavailability                   
              of a US-made high quality powder.  In addition, the technology                 
              and understanding of combustion synthesis which will be                        
              developed in this program will be applicable to combustion                     
              synthesis of a wide variety of other desirable materials.
