Title       : Perceptual Speed, Switching, and Temporal Acuity Factors in Cognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1991  
File        : a9160623

Award Number: 9160623
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Essex Corporation Florida
	      1430 SPRINGHILL ROAD
	      McLean, VA  221023000    407/894-5090

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 1186,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The advent of microcomputer and electronic displays is changing                
              the nature of everyday tasks.  Many types of display make higher               
              demands on switching back and forth between displays than on                   
              sustained inspection of a single display.  There is evidence that              
              temporal acuity describes a capability advantage for the new task              
              demands.  The availability of portable microcomputers,                         
              particularly battery-operated versions with rapid onset visual                 
              elements, may permit the assessment of these abilities.  This                  
              research will determine whether a trait exists involving temporal              
              acuity factors in perception.  To do this, the research will                   
              implement paradigms dealing with theoretically disparate aspects               
              of temporal as opposed to spatial factors, from various domains                
              and conceptual models (viz., information processing, perception,               
              and cognition) on such a portable microcomputer.  The research                 
              will use for empirical studies methodologies that follow from                  
              mental test theory.  The research will involve administration of               
              a number of tasks to groups of individuals over several                        
              replications to determine:  (1) the degree of stability and                    
              reliability of each test, (2) the number of unique factors                     
              evaluated by such tests, and (3) the relationship of any "new"                 
              factors to other "old" capabilities presently measurable and                   
              predictive of operational performance (e.g., scores on                         
              intelligence tests or tests of spatial perception).   Phase II                 
              research will validate the factors which surfaced in Phase I                   
              against real-world performances of military persons, to determine              
              predictive validity and variance accounted for, and permit                     
              generalization and unequivocal evaluation of the test properties.              
                                                                                             
              An off-the-shelf portable battery of temporal factors which                    
              stabilize rapidly will have important applications to selection.               
              The results would further specify constructs which appear in                   
              theory to be related to a myriad of jobs.  The traditional                     
              methods of testing can be improved to take into account abilities              
              in speed of processing.
