Title       : GK-12 and GeoKids: Bringing Place-Based Science to Urban Philadelphia Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0139303

Award Number: 0139303
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $848320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. Snetselaar ksnetsel@sju.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger K. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Glassman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott P. Mc Robert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's University
	      5600 City Avenue
	      Philadelphia, PA  191311308    215/879-7300

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

This project builds on strong existing collaborations between Saint Joseph's
              University (SJU) science faculty and a Philadelphia museum, the Wagner Free
              Institute of Science (WFIS), and between WFIS staff and principals at three
              nearby urban Philadelphia public schools.  GK-12 Fellows are M.S. candidates or
              advanced undergraduates studying Biology, Chemistry, or Environmental Science. 
              Each year 4-8 Fellows will collaborate with WFIS education specialists, SJU
              faculty, and K-6 teachers to develop and present semester-long thematic units
              to students attending schools in one of Philadelphia's most underserved
              neighborhoods. "GeoKids" incorporates a place-based approach that uses the
              local environment as a resource to teach earth and life sciences, a unique and
              challenging learning strategy for an inner-city program.  GeoKids emphasizes
              hands-on science, project-based learning, and development of fundamental skills
              such as reading, writing, and observing.  The program includes annual summer
              workshops where Fellows, K-6 teachers, and participating SJU and WFIS educators
              review curriculum standards, study in appropriate content areas, and become
              more familiar with education issues specific to students from the target
              schools.  Doctoral education students will collaborate with an education
              assessment expert in designing and administering assessment tools.  Expected
              outcomes of the program include: development, testing, and documentation of
              environmentally-based lessons, K-6 teachers empowered to develop their own
              place-based lessons, SJU faculty and graduate students committed to enhancing
              science literacy, and incorporation of GK-12 program elements into existing
              Service Learning activities at SJU.  The grant activities support efforts
              underway at SJU to enhance and expand the graduate programs in Chemistry and
              Biology.  




