Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0139450

Award Number: 0139450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet L. Schottel schot002@umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Objectives
The overall purpose of this program is to motivate and prepare
              talented students, specifically more women and minority students, to earn their
              PhD degree in basic life science disciplines and eventually to become members
              of the faculty at colleges and universities or to take leadership roles in the
              private sector. 

Means to achieve objectives
This NSF award will sustain
              the highly successful NSF-REU program developed by University of Minnesota
              faculty over the past twelve years.  For the next five years, the participants
              will continue to be recruited nationwide, but particularly from Historically
              Black Institutions and other small private colleges.  Each year, twelve high
              ability undergraduate students will come to Minnesota for the 10-week summer
              program.  The students will spend the first three weeks of the summer in an
              intensive three-credit laboratory course at the Lake Itasca laboratories
              learning basic molecular biology techniques.  Following the course, each
              student will spend seven weeks on the Twin Cities campus completing an
              independent research project that uses many of the molecular techniques learned
              in the course. The research project will be conducted under the direction of
              one of the more than 100 faculty members affiliated with the program who share
              a common interest in molecular biology research.  Supplemental activities will
              include weekly student seminars and evening workshops designed to strengthen
              future applications for postgraduate studies.  All students will present the
              results of their research project through a scientific poster at a campus-wide
              symposium at the end of the program.  An orientation weekend at the start of
              the program, the laboratory course at Itasca, communal housing in campus
              dormitories and numerous social, cultural and recreational activities
              throughout the summer weekends will foster the formation of strong personal and
              professional student-student and student-faculty bonds.

Outcomes and
              significance of award
Students will have an interesting and exciting summer
              that will strengthen their confidence and their desire to go to graduate school
              to earn an MS, PhD or MD/PhD degree in a basic life science discipline. 
              Intensive exposure to the high quality and quantity of research opportunities
              as well as the supportive and nurturing relationships with faculty mentors will
              motivate many participants to pursue graduate studies.  In addition,
              undergraduate students from all backgrounds and ethnicity will have the
              opportunity to interact with graduate student role models to encourage
              undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to seek graduate school degrees.  Over
              the long term, increased numbers of African American, American Indian and
              Hispanic students will be motivated to earn graduate degrees in basic life
              science disciplines and eventually to become members of the faculty at colleges
              and universities or leaders in the private sector.  These new recipients of MS
              and PhD degrees will be role models and mentors who can help move a much larger
              number of individuals from underrepresented minority groups closer to full
              participation in the scientific and technological workforce.

