Title       : SGER: Development of an In Vitro Chromatin Assembly and Transcription System for
               Plant Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0139958

Award Number: 0139958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison J. Crowe acrowe@u.washington.edu.  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Studies of both plant and animal genes have illustrated the key role that
              chromatin and chromatin modulators play in regulating gene expression during
              development.  Correct spatial and developmental expression of phaseolin, the
              major seed storage protein in bean, requires chromosomal integration. 
              Chromatin structural analyses have established that a nucleosome is
              rotationally positioned over the phaseolin promoter in non-seed tissue, thereby
              blocking transcription initiation.  This repressive chromatin structure is
              disrupted prior to beta-phaseolin gene activation in the maturing embryo,
              suggesting a mechanism by which gene expression can be regulated during
              development.  However, the role that tissue-specific transcription factors and
              chromatin modulators play in the transition from a silenced to an active
              phaseolin gene has not been elucidated.  The overall aim of this project is to
              develop an in vitro chromatin assembly and transcription assay to study
              chromatin-mediated regulation of plant genes.  To achieve this goal, the PI
              will combine existing animal in vitro chromatin assembly systems and a
              previously developed plant in vitro transcription assay with purified plant
              transcription factors to reconstitute phaseolin gene regulation in vitro.  The
              three specific aims are 1) to reconstitute physiological chromatin on the
              phaseolin gene in vitro, 2) to transcribe the phaseolin gene in vitro using a
              tobacco cell transcription extract, and 3) to reconstitute hormonal and
              tissue-specific regulation of phaseolin gene expression in vitro.  Results from
              these studies will provide definitive evidence that the chromatin
              assembly/transcription system faithfully recapitulates the endogenous
              chromosomal context and tissue-specific expression pattern of a plant gene in
              vitro. If successful, this in vitro system may provide a universal tool for
              elucidating the mechanisms driving chromatin-mediated gene regulation in
              plants.  An increased understanding of how chromatin context influences gene
              expression during plant development will greatly facilitate the engineering of
              stable transgenic plants for both commercial and agricultural use. 
