Title       : The Virginia Center for Urban Education at Old Dominion University: Engineering
               Graduate Fellows and Master Teachers for Grades 4 - 5
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0139336

Award Number: 0139336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1148509            (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith Williamson kxwillia@odu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Adam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Sandy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denny Wolfe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

Old Dominion University (ODU) in collaboration with Norfolk Public Schools,
              Portsmouth City Public Schools and the Virginia Space Grant Consortium, seek to
              enhance existing resources for mathematics and science teachers and provide
              opportunities for graduate students to work with teachers from these two urban
              school districts. The program will allow ODU to place graduate students from
              the College of Engineering into 4th and 5th grade classrooms to support
              specially designated Master Teachers. The program will be integrated through
              the ODU College of Education, Center for Urban Education, Professional
              Development Schools (PDS) program which fosters joint inquiry into research
              problems by reviewing and revising curricula: drawing on shared expertise,
              co-teaching experiences; and through sharing insights with colleagues 
in the
              educational community. Teaching Fellows and Master Teachers will collaborate in
              this atmosphere through four professional development seminars designed to
              address applied mathematics, problem-solving, gender equity and inquiry based
              instruction in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
              education. Hands on classroom activities, focused on inquiry and teamwork, will
              incorporate the Lego Control Laboratory as the tool to introduce elements of
              modern technology into the classroom. This project is receiving partial support
              from the Directorate for Engineering. 


