Title       : Representations of Finite Groups and Algebraic Lie Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0139019

Award Number: 0139019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Kleshchev klesh@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan Brundan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will continue their study of the representation theory
of
              finite groups, especially the symmetric group and its double covers, by
              
exploiting various connections to Lie theory. These connections arise
              at
many different levels, combinatorial, algebraic and geometric, and involve
              the 
representation theory of algebraic groups, supergroups, quantum groups
              and 
infinite dimensional Lie algebras. The investigators intend to study in
              
particular the Shapovalov form on highest weight modules over
              affine
Kac-Moody algebras via vertex operators, Broue's conjecture for
              the
symmetric group, and to further exploit the relationship between
              branching
rules and crystal graphs in representation theory.

This project
              is in the area of mathematics known as representation theory.  
The tools of
              mathematics provide a precise way to describe the symmetries
of something. 
              Representation theory is the study of the ways such
symmetries can arise in
              the real world, and as such it has applications to many 
areas of mathematics,
              physics and chemistry.  In the last few years, there has
been some major
              progress in our understanding of representation theory, thanks
in part to a
              new influx of ideas from mathematical physics. This project is
concerned in
              part with the representation theory of the most important of all the
finite
              groups, the symmetric group, which is closely related to the theory of
              
symmetric functions. The work is expected to have applications to other areas
              of
mathematics, as well as a wider impact in mathematical physics, statistical
              
mechanics and coding theory.


