Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0139668

Award Number: 0139668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Gegenheimer pgegen@ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The University of Kansas offers a 10-week summer program of Research Experiences
              for Undergraduates in Molecular Biosciences.  Complete details of the
              scientific and social aspects of the Molecular Biosciences summer program
              including an on-line application are available at
              http://rnaworld.bio.ku.edu/reu/ .
Because independent research is pivotal in a
              student's commitment to a career in biological research, we encourage
              applications from students at colleges with limited research opportunities, and
              members of groups traditionally underrepresented in this field.  Our program
              has several objectives: to attract students to careers in science by allowing
              them to contribute meaningfully to on-going laboratory research of national
              importance; to ensure that students who are already interested in research, or
              are just starting, receive the encouragement they need to continue; and to
              facilitate this by providing faculty mentoring as well as peer mentoring from
              undergraduates already involved in research.  Participants gain the direct
              experience they need to make an informed career decision and, if they so
              choose, to succeed in graduate school.  University of Kansas undergraduates
              currently engaged in research serve as peer mentors and role models for the
              summer students, helping them to become more quickly acquainted with the
              University and making them feel more at ease in their labs. 
Our research
              focuses on several overlapping areas of biochemistry; molecular, cellular, and
              developmental biology; microbiology; and neurobiology.  Major strengths are in
              the areas of protein structure and function, enzyme mechanisms and protein
              engineering; proteins involved in cytoskeletal structure; the structure,
              function and regulation of membrane proteins - receptors, ion channels and ion
              transporters - and of their genes; and molecular analysis of signal
              transduction and gene regulation in microbial metabolism, virus infection,
              learning and memory, and eukaryotic developmental biology.  Projects have been
              chosen so that a student can logically build upon previous laboratory and
              course experience in the natural sciences.  During the course of the summer,
              students gradually gain more independence and control over their research.
              
Participants will engage in a variety of enrichment activities.  At weekly
              lunch meetings, participants give 20-minute presentations describing their
              project - background, plans, and current status.  A second weekly series
              targets career development and career choices in the area of molecular
              biosciences, including careers in academic, industrial, or medical research, as
              well as the nature of science and its professional ethics

