Title       : REU Site: Molecular Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0139881

Award Number: 0139881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth E. Buskirk rbuskirk@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

The School of Biological Sciences of The University of Texas at Austin
              offers a ten-week REU Site Program in Molecular Biology designed to introduce
              talented, upper-level undergraduates to intensive, independent laboratory
              research.  A ten-week summer program, involving ten students each year for
              three years, will provide each participant a stipend, room and board, travel
              allowance and tuition for the independent research course in which all are
              enrolled.  We seek participants who have good course work preparation in
              molecular biology and are interested in post-graduate study but have not had
              the opportunity to do research.  Participants will work individually with
              faculty mentors matched with the student's interests and background, and they
              will have access to all faculty members in the School of Biological Sciences
              and the Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology through seminars and lab
              visits.  Students will be placed in active faculty research labs that deal with
              such problems as gene structure and control, cell signaling, developmental
              genetics and pathogenic mechanisms, which are being studied in a variety of
              model organisms, including bacteria, yeast, plants and mammals.  In weekly
              group meetings, students will discuss current issues in molecular biology,
              prepare for the GRE, and learn about graduate school.  Each participant will
              present an oral progress report to the group and will write an abstract and
              prepare a research poster for a closing symposium.

