Title       : Research in Particle Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a0139967

Award Number: 0139967
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pran Nath nath@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tomasz R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Investigations in theoretical high energy physics in areas of supersymmetry
              phenomenology, CP violation, dark matter and extra dimensions and their
              applications to model building will be carried out. The implications of the
              data from the Brookhaven g-2 experiment and of RUNII of the Tevatron for
              supersymmetry and surperstring theory will be explored. Correlated studies of
              nonuniversalities, flavor and
CP violation in grand unified and string models
              will be carried out with the goal of achieving correlated predictions for the
              electric dipole moments of leptons and of flavor violating processes. This
              investigation
 is of importance in view of the proposed experiments for the
              sensitive search of the muon electric dipole moment and of the process
              mu-e+gamma.

Studies of the amount of supersymmetric dark matter in the 
              coannihilation  region including effects of nonuniversalities will be carried
              out.  Further, studies of dark matter under the influence of CP violation
will
              also be carrried out in the coannihilation region.  Additional research will
              include investigations of new grand unified models which  can remove the
              current constraint on such models brought about by the recent SuperKamiokande
              limit on the p-nubar+K mode. Such models include grand unified models with
              large representations and models in extra  dimensions. Specifically the
              possible deduction of supergravity GUTs
with a cascade from higher dimensional
              supergravity theories to lower dimensional ones along with supersymmetry
              breaking related to extra dimensions will be investigated.
