Title       : RUI: Numerical Simulations of Neutron Stars, Black Holes and Gravitational
               Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0139907

Award Number: 0139907
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Baumgarte tbaumgar@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under this award, numerical tools will be developed for the study of
              astrophysical systems involving relativistic gravity, strong electromagnetic
              fields, and rotation.  These tools will include computer codes for evolving
              fluids and electromagnetic fields in a fixed gravitational field, codes for
              evolving the relativistic gravitational field itself, and a combined code that
              will evolve gravitational fields with both material and electromagnetic
              sources.  Tools for verifying the accuracy of the integrations will also be
              developed.  The codes will be optimized for use on the latest generation of
              supercomputers, publicly released, and made available within the scientific
              community.  In the course of developing these codes, computational
              scientists
will be trained at the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
              levels.  The codes will also be applied by the
developers to problems at the
              forefront of astrophysics and gravitation physics research.

This work is
              motivated by a number of astrophysical systems, including: accreting black
              holes and neutron stars; coalescing binary neutron stars and black holes;
              rapidly rotating neutron stars formed in core-collapse supernovae; and
              collapsing supermassive stars.  Taken together, these objects are the focus of
              a large fraction of current astrophysical research.  They are the likely source
              of detectable gravitational waves, powerful X-ray emission, and gamma-ray
              bursts.  So far, however, they have resisted
understanding because the
              underlying physics of the fluid, the electromagnetic field, and the
              gravitational field is complicated, nonlinear, and time dependent.  Only
              numerical integrations can unlock the fundamental physics of black hole
              accretion, test scenarios for the generation of gamma-ray bursts, and generate
              more accurate predictions for gravitational waveforms from coalescing compact
              binaries.  The required numerical methods do not yet exist; they will be
              developed under this award.

