Title       : Focused Research Groups (FRG): The Dynamics of Growing Biogels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0139926

Award Number: 0139926
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1014555            (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron L. Fogelson fogelson@math.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Keener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1616,7208,9183,9263,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The importance of biogels in the function of biological
systems is
              increasingly recognized, yet little theoretical work
has been done to
              understand their behavior.  Mathematics is
well-suited to sorting out the
              interplay among the many forces
(mechanical, electrochemical, and biochemical)
              that determine
biogel structure and function.  The investigators
              use
mathematical tools to explore four closely related problems of
biogel
              growth and dynamics, with an emphasis on pattern-forming
mechanisms and the
              relationship between pattern and function.
The four problems are biofilm and
              blood clot formation and
function, gastric protection of the stomach, and the
              behavior of
biogels in contact with a moving fluid.  Models are developed
              to
understand how physical properties such as the viscoelastic
constitutive
              properties and the gel morphology are determined and
controlled, and how these
              properties affect the biological
function of the biogel.  The investigators
              use analytical and
computational tools to examine gel growth and dynamics
              on
different scales using various models (continuum, discrete,
isotropic,
              anisotropic), while attempting to incorporate what is
known experimentally,
              and to expand the experimental database
about specific biogel systems.
    
              Biogels are composites of water, filamentous protein
networks, and other
              chemicals, and are increasingly recognized as
having profound influence on the
              function of many biological
systems.  Important biological settings in which
              these biogels
play a major role include blood clot
              formation,
difficult-to-treat bacterial infections, and the proper
protective
              functioning of the stomach lining.  Improved
understanding of how biogels are
              formed and how their properties
are regulated is critical to understanding
              these important
processes and how they can be manipulated to improve
              human
health.  Because the formation and regulation of biogels is
governed by
              physical and chemical properties and because these
properties can be expressed
              mathematically, mathematical tools
can be brought to bear on these problems. 
              Through mathematical
analysis and computational simulations of biogels, a
              wealth of
detailed data can be obtained that complements the data
obtainable
              from traditional laboratory experiments.  Hence the
combination of
              mathematical and experimental investigators
brought together in this project
              is expected to lead to important
new insights about biogel behavior.  The
              project includes
mathematicians, a bioengineer, and a biologist, and
              provides
interdisciplinary research and training opportunities for
students
              and postdocs.
