Title       : Developing Science Graduate Students into Middle Grade Science Classroom
               Resources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0139171

Award Number: 0139171
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1041720            (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Burleigh Harris harrisw@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Shafer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of North Carolina at Wilmington (UNCW) will conduct a three-year
              program with the New Hanover County School system to improve science education
              in the middle schools. A select group of science graduate students (GK-12
              Fellows) from programs in chemistry, biology, earth sciences, and marine
              sciences will be prepared to serve as classroom resource persons for middle
              school teachers and students. The Science and Mathematics Education Center will
              serve as the management hub for the project and the liaison between UNCW and
              the New Hanover County School system. Other participants in the project include
              the Program in Environmental Studies and the Graduate School. For a three-year
              period, GK- 12 Fellows will be placed in all New Hanover County middle schools
              each year focusing on a different grade level. Year I of the project will focus
              on 8th grade classes, Year 2 on 7th grade classes and Year 3 on 6th grade
              classes. Through this partnership with New Hanover County Schools, this project
              will directly impact more than 5200 middle school students over the three years
              of which almost 2000 are minorities. In addition, over 60 middle school
              teachers will be directly or indirectly impacted by this project. The Science
              and Mathematics Education Center will maintain a website that provides a
              conduit between university science faculty, project staff and middle school
              science teachers and students. This website will provide a forum for questions
              and answers, the posting of project activities and a resource for database
              sharing. 
NSF fellows will receive special preparation in teaching science as
              inquiry and in using technology in instruction. Scientific instruction will be
              organized thematically for each grade level addressing the following four
              program strands: the nature of science, science as inquiry, science and
              technology, and science in social and personal perspectives. UNCW faculty will
              serve as the instructional staff for eight-day workshops each summer for GK-12
              Fellows and selected middle school science teachers. These workshops will focus
              on policy regulations for working in K-12 schools, school safety, pedagogy
              instruction, and creation of a curriculum-sequencing guide that is aligned with
              the North Carolina Standard Course of Study for Middle Schools. Weekly seminars
              taught by UNCW science faculty will develop specific inquiry-based activities
              for each grade level according to the sequencing guide. Fellows will spend 10
              hours per week over 36 weeks in middle school classrooms assisting classroom
              teachers with science lesson selection, setup, and demonstration. Participating
              middle school teachers will serve as resource persons to non-participant,
              in-service teachers within their schools, and along with GK-12 Fellows, develop
              and teach two, grade-specific day long workshops during the school year. In
              addition, program participants will develop a grade-specific activity book for
              distribution to all middle school teachers. Participating middle school
              teachers and selected GK-12 Fellows will also serve as workshop leaders each
              summer for new cohorts of Fellows and teachers. 


