Title       : Condition and Security Indicators for Interdependent Infrastructure Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0139878

Award Number: 0139878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil S. Grigg neilg@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evan C. Vlachos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to define multi-attribute infrastructure
              performance indicators for system condition and security ways using emerging
              databases and software systems.  The indicators will enable identification of
              inefficiencies and vulnerabilities of three interdependent infrastructures-road
              transportation, electricity, and water supply. The work initiates a new
              assessment system for overcoming institutional inertia in publicly- and
              investor-owned infrastructure systems: one based on interdependencies of
              regional services.  

As government- or investor-owned monopolies, road
              transportation, electricity, and water supply support basic functions of
              society, but even large, well-managed organizations publish little data about
              condition and security, and where indicators exist, they are not used much.  
              The project seeks to avoid the overgeneralization problem of infrastructure
              research by focusing on information-based indicators that apply both within and
              across infrastructure categories.  The hypotheses to be tested include:  1)
              condition and security measures exist, but are detail-oriented and used mainly
              in budget processes; 2) the public lacks information about condition and
              security of infrastructure services; 3) indicators will facilitate detection of
              problems and inefficiencies, 4) improve coordination and cooperation, and
              enhance condition and security; 5) better system information will lead to more
              robust systems that operate better and last longer, with measurement of
              effectiveness; 5) information for indicators can be made available through new
              software; and 6) new incentives can stimulate better reporting through
              computer-based information systems.  

In the study, indicators will be
              selected from the large number available and from past failure incidents to be
              refined in a case study of infrastructure systems in the Northern Colorado
              study region. A workshop will be conducted in which agency managers will learn
              how use the indicators and insights will be sought on why indicators are not
              used more often or more effectively.  Based on this case study, multi-attribute
              indicators will be constructed. The indicators will then be tested on a
              stakeholder and public audience at a second workshop to determine 1) whether
              the public judges the information to be relevant for decision making and 2) the
              management of public infrastructure can be improved if the public has more
              relevant and easily-understood information about condition and security.  The
              project reports will provide a comprehensive review of infrastructure
              indicators, evaluate indicators and discuss how to synthesize fewer and more
              meaningful ones; evaluate the actual status of use of indicators by managers;
              evaluate public acceptance of the indicators for their decision-making; and
              present reports with state-of-the-art assessments of use of performance
              indicators to improve independent and interdependent management of
              infrastructure systems.

