Title       : Mathematical Tools for Non-invasive Spectroscopic Monitoring of Blood Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0139914

Award Number: 0139914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $890000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Coifman coifman@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Seonja Kim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gustave Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Warner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maxim J. Goldberg-Rugalev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The investigator and his colleagues undertake a coordinated
effort to bring
              to bear ideas from analysis, geometry, and
statistics on the problem of
              analysing spectroscopic data in high
dimensions.  A major challenge
              confronting the analytical chemist
involves the organization and manipulation
              of massive amounts of
data, both measured and computed.  Recent work indicates
              that
special geometric structures allow for efficient transcription
and
              modeling of the relation between spectral measurements and
material
              composition.  The investigators develop tools to identify
such structures and
              to automate the process of analysis and
feature extraction.  In particular,
              the investigators concentrate
on near-infrared spectra of blood, with the goal
              being to
estimate concentrations of various blood analytes from
noninvasive
              spectrometric measurements.  The multidisciplinary
team undertakes a coherent
              approach in which various aspects of
chemical analysis, blood pathology, and
              sensor engineering
interact with mathematical analytic tools.  They adapt and
              extend
computational software to the particular geometry of chemical
spectra,
              for which the data manifolds need to be parametrized by
the concentrations of
              various constituent materials.  To achieve
such parametrizations, they exploit
              mathematical tools for local
multiscale descriptions of data together with
              clustering
techniques that occur naturally in the context of data
              analysis
for expression profiles of gene arrays.
     Shining a light on the
              skin allows one to get spectral data
about the blood beneath the skin and its
              chemical components.
Hence noninvasive blood analysis is possible, if only one
              could
make sense of the data.  The investigator and his colleagues apply
a
              range of mathematical and statistical ideas to build tools that
can make sense
              of such data.  There are important medical payoffs
because of the role blood
              chemistry plays in health.  Moreover,
the underlying mathematical problem, to
              find efficient ways to
make sense of enormous volumes of high-dimensional
              data, arises
across science and engineering, so the potential impact of
              the
project is even wider.  The project provides interdisciplinary
research
              and training opportunities for students and postdocs.
