Title       : Electrochemically Active Polymers - Designing Compositional Structures and
               Electronic Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0139637

Award Number: 0139637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $432000             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Michael Elliott elliott@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1984      MATERIALS SYNTHESIS & PROCESSN
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9179,9239,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Advanced Materials Program in the Division of Chemistry makes this renewal
              award to Colorado State University to develop new electrochemically-active
              metal-centered polymer materials based on transition metal complexes of diimine
              ligands. With this award, Professor Elliott will functionalize ligands to
              polymerize them and to fine-tune their redox properties.  Polymer films of
              single and multi-layer/multi-composition structures will be prepared and
              studied to control counterion motion both within polymer phases and across
              their boundaries and to control the oxidation-state distribution of redox
              sites. Determination of the differences and similarities between
              electroluminescence and electro-generated chemiluminescence, and potential
              application of these polymers in organic light emitting diodes will also be
              studied with this award.  In addition, training in materials chemistry will be
              provided to a diversity of students with this award. 

New
              electrochemically-active materials with transition metals in the center will be
              prepared using functionalized ligands based on diimines.  Polymer films will be
              prepared to control counterion motion both within polymer phases and across
              their boundaries and to control the oxidation-state distribution of redox
              sites. These dendrimeric polymers with controlled oxidation-reduction
              properties will have applications in catalysis, phase transfer reactions, drug
              delivery systems and sensors.  Determination of the differences and
              similarities between electroluminescence and electro-generated
              chemiluminescence would provide insight into potential applications of these
              polymers in organic light emitting diodes. In addition, the award would expose
              both graduate and undergraduate students in different aspects of experimental
              materials chemistry.

