Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences in Marine Molecular Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0139190

Award Number: 0139190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Claiborne   (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Towle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Desert Island Biol Lab
	      
	      Salsbury Cove, ME  04672    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The National Science Foundation's Research Experience for Undergraduates site at
              the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (Salisbury Cove, Maine) provides
              ten eight-week fellowships for undergraduate students majoring in biology or
              its allied fields of study.  Students prioritize three mentors/projects from a
              list of 30 senior scientists exploring timely questions involving marine
              molecular physiology and functional genomics.  Using sharks, skates, flounder,
              sculpin and other sea fauna including invertebrates, students work at the
              laboratory bench to explore questions at the molecular level concerning
              reproduction, osmoregulation, acid base balance, ion transport and
              environmental toxicology.  Students are trained in advanced techniques such as
              confocal microscopy and gene expression.  To supplement bench work,
              undergraduates attend three weekly laboratory-wide science seminars on topics
              related to marine molecular physiology (Monday Morning Membrane Transport
              Seminar, Wednesday Evening Seminar, and Friday 'Brown Bag' Short Lecture
              Seminar) and participate in an ethics course, 'Responsible Conduct in
              Laboratory Research' taught by their mentors.  Students are invited to attend a
              variety of MDIBL scientific conferences in which internationally renown
              researchers present their work.  Selected undergraduates present their research
              at an end-of-the-season event, 'Future Scientists Night' sponsored by MDIBL and
              the Jackson Laboratory.  Finally, students write a research paper for possible
              publication in The Bulletin of the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
              (http://www.mdibl.org/parent-frames/publications/). 

MDIBL's REU Fellowships
              are all-inclusive.  Room, board, supplies, travel and a stipend are provided. 
              Undergraduates are housed on campus in one of two residence halls adjacent to
              the Laboratory volleyball court.  Three meals a day are provided in the MDIBL
              CO OP.  On weekends, undergraduates cook their own meals, with 'raw materials'
              provided in the dining hall.  Activities outside the Laboratory include
              unlimited recreation in nearby Acadia National Park and small towns on Mount
              Desert Island.  The dormitories, the community dining hall, dedicated mentors,
              energetic students, the Laboratory's natural setting and ambiance coalesce to a
              truly unique and productive scientific community. 

Student recruitment point
              of contact:  Michael McKernan (Director of Education), tel. 207 288-3605,
              mmckernan@mdibl.org.  For site and application information see web page at
              http://www.mdibl.org 

