Title       : REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Coastal and Nearshore Marine
               Systems of the Northeastern Gulf of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0139660

Award Number: 0139660
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Heck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan R. Pennock  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
              (REU) site that will provide a Fall semester (twelve weeks) research experience
              in oceanography for a total of seven students.  The REU site is located at the
              Dauphin Island Sea Laboratory (DISL), a permanent field station located in the
              Gulf of Mexico about four miles off the coast of Alabama. The DISL provides
              courses and research facilities for students and faculty from twenty-two
              colleges and universities in Alabama. Participants in the REU program will be
              recruited nationally and matched with a faculty mentor. Under the guidance of
              the faculty mentors, the students will design, implement, analyze and report on
              independent laboratory and field research. Research areas include aspects of
              the ecology and early life history stages of marine fishes and invertebrates;
              coral reef ecology; evolution of benthic communities; the ecology of seagrass
              ecosystems; marine conservation biology; the role of  microorganisms in
              transforming organic and inorganic compounds in marine systems; and
              phytoplankton and zooplankton ecology. In addition, the program holds seminars
              on career opportunities and scientific ethics. In the past, the program has
              successfully attracted disabled and minority participants typically
              under-represented in the marine sciences. Cost-sharing will be provided by the
              DISL.
