Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates in Biology at the University of Texas at
               El Paso
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2002      
File        : a0139463

Award Number: 0139463
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristine M. Garza kgarza@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eppie D. Rael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin C. Flores  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The University of Texas at El Paso will be offering ten Undergraduate Research
              Positions for ten weeks during June and July beginning 2002.  These positions
              will be funded through the NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
              Program in biological research.  The main goal of this program is to provide an
              exciting and nurturing research experience for students, one that will
              encourage them to pursue careers as research scientists.  Each student is
              paired with a faculty advisor, who is often supported by interested graduate
              and advanced undergraduate students.  Students are required to engage in a
              10-week research project.  Areas of research conducted by our faculty include:
              host-parasite interactions, DNA repair, toxicology, lipid metabolism,
              autoimmunity, neurobiology, systematics, desert ecology, behavioral ecology,
              and many others.  In addition to the work with their faculty advisors, students
              attend several weekly meetings: lab meetings with their mentor and fellow lab
              colleagues, a faculty lecture series on research opportunities in biology, and
              a journal club to discuss cutting-edge science that is followed by an informal
              gathering with current UTEP undergraduate and graduate students to discuss
              questions, issues and concerns.  Students will also have the opportunity to
              visit a national research laboratory so as to expand student exposure to
              biology beyond the campus.  Towards the end of the program, students are asked
              to give a short talk at the Undergraduate Summer Research symposium and to
              provide a written summary of their summer research.  As recognition for student
              achievement, two of the ten students will be selected to attend a national
              meeting with their REU mentor based on their overall performance.  Several
              social activities are also organized throughout the summer to help students get
              acquainted with each other, with the University, and with the surrounding area.
