Title       : Synthesis and Characterization of Conjugated Diblock Copolymers (Co-Oligomers)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0139155

Award Number: 0139155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luping Yu lupingyu@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is aimed at establishing a vigorous project to synthesize various
              well-defined, conjugated diblock copolymers and to investigate their physical
              properties.  A conjugated diblock copolymer possesses a rod-rod structure and
              will behave differently than rod-coil types of copolymers.  These conjugated
              diblock copolymers are new architectures of electroactive polymers.  The main
              goal of this work is to understand the kind of electronic and structural
              properties that the rod-rod types of diblock copolymers will exhibit.  To probe
              these properties, various combinations of conjugated blocks and their synthetic
              approaches are outlined in this proposal.  These combinations vary from having
              different amphiphilic properties to having different electronic properties.  A
              series of functionalized conjugated oligomers, ranging from oligothiophenes and
              oligophenylenenvinylenes to oligophenlylenes, will be synthesized.  The
              electronic and physical properties of these oligomers will be investigated as
              the database for their comparison with diblock copolymers (or co-oligomers). 
              Several of the oligomers obtained will be coupled to form diblock copolymers
              with various conjugation lengths and electronic properties.  Since these block
              copolymers can undergo phase separation and form self-assembly, microscopic
              studies of the self-assemblies will be carried out to find the principles
              underlying their molecular packing and phase behaviors.  Copolymers with
              various redox properties will be coupled to explore electro-optic properties
              such as optical absorption and luminescence, and photoconductivity and
              electrical conductivity.  Copolymers with an electron-rich block and an
              electron-deficient one will be functionalized with a hydrophilic side group
              attached to the first and hydrophobic moiety attached to the latter.  These
              block copolymers will be sued to prepare L-B films, which are very interesting
              for their molecular-electronic effects due to their built-in molecular "P-N"
              junction.  These block copolymers are expected to undergo phase separations to
              assemble into nanometer-continuous domains, which will be explored for
              photovoltaic effect.

The investigation of possible applications of the
              diblock copolymers includes their use in electro-optic devises, such as
              photovoltaic and electroluminescent devices, molecular-electronic components,
              and optical switching.  Experiments to explore the properties leading to those
              applications are also proposed. 

