Title       : Advanced Data Analysis Techniques for Active Microwave Occultation Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0139511

Award Number: 0139511
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1323559            (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin M. Herman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven L. Dvorak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Emil Kursinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant advances methods of atmospheric sounding based on measurement and
              interpretation of GPS signals received by low earth orbiting (LEO) satellites. 
              Because of refraction, radio signals follow a slightly bent path and have a
              slightly reduced speed when they propagate through the earth's atmosphere from
              a GPS transmitting satellite to a LEO receiver.  From the amount of bending and
              the excess time delay can be inferred the vertical profile of the radio
              refractivity of the atmosphere.  The refractivity is related to the electron
              density in the ionosphere and to the temperature, pressure, and water vapor
              content of the neutral atmosphere.  Atmospheric sounding using the occultation
              technique separates the different contributions to the refractive index to
              determine both the electron density profile in the high atmosphere and the
              profiles of temperature and humidity in the lower atmosphere.

The project is
              divided into two main parts.  The first is concerned with solving certain
              problems in using the existing system of GPS satellites to monitor profiles of
              temperature, humidity, and electron density.  It includes (1) developing
              corrections for the effects of the ionosphere on measurements in the lower
              atmosphere; (2) studying the effects of multipath propagation in the lower
              troposphere; (3) extending the profiling down to the boundary layer; (4)
              assimilating radio occultation data into weather forecasting models.  The
              second part of the project is aimed at developing an advanced sounding system
              in which an array of as many as six LEO satellites will be equipped for both
              transmitting and receiving signals at frequencies within selected water vapor
              and ozone absorption bands (so-called crosslink experiments).  Measuring the
              amplitudes and phases of such signals enables the determination of profiles of
              temperature, water vapor, and ozone from radio occultations.  This research
              lays the groundwork for new methods of atmospheric sounding that will have
              important application in numerical weather prediction models and, through the
              detection of long-term trends, in climate studies.
