Title       : Harvard Forest REU Research Program in Forest Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0139495

Award Number: 0139495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237918             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Foster   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Donohue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Harvard Forest is a center for NSF-Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) and
              related studies involving more than 75 researchers from Harvard University and
              other institutions.  Since 1993 Harvard Forest has provided a diverse and
              talented group of undergraduate students with training in independent research
              and guidance to graduate study and professional development through a Summer
              Research Program in Ecology.  This program, which is dedicated to promoting
              career development in ecological sciences, includes between 13-18 students each
              summer.  

The research theme of the Harvard Forest REU program addresses the
              relative importance of environmental change, natural disturbance, and human
              activity in controlling current and prospective ecological patterns and process
              in the northeastern U.S.  Studies are diverse and mentors are lead scientists
              and educators in areas ranging from atmospheric chemistry and ecosystem studies
              to wildlife biology, population ecology, ecophysiology, paleoecology, and
              conservation biology.  Mentors in the program include researchers with Marine
              Biological Labs-Ecosystem Center, Woods Hole Research Center, University of New
              Hampshire, University of Massachusetts, Holy Cross College, and three academic
              departments at Harvard University (Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Earth
              and Planetary Sciences, and Harvard Forest).

To provide the most productive
              student experience the program utilizes an effective protocol comprising:
              selection of diverse and productive students; advanced preparation; individual
              mentorship within research groups of faculty, graduate students, post-doctoral
              associates and undergraduates; weekly seminars and discussion groups on
              science, careers, graduate studies, and ethics in science; field trips to other
              research sites and institutions; recreational opportunities; an annual student
              symposium and published proceedings; program evaluation and discussion; and
              follow-up of publications and presentation, theses and careers.

The REU
              program at the Harvard Forest uses exceptionally well-equipped field,
              laboratory, analytical, and housing facilities.  Each student is closely
              supervised in independent studies by a mentor and the program is overseen by a
              coordinator working closely with the Harvard Forest Director, Administrator,
              Museum Coordinator, and Data Manager.  Participants are recruited nationally
              with a strong emphasis on geographic coverage, small colleges and participation
              of women, minorities, and students with disabilities.  The program runs 12
              weeks during the summer although many students continue with research projects
              beyond this period.  Detailed information on past and proposed REU research
              projects and the Summer Research Symposium, which includes past REU student
              research results, is available at www.lternet.edu/hfr.

