Title       : Collaborative Research: The Weak Temperature Gradient Equations for Tropical
               Atmosphere Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0139918

Award Number: 0139918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Majda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, meteorologists and applied mathematicians are
collaborating to
              study the "weak temperature gradient" (WTG) equations for
large-scale tropical
              atmospheric dynamics.  The WTG equations form a
"balance model", or set of
              singular limit equations, asymptotically valid
in a parameter regime relevant
              to the tropical atmosphere.  The WTG
equations are designed to facilitate
              study of key aspects of the tropical
climate problem, such as the large-scale
              dynamical roles of moist
convection and other diabatic processes.  This focus
              is achieved by
eliminating other processes which can be present in solutions
              to the
primitive equations, such as gravity waves and baroclinic instability,
              in
the same way as gravity waves are eliminated in extratropical
              balance
models  such as the quasi-geostrophic equations.  One goal of this
              project
is to develop new mathematics by studying the WTG equations'
              properties.
Another goal is to solve the equations under geometries,
              boundary
conditions and forcings which represent idealizations of those
              relevant to
the real earth's climate, and then to study the sensitivity of
              the
solutions to key parameters.  Achievement of these goals is expected
              to
lead to deeper understanding of both the real climate and more
              complex
mathematical models of it, such as general circulation models
              (GCMs).

The earth's climate system is notoriously complex.  Many
              different
physical processes interact in a tangled web of feedbacks to produce
              the
dynamic and variable climate we observe.  Unlike a laboratory
              science,
meteorology and oceanography are hindered by the impossibility
              of
controlled experiments which might allow the key mechanisms to
              be
conclusively revealed.  We are stuck with the one planet on which we
              live
and cannot change its basic properties to see what happens. 
              Consequently,
the science proceeds by observation and by a heavy reliance on
              numerical
simulation with GCMs, which are sophisticated computer programs run
              on the
most powerful computers available.  These simulations offer
              the
possibility of a certain kind of controlled climate experiments:  we
              can
create virtual earths on the computer, control their properties,
              and
observe their behavior with precision.  One obvious limitation of
              this
approach is that the models are imperfect representations of reality. 
              A
less obvious, but equally important problem is the models'
              complexity,
which both limits the number and type of simulations which can be
              done and
renders the results nearly as difficult to understand as the real
              climate
system.  Because of these problems, there is a need to
              supplement
observational and GCM studies with theoretical studies using models
              that
are simpler than GCMs - if not simple enough to allow solution with
              pencil
and paper, then at least using very simple computer programs that
              run
quickly on a PC.  To the extent that these simpler models have
              key
features in common with the real system, their simplicity allows a
              deeper
level of understanding of the basic dynamics of climate and leads
              to
explicit hypotheses that can be tested against observations and
              GCM
simulations.  This project  harnesses the physical insight of
              climate
scientists and the sophisticated methods of applied mathematicians
              to
develop and study simple models designed specifically to represent
              the
tropical atmospheric component of the earth's climate system.

