Title       : RUI: Constraints on Negative Energy in Field Theory and Gravitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0139969

Award Number: 0139969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Roman roman@ccsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central CT State U
	      1615 Stanley Street
	      New Britain, CT  060532439    860/832-2365

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research discussed here deals with the implications of a very unusual form
              of energy. The existence of this so-called "negative energy" is allowed by the
              laws of quantum field theory, which describe the behavior of matter and energy
              on microscopic scales. Since negative energy would have repulsive gravitational
              effects, this work lies at the intersection of quantum field theory and
              Einstein's theory of gravity, general relativity. The focus of the research is
              the extended investigation of restrictions imposed by the laws of physics on
              negative energy. These generalized restrictions would involve the placement of
              constraints on the distribution of negative energy in both time and space. In
              addition, the scope of the constraints would be extended to include the effects
              of gravitation. Regions of negative energy also appear to be accompanied by
              large fluctuations in energy density, which could perhaps lead to large
              fluctuations in the gravitational fields produced by the negative energy. How
              this would affect the description of gravity, given in Einstein's theory as the
              curvature of the geometry of space and time, in these circumstances is
              currently not well understood. It is hoped to investigate this issue as
              well.

These topics are of interest for several reasons. Situations involving
              negative energy, such as the Casimir effect and squeezed states of light, have
              been produced in the laboratory. The amounts of negative energy generated in
              these experiments are extremely tiny. However, if the laws of physics impose no
              constraints on negative energy, then one might be able to create large amounts
              of it and thereby produce bizarre macroscopic effects. Such effects could
              include: traversable wormholes (tunnels connecting otherwise distant regions of
              space and time), warp drives (for faster-than-light travel), time machines for
              travel into the past, violations of the second law of thermodynamics (e.g.,
              refrigerators requiring no power sources), and the destruction of black holes
              (the remains of collapsed dead stars). However, research by Larry Ford and the
              author has shown that quantum field theory does impose some rather strong
              restrictions on negative energy. These constraints have come to be known as
              "quantum inequalities", and yield severe limitations on the macroscopic effects
              of negative energy mentioned above. Loosely speaking, they say that large
              negative energies can exist for only short periods of time. It has recently
              been realized that even the currently known quantum inequalities, although
              formulated as restrictions in time, can be used to rule out or constrain the
              ways in which negative energy can be distributed in space as well. These
              results, together with some explicit examples of spatial distributions of
              negative energy which are allowed by the laws of physics, indicate that
              negative energy must be subtly intertwined with positive energy in space. Must
              this always be the case? A major focus of the proposed investigation will be to
              narrow the gap between distributions which can be ruled out and those which are
              definitely allowed. The latter will involve the construction and analysis of
              additional explicit examples. This represents a continuation of my previous
              research and essentially aims to extend the scope of all of these results.

