Title       : NSF Graduate Teaching Fellows Program of the Duke University Marine Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0139149

Award Number: 0139149
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $988850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Celia Bonaventura   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael K. Orbach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              a. Project Title: NSF Graduate Teaching Fellows Program of the Duke University
              Marine Laboratory 
b. Institution: Duke University Marine Laboratory 
c.
              Principal Investigator: Celia Bonaventura, Ph.D., Professor of Cell Biology,
              Duke University Medical School and Nicholas School of The Environment and Earth
              Sciences 
Co-Principal Investigator: Michael K. Orbach, PhD, Professor of the
              Practice of Marine 
Affairs and Policy, Duke University Nicholas School of the
              Environment and Earth Sciences 
d. Number of Fellows: Nine NSF Teaching
              Fellows, including 3 undergraduate students, 3 masters students, and 3
              pre-doctoral students 
e. Target Audience: The Program will focus on high
              school and middle school grade levels, with some activities that attract
              students of all ages. 
f. NSF-supported disciplines: Within the broad context
              of Coastal and Marine Environments, topics of instruction will include
              disciplinary and interdisciplinary aspects of biology, chemistry, physical
              science, earth science, ecology, environmental social sciences, mathematics,
              statistics and technology. Throughout all aspects of the Program, covering many
              scientific disciplines, we will encourage development of communication skills,
              including written, spoken, and graphic communications. 
g. Brief description
              of project and benefits: This proposal is submitted in response to the NSF's
              solicitation for Graduate Teaching Fellows in K-12 Education. The overall goal
              of the proposed project is to team some of the best students from Duke
              University's Marine Laboratory (as undergraduate and graduate Teaching Fellows)
              with high school and middle school students from neighboring rural public
              schools. This effort will be strongly supported by the Dean of Duke
              University's Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth Sciences, as well as
              an enthusiastic group of Duke faculty members and local school administrators
              and educators. 
The Duke University Marine Laboratory, staffed by Faculty of
              the School of the Environment and Earth Sciences, provides an outstanding
              setting for teacher and student training. Our program focus, Coastal and Marine
              Environments, includes a number of key domains that are relevant to
              NSF-supported science disciplines. Our project team has a broad,
              interdisciplinary nature, including expertise in biochemistry, marine ecology
              and zoology, environmental social science, integrated earth/biological/physical
              science and science education. We thus offer both a unique setting for science
              education and an excellent faculty and student support base for broad coverage
              of NSF-supported disciplines. 
The high-quality Duke students who will serve
              as Teaching Fellows are undoubtedly our best assets with regard to this
              program. Their talents and enthusiasm will be augmented by Duke faculty
              participants who have consistently demonstrated an exceptional interest in
              working with the public schools and in facilitating public school outreach for
              Marine Laboratory undergraduate and graduate students as a key component of
              their Duke experience. All of these participants will work with the Teaching
              Fellows and K-12 students to focus on the educational disciplines listed above.
              
We believe one of the strongest aspects of the proposed project is the
              opportunity for students to pursue the in situ exploration of marine/coastal
              environments to which the Marine Laboratory has direct access. This unique
              opportunity will prove to be exciting and fun for the students who live in and
              near these environments. Our program will provide the inquiry-based opportunity
              for K-12 students in coastal areas to integrate the knowledge they have
              acquired about their own "backyard" into a more complete picture of the complex
              functioning of coastal and marine ecosystems. Our previous experience in
              working with the public school students in Carteret County, North Carolina,
              confirms this to be an approach 

