Title       : Frameworks of Transition Metals and Multifunctional Linkers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0139565

Award Number: 0139565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Slavi C. Sevov ssevov@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              New hybrid inorganic/organic materials with open-framework structures and
              improved properties based on various multifunctional linkers will be
              synthesized. The emphasis on transition-metal - multifunctional linker systems
              will lead to new open-framework compounds with new structures and novel
              properties. For example, the borophosphate group, a multifunctional "linker"
              with borate and phosphate functionalities, is a novel species that acts
              similarly  to the aluminophosphates in some compounds, but brings unique
              structural features in others. Envisioned for this project is further
              utilization of such capabilities by using analogies with known open-framework
              compounds where various templates, transition metals, and synthetic conditions
              will be systematically studied. Other multifunctional linkers to be
              investigated include di-phosphonates, carboxy-phosphonates, and phosphonated
              a-aminoacids to provide various coordination modes to the transition metal
              centers as well as different functionalities to the solid. Students involved
              with this project will acquire valuable skills in structure characterization,
              property measurements and novel synthetic techniques. Their training in
              cutting-edge research methodology is emphasized.
%%%
Inorganic/organic hybrid
              materials have significant potential for applications in molecular separation
              and sensing, ion exchange, and catalysis in the petrochemical industry and for
              chemicals production. The technological impact of the latter will be in
              improvements in chemical processing and, subsequently, an increase in
              energy-use efficiency. The educational aspect of the program is aimed at
              teaching undergraduate and graduate students not only in particular lab
              techniques but also in general understanding and appreciation of solid state
              chemistry. Training in these areas will make these chemists highly  competitive
              for employment in universities and in chemical industry.


