Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Rice Quantum Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0139202

Award Number: 0139202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence S. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216677             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Johnson johnson@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 9134      EDUCATION & INTERDISCIP RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The REU program conducted by the Rice Quantum Institute brings together a number
              of students from outside universities as well as from Rice University for a
              ten-week interdisciplinary summer research program. The focus is to provide
              undergraduate students, frequently from schools with more limited resources,
              with a jump start into many aspects of research that cannot easily be learned
              in classes.  The students are exposed to different disciplines by contact with
              a variety of research groups, organized lab tours, weekly seminars by Rice grad
              students, and frequent scientific and social interactions with other REU
              students. Each student also works on a project with a particular research group
              from among the departments of Physics and Astronomy, Chemistry, Electrical and
              Computer Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science,
              Bioengineering, Chemical Engineering, Computational and Applied Mathematics,
              and Civil and Environmental Engineering. This involves an accelerated learning
              period where students become familiar with a new field and depend on the
              undergrads, grads, postdocs and faculty mentor of the group to show them the
              relevant literature, lab expertise, instrument and computer skills, etc. This
              leads into the major period of research where they are given the responsibility
              for bringing the project to a successful completion. Participants are given an
              opportunity to to present their work on the last day at the RQI Colloquium.
              This annual event, which assembles a large audience made up of REU students, of
              research groups and others from Rice, as well as interested outsiders from
              neighboring schools and industries, showcases research going on within the
              Institute.

