Title       : Questions Concerning Parabolic Measure, Uniform Rectifiability and the Kato
               Square Root Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0139748

Award Number: 0139748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133265             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              March 6, 2002
PI: John L. Lewis
DMS-0139748

Abstract:

The aim of this
              project is to investigate further some problems originating from my work on (a)
              caloric  measure in parabolic flat domains, (b) inverse problems  and (c)  Kato
              type problems. 
Under (a) I would like to know to what extent such concepts as
              uniform rectifiability, Reifenberg flatness, and asymptotic optimal doubling
              which have been extensively studied in regard to  Laplace's equation, can be
              generalized to the heat equation. As regards (b), I would like to investigate
              whether very weak overdetermined boundary conditions for solutions to certain
              
p-Laplacian type equations in a domain D imply that the boundary of D
              satisfies a  regularity condition similar to uniform rectifiability.  Finally
              under (c) I would like to know if an extrapolation technique, used by the
              author and co-authors on some parabolic measure and Kato problems, could be
              applied to other Kato type problems. 
 
Many physical problems can be
              described in the language of partial differential equations (PDE's). Well known
              examples of such equations arising in the 19 th century are Laplace's equation,
              the heat equation, the wave equation, Maxwell's equations, and the Navier-
              Stokes' equation. Without question knowledge derived from a theoretical study
              of these equations led to many fundamental technological advances during the 19
              th and 20 th centuries. Three questions often asked by those who study PDE's
              are (a) does there exist a solution, (b) is it unique and (c) does it possess
              nice properties or is it regular?  As concerns  (a) and (b) one is often
              concerned with so called boundary values or boundary conditions for a solution
              in its domain of existence. So called overdetermined boundary value problems
              have no solution whereas such classical problems as the Dirichlet and Neumann
              problems have solutions if the boundary of the given domain and the boundary
              conditions are sufficiently nice (smooth). My work is concerned with how much
              one can relax these assumptions and still get meaningful theorems. For example,
              my co-authors and I have obtained nearly optimal results, which show that
              certain boundary value problems for Laplace's equation can only be solved if
              the given domain is a ball. As another example of my work, classical theorems
              for the Laplacian in smooth domains have been shown to hold in a class of rough
              domains called Lipschitz or sawtooth domains.  More recent work has generalized
              these results to nongraph domains satisfying `uniform rectifiability'
              assumptions.  My co-authors and I have obtained the analogue of Lipschitz and
              uniformly rectifiable domains for the heat equation. Our work provides a model
              for certain free boundary problems such as ice melting (the Stefan problem).
              




