Title       : Numerical Investigation of Convective Initiation and Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0139284

Award Number: 0139284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Fovell rfovell@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will extend prior research concerning the initiation,
              structure and behavior of atmospheric convection utilizing numerical
              simulations.  Part of the research is dedicated to the study of squall line
              storms and part focuses on convection associated with sea breeze fronts (SBFs)
              and horizontal convective rolls (HCRs).  There is a considerable and profitable
              synergy between the two, particularly with regard to the study of convective
              initiation.

In squall line simulations, the small perturbations that are
              often seen in the inflow just upstream of the model storms can act as
              convective triggers, expediting new cell formation and even keeping the
              organized convection active.  These perturbations appear to be generated in
              response to storm motions and circulations and reside in a portion of the
              environment that appears to be preconditioned by the storm itself, making it
              more favorable for this initiation to occur.  In the case of the SBF, the
              boundary layer rolls provide the (now independent) upstream perturbation.  The
              SBF and HCR circulations can combine to create deep convection in situations
              where neither phenomenon could do so in isolation.

Both the squall line and
              the SBF/HCR phenomena provide an interesting interplay of the three factors
              that influence convective initiation: kinematic controls, moisture controls and
              dynamical forcing.  Kinematic controls include the direct effect of waves,
              vortices, etc., on convective initiation or inhibition; the HCRs represent one
              example.  The aforementioned preconditioning is a moisture control: the
              environment, responding to latent heating and cooling in and around the storm,
              tends to adjust by creating a cooled and moistened tongue of air in the storm's
              immediate upstream environment, and the triggers tend to form in this tongue. 
              These triggers may have their genesis in transient gravity waves excited by the
              convection itself and passing through the upstream environment; this would
              represent a dynamical forcing. 

One of the tools to be utilized in this
              research includes an adjoint cloud model, which will be used for sensitivity
              analysis and dynamical tracking.  The adjoint will be of significant use in
              situations such as the convective initiation study, in which more than one
              process or factor may be active and it isn't clear which is the pivotal or
              primordial one. 

Successful completion of this research will lead to better
              understanding of the initiation of convective precipitating systems.
