Title       : Deformations and Representation Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0139737

Award Number: 0139737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frauke M. Bleher fbleher@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator applies tools from group representation
theory to study
              deformations of representations of profinite
groups and of complexes of
              modules for such groups. The
investigator's main theme is to examine problems
              and
applications related to generalizations of the deformation
theory of
              group representations developed by B. Mazur. The
generalizations are
              extensions of this theory to (1)
deformations of objects in derived
              categories, and (2)
deformations of representations whose images lie in
              various
linear algebraic groups, such as orthogonal groups. The
investigator
              studies applications of these theories to certain
embedding problems. The
              second theme is to determine for finite
groups the ring structure of the
              universal deformation ring of
an irreducible modular representation, using
              only the local
structure of the finite group. The investigator also works
              on
one other project which concerns moduli spaces of representations
of
              finite dimensional algebras. The goal is to use the rich
algebro-geometric
              structure of moduli spaces to obtain a better
understanding of the geometric
              behavior of algebra automorphisms.

Groups are abstract mathematical objects
              by which one may encode
and study symmetry, for example in chemical molecules,
              crystals, networks,
or abstract mathematical structures. Representations of
              groups provide
a way to extract information about the internal structures of a
              group.
Roughly speaking, representations can be thought of as
              "linearized
snapshots" of the group which are given by explicitly
              described
matrices. In this project, the investigator studies deformations
              of
representations. The deformations of a given representation form a
family
              of representations which are associated to this representation
in a certain
              way. In case there is a single deformation which can be
used to describe all
              deformations, one talks about a universal
deformation. Universal deformations
              provide universal constructions which
can be used to solve certain problems
              all at once, which otherwise would
have to be solved in a case-by-case
              fashion. It is the goal of this
project to study certain generalizations of
              deformations of
representations which in turn should lead to more powerful
              applications
in different areas.
