Title       : Neutrino and Photon Propagation in a Medium with External Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0139538

Award Number: 0139538
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederick Cooper                        
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose F. Nieves nieves@ltp.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U Puerto Rico Rio Piedras
	      Office of External Resources
	      PO Box 21489, San Juan, PR  009311489    787/763-4949

NSF Program : 1286      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project extends and continues previous work on the behavior of photons and
              neutrinos in a medium.  Concrete calculations to be performed include: (1) The
              effects of the presence of a magnetic field on neutrino damping rates due to
              the effects of the matter-induced electromagnetic couplings of the neutrino.
              These effect, independent of neutrino mixing, could provide a mechanism for
              pulsar kicks; (2) The imaginary part of the photon self-energy (from which the
              photon damping rate is determined)in a medium that contains, besides the usual
              background of charged particles, a background of neutrinos that moves, as a
              whole, relative to the stationary background. This type of system has been
              considered in connection with energy generation mechanisms in supernova
              explosions; (3) The photon self-energy in a medium with an external plane wave
              field to study chirality effects. This is a novel application of thermal field
              theory methods in the context of optical and condensed matter physics.

The
              properties of photons and neutrinos in a medium, and their interactions, have
              been the subjects of continuous attention over the years because of they
              provide information about underlying processes in the environments in which
              they occur. This information can be important in various astrophysical and
              cosmological situations and in condensed matter and physical optics laboratory
              experiments. Apart from the details that are specific to the particular
              calculations and physical contexts of the calculations in this project, the
              treatment of these problems involve ideas, methods and techniques that can be
              useful in other branches of physics. 
