Title       : Research Experience for Undergraduates: Behavioral Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0139137

Award Number: 0139137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Danielle N. Gray dgray@learnlink.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Marsteller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Behavioral Neuroscience (CBN) is an NSF Science and Technology
              Center with eight participating Atlanta-area institutions: Clark-Atlanta
              University, Emory University, Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of
              Technology, Morehouse College, Morehouse School of Medicine, Morris Brown
              College, and Spelman College.  These eight institutions have partnered to
              investigate those brain mechanisms that are responsible for social behaviors
              (e.g. fear, aggression, and reproduction) and to develop programs that expose
              students at all levels to the latest findings and career opportunities in the
              sciences.  Funding from the NSF-REU program will allow participants to enjoy
              the opportunity to partake in an inter-institutional, interdisciplinary
              research environment.  For ten summer weeks, ten undergraduate students will
              engage in research focused on topics including fear, reproduction and
              aggression.  In addition, students will participate in weekly ethics and career
              seminars, a poster session coordinated in conjunction with the Emory's Howard
              Hughes summer research program, biweekly journal clubs and methods course, and
              professional development training sessions. 

Students at the freshman and
              sophomore levels from minority serving institutions, women colleges, and small
              colleges nationwide with limited research opportunities will be the primary
              targets of our recruitment efforts.  Also, students from Atlanta will be
              invited to continue their research project throughout the academic year.  In
              order to ensure that freshmen and sophomores will acclimate to the demands of
              an intense research environment, participants will be placed in CBN labs with
              junior and senior summer research students, who will serve as peer mentors. 
              NSF-REU participants will receive a stipend of $3000, room and board, and a
              travel award, which may be used to cover the costs of attending the summer
              program and/or a national scientific meeting. 

