Title       : Research Conference: Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0139236

Award Number: 0139236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joachim Rosenthal Rosenthal.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0139236
Rosenthal

The International Symposium on the Mathematical Theory of
              Networks 
and Systems (MTNS) is a major international conference. It attracts
              
typically 400 mathematicians and other scientists working in theoretical
              
aspects of systems theory. The symposium is interdisciplinary and attracts
              
mathematicians, engineers and researchers working in all aspects of 
systems
              theory. Mathematical methods which play a role in the areas 
mentioned above
              stem from a broad range of fields of pure and applied 
mathematics, including
              ordinary and partial differential equations, real and 
complex analysis,
              numerical analysis, probability theory and stochastic 
analysis, operator
              theory, linear and commutative algebra as well as 
algebraic and differential
              geometry.
 
In August 2002 the MTNS symposium will be held on the campus of
              the 
University of Notre Dame.  Travel support will be provided by this award
              
for approximately twenty new researchers (graduate students and recent
              
doctoral recipients) and 2-3 international researchers needing special
              
assistance to attend this conference. The symposium program will include
              
plenary lectures, special topic invited lectures, mini-symposia,
              mini-
courses, special topic sessions and contributed papers. The symposium
              
will cover serious mathematical issues as well as some important applied
              
areas. Several broad application areas were selected: (1) Systems theoretic
              
questions in biology, (2) Applications in the area of telecommunications,
              
(3) Computational questions arising in control and systems theory and (4)
              
Systems theoretic questions in the area of mathematical finance. In each of
              
these important application areas 2-3 established researchers were asked to
              
organize a "Mini-symposium". This is a sub-symposium which typically
              
consists of a sequence of tutorial lectures as well as a sequence of invited
              
sessions each consisting of 4 research papers. The organizers had these
              
areas of research in mind at the time the plenary speakers and the special
              
topics speaker were selected.

