Title       : REU SITE: Summer Research Opportunities in Enviromental Sciences in the Sierra
               Nevada and White Mountains of California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0139633

Award Number: 0139633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Morrison mike@wmrs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan May Szewczak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              White Mountain Research Station, University of California
This REU program will
              link nationally recruited undergraduates with accomplished academic scientists.
               Special emphasis will be placed on including minority and women students so
              they may benefit from the research and team building experience.  These
              research teams will work in the unique and challenging environment of the
              eastern Sierra Nevada region of California and will use four laboratory
              facilities in the White Mountains.  This REU site will encompass a wide range
              of environmental biology research, from high altitude physiology to population
              ecology.  These projects will expose students to broadly related research
              questions and state-of-the-art technologies, while allowing each student to
              explore a particular aspect of a project in depth.  Project mentors will
              facilitate the REU by supporting the technological, logistical, and
              organizational needs of the students.  Week long orientations at the beginning
              of the program will introduce the research projects and mentors to the
              students, and provide the students with basic knowledge of the region and the
              team building process.  Led by faculty mentors, weekly research team meetings
              will provide time for traditional scientific reviews of the previous week's
              work.  Additionally, students will also meet as a group and discuss how they
              are progressing as members of their research teams.  An important emphasis of
              this program will be team building and positive work environments and the
              direct role of students in the process through discussions and feedback.  As a
              result, the impact of this REU program will be to expand a student's
              understanding of, and participation in, effective research programs while
              producing research that has the potential to contribute substantially to a
              particular 

