Title       : Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes Studied by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0139452

Award Number: 0139452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yue Wu yuewu@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is focused on investigation of single-walled carbon nanotubes
              (SWNTs) using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).  The one-dimensional structural
              characteristics of SWNTs could lead to novel correlated electronic states which
              is one of the most fundamental issues in condensed matter physics.  NMR will be
              used to examine the correlation of electrons in SWNTs.  The properties of SWNTs
              can be modified by Li and K intercalations and NMR will be used to investigate
              the intercalation mechanism and characterize changes of electronic properties. 
              This could lead to new methods for tailoring the properties of SWNTs with
              applications including Li batteries.  Finally, the accessibility of SWNTs by
              gas molecules and the characteristics of adsorption will be investigated.  This
              study provides insight into the nano-confinement effects on nanofluids and
              could provide crucial information for the development of SWNT-based molecular
              sensors and filters.  This research provides an excellent opportunity for
              students to acquire a broad knowledge and research capabilities including novel
              materials synthesis, state-of-the-art spectroscopy, fundamental physics, and
              applications suitable for a wide range of careers including in academe,
              industry, and government.

This research is focused on investigation of
              single-walled carbon nanotube (SWNT), a seamless cylinder formed by wrapping a
              graphene sheet.  The study aims at understanding the electronic properties,
              especially novel characteristics associated with the one-dimensional nature of
              the structure.  Modifications of SWNT properties by lithium and potassium
              intercalations will also be explored with potential applications such as
              high-density lithium batteries.  Trapping of ambient gas molecules inside the
              tubes of SWNTs will be studied.  This could lead to sensitive molecular sensors
              and efficient gas filters.  The main technique to be used is nuclear magnetic
              resonance, which provides detailed information on structures, molecular motion,
              and electronic properties.  This research provides an excellent opportunity for
              students to acquire a broad knowledge and research capabilities including novel
              materials synthesis, state-of-the-art spectroscopy, fundamental physics, and
              applications suitable for a wide range of careers including in academe,
              industry, and government.  It will also attract high school and undergraduate
              students to the exciting field of nanotechnology.

