Title       : Dynamics of R.F. Discharges for Materials Etching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0139956

Award Number: 0139956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Lieberman lieber@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan J. Lichtenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0139956
Lieberman

Chemically reactive plasma discharges are widely used in
              the semiconductor and flat panel display industries for etching and deposition
              processes: moreover, their use has become critical for very large scale
              integrated (VLSI) circuit and thin film transistor (TFT) production. High
              density rf inductively coupled plasma sources are playing an increasing role in
              processing as feature sizes shrink and as wafer and TFT substrate sizes
              increase. This proposal is for continuation of research on such
              discharges.

Almost all processing applications require the use of fluorine,
              chlorine or oxygen-containing feedstock gases, which produces an
              electronegative discharge plasma containing a high concentration of negative
              ions. Such discharges have been found to be unstable in certain regimes of
              discharge pressure and applied radio frequency power, adversely affecting
              processing performance. 

The proposed research program has the following
              components: 

(a) Experiments will be performed and analytical models will be
              developed for instabilities in inductively coupled plasma sources with
              electronega-tive gas feedstocks. The program continues the PIs experiments with
              more complete diagnostics and improves the chemistry in their present models,
              which now only qualitatively agree with the experimental results.

(b) They
              will perform general theo-retical studies of electronegative discharges in
              support of (a) above, continuing a program to develop increasingly accurate
              models.

The experimental studies of electronegative discharge equilibrium,
              hysteresis, and instabilities will be performed in a planar inductive discharge
              (transformer-coupled plasma, or TCP) of the conventional type used for VLSI
              processing.  A sulfur hexafluoride/argon feedstock gas mixture allowing control
              of the negative ion density will be used. 


