Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Political Economy and the Development
               of Chiefly Societies from the Rio Parita Area in the Central Region of Panama
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0139005

Award Number: 0139005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Drennan drennan+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, Mr. Mikael Haller will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation in Central Panama.  He will conduct
              archaeological investigations at the regional level by examining settlement
              occupation over a 4000 year period up to Spanish contact in the 16th century. 
              Central Panama is an ideal area to investigate the development of chiefdoms
              since there is both archaeological and historical data relating to the region
              which can be used to test against current models for the development of chiefly
              societies.

On the one hand, anthropologists have argued that long-distance
              exchange of esoteric knowledge was critical for establishing political power,
              as opposed to economic gain.  In contrast others claim that chiefly control of
              local resources was the main factor.  A third model, focusing on warfare as the
              key factor in the development of chiefdoms from autonomous societies, derives
              from a comparison of tribal and chiefly societies in South America and Panama. 
              In evaluating these models, Mr. Haller will use survey data in determining the
              relative importance of five factors that combined include the major components
              of the three models: control of agricultural land, population growth, local
              exchange and craft production, long-distance exchange, and warfare.

Despite
              recent archaeological work concerning important sociopolitical issues, there is
              still relatively little information about the geography, economy and
              development of Panamanian chiefdoms and various hypotheses remain
              unsubstantiated by the archaeological record.  Clearly, using Panamanian
              chiefdoms as models for archaeological reconstruction of other cases and for
              comparative studies requires a better understanding of their emergence and
              development prior to the sixteenth-century, as well as the nature of the
              archaeological record at the time of contact. 

This research project
              addresses concerns similar to those of regional specialists working around the
              world on the formation of complex societies since an underlying goal is to
              determine the relative importance demographic stress, economic specialization,
              control of agricultural production, and local exchange in this process.  This
              research project will add to current understanding of regional processes
              through an examination of the development of Panamanian chiefdoms and it will
              provide a specific case for comparative studies of sociopolitical
              organization.

Therefore, this project has the potential to address several
              important lines of anthropological inquiry.  Foremost is the contribution this
              research will make to the study of the development of complex societies.  In
              addition, it will contribute to a better understanding of the relationship
              between archaeological and ethnohistorical accounts-crucial in reconstructing
              and interpreting prehistoric societies.  On a general anthropological level,
              data from this research can be used in understanding the relationship between
              social complexity and population pressure, warfare, and control of economic
              resources. It will also assist in training a promising young scientist.



