Title       : Physics with Ultracold Molecules and Fermionic Atoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0139995

Award Number: 0139995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $580000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Doyle doyle@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1291      ATOMIC & MOLECULAR DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Cold atom interactions and dilute Fermi degenerate atomic gases have become very
              dynamic areas of research. One of the most intriguing new frontiers is the
              creation of quantum degenerate dipolar fermionic gases. Such gases are
              predicted to exhibit exciting new phenomena including dipole-induced mean field
              effects and, perhaps, BCS superfluidity. Ultracold dipolar gases could also
              play a role in the construction of a robust quantum computer.

Dilute Fermi
              degenerate atomic gases have numerous features that need to be explored.
              Similar to their charged particle counterparts (electrons), their behavior in
              the condensed state will be varied and depend crucially on the subtleties of
              their interactions. Very little is known about ultracold dipolar Fermi systems.
              One promising route to the study of such systems is through evaporative and
              sympathetic cooling of magnetically trapped atomic gases.

The goal of this
              research proposal is to investigate the magnetic trapping and evaporative
              cooling of Fermionic atoms, the interactions between cold and ultracold atoms,
              and the possible creation of atomic Fermi degenerate gases with high magnetic
              moment. This will be accomplished using magnetically trapped metal atoms (such
              as chromium). Spectroscopy will be used for detection of the trapped species.
              Precise determination of elastic and inelastic collisional cross sections will
              provide important information about these systems. Fermi degeneracy will be
              pursued through a combination of laser cooling and evaporative cooling of
              magnetically trapped co-resident bosonic and fermionic isotopes.

