Title       : Metal-Catalyzed Asymmetric Cyclization Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0139714

Award Number: 0139714
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xumu Zhang xumu@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objectives of this work are to design and test new transition metal
              catalysts for effecting asymmetric carbon-carbon bond forming reactions.  Two
              reactions in particular will be studied in detail, asymmetric rhodium catalyzed
              ene reactions and silver and copper catalyzed asymmetric 1,3 dipolar
              cycloadditions of azomethine ylides.  In each case, new sets of chiral
              phosphine ligands will be prepared and then an understanding of the mechanisms
              of these reactions will be used to "fine tune" metal/ligand catalysts systems
              for these reactions.  The rhodium catalyzed enyne cycloisomerization will be
              applied to asymmetric syntheses of the natural products Oppositol and
              alpha-Kainic acid.  The silver and copper catalyzed reactions will be applied
              to core structures found in hexahydrotriquinacene, hydantoin, and polycyclic
              fused lactam containing natural products. 

With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Xumu Zhang
              of the Department of Chemistry at Penn State University.  Dr. Zhang will
              explore stereoselective cyclization reactions which are catalyzed by rhodium,
              silver, and copper reagents.  The ability to form carbon-carbon bonds in
              molecules which are chiral (have two nonsuperimposable mirror images) and make
              only one of the two possible forms (a single enantiomer) is one of the most
              important problems facing the pharmaceutical industry today.  When developed,
              Dr. Zhang's rhodium catalyzed work could be applied to the synthesis of natural
              products such as Oppositol and alpha-Kainic acid.  The marine natural product
              Kainic acids are potent neurotransmitters and a worldwide shortage of these
              compounds has hindered work in the neuroscience community.  The silver and
              copper catalyzed reactions will be applied to core structures found in
              hexahydrotriquinacene, hydantoin, and polycyclic fused lactam containing
              natural products which have a broad range of biological activities as
              antivirals, antifungals, antibacterials, and herbicidals.  Students trained
              during the course of this work will gain skills needed by the pharmaceutical
              industry which now produces a number of single enantiomer compounds. 


