Title       : Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biological Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0139577

Award Number: 0139577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julius H. Jackson jhjacksn@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Summer Program for Undergraduate Research in Biological Systems (SuPURBS).  
              SuPURBS is a new, summer residency program to support students for 10 weeks of
              undergraduate research at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michgan. 
              The Program objectives are to: (i) facilitate undergraduate research with a
              cross-disciplinary, thematic emphasis on molecular and cellular systems
              analysis; (ii) broaden the exposure of students to mathematical skills that
              apply to biological questions; (iii) promote student and faculty interaction;
              (iv) broaden awareness of career opportunities in research, education and
              industry; and (v) utilize educational and research collaborations between
              faculty at undergraduate institutions and at Michigan State University to
              prepare students for increased use of mathematical approaches to solve
              biological questions.  The Program focus is to combine a research experience in
              areas of molecular and cellular biosciences, along with classroom exposure to
              methods and strategies for analysis of biological systems.  Over 54 faculty
              associated with 15 academic departments, three research centers, and two
              graduate, interdepartmental, academic programs comprise the pool of research
              mentors who are accessible to SuPURBS program participants.  Research
              disciplines represented include microbial biology; biochemistry; cell biology;
              microbial ecology; molecular evolution; immunology; signal transduction;
              parasitology; cryobiology; phylogenetics; plant biology; astrobiology;
              infectious diseases; genetics and molecular genetics.  Maximizing the time for
              student research and promoting interaction among students as well as between
              students and faculty are key features of the overall program design.  Core
              program activities for SuPURBS participants include: a) four weeks of four
              hours per week mathematics exposure under the theme of Analysis of Biological
              Systems; b) weekly, group journal club and research discussion; c) informal
              seminar and discussion with faculty or graduate students and postdocs about
              research and career opportunities.  Students will complete a written report of
              progress and a powerpoint poster of results from the summer research.  Group
              recreational activities will be planned and scheduled by student participants. 
              The SuPURBS program provides student participants with free room and three
              meals per day in a residence hall on campus; round trip travel expenses up to
              $500; and a stipend of $3000.  The SuPURBS program will generally start after
              Memorial Day in the last week of May and run through the first week of August. 
              A SuPURBS website at http://www.msu.edu/~supurbs/ is under development and will
              be accessible from the webpage of the College of Natural Science
              (www.ns.msu.edu), and the Department of Microbiology & Molecular Genetics
              (www.mmg.msu.edu), Michigan State University.  Email supurbs@msu.edu for
              information and an application.  
