Title       : The Archaeoethnobotany of Theobroma cacao in Mesoamerica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0139214

Award Number: 0139214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85799              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Joyce rajoyce@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christine A. Hastorf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	With National Science Foundation support a team from UC Berkeley will conduct
              research on the cacao plant, the natural source of chocolate, in its original
              area of cultivation in Central America. The project will develop a means to
              identify evidence for this important crop in archaeological sites, allowing
              researchers to tell whether different sites were centers of production prior to
              the Spanish conquest. Under the direction of Professors Rosemary Joyce and
              Christine Hastorf, postdoctoral researcher Dr. Kirsten Tripplett will conduct a
              baseline survey seeking examples of cacao plants in areas of Mexico, Belize,
              and Honduras that were recorded as important chocolate producing regions in the
              sixteenth century AD. Samples of cacao plants representing native populations
              of the species will be collected for further research in the United States. In
              a specialized laboratory for the study of ancient plant remains operated by
              Professor Hastorf, Dr. Tripplett will explore the possibility of identifying
              pollen, starch, and other cacao plant parts in archaeological sites. She will
              create a reference database for the identification of ancient cacao plant
              remains, that will be made accessible by computer. Dr. Tripplett will test the
              reference collection by comparing it to plant remains recovered from
              archaeological sites where cacao production is suspected to have been
              important. Because cacao was used as a form of money in the region in the
              sixteenth century, identifying it in archaeological sites will be a critical
              step in understanding the economy of the Aztecs, Mayas, and earlier
              Mesoamerican societies. Archaeologists have proposed that production or trade
              of cacao was a factor in many different sites, but until now, no systematic
              model has allowed identification of remains of the plant. This project will
              establish procedures for recovering and identifying evidence of this critically
              important plant.
