Title       : FRG: The Mathematics of Financial Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0139911

Award Number: 0139911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1043716            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Shreve ss9n@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph B. Kadane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Schervish  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teddy I. Seidenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop rational and implementable methods 
to
              measure and control risk in the finance industry.  The topic is timely
              
because there have been some spectacular failures in the finance industry,
              
because regulations are under discussion which would institutionalize
              
quantitative risk measures, and because the leading risk measure,
              "value-
at-risk," has undesirable properties.  Chief among these is that in
              certain 
situations, situations that often arise in credit-risky markets,
              meeting 
regulatory value-at-risk requirements encourages concentration of
              risk 
rather than diversification.  

The proposal builds on the idea of
              coherent risk measures developed by a 
team, which includes one of the
              principal investigators on this proposal.  
This team developed a set of
              axioms deemed to be desirable, and then 
characterized those "coherent" risk
              measures which satisfy these axioms.  
Their work showed that every coherent
              risk measure can be characterized 
by a set of probability measures over
              possible future scenarios. A three-
part project is proposed. The first part
              is to develop a decentralized 
implementation of risk control based on
              coherent risk measurement.  This 
requires development of duality theory and
              equilibrium pricing within a 
firm.  The second is to elicit scenarios and
              estimate model parameters in 
real settings.  This mandates refining the
              mathematical models to the point 
that a manageable number of measures over
              future scenarios present 
themselves, and appealing to statistical theory to
              make those choices.  
Finally, it is proposed to extend the existing theory of
              coherent risk 
measures. This project is being supported under the Focused
              Research 
Groups in the Mathematical Sciences activity.

