Title       : Two-Dimensional Leaky-Mode VCSEL Arrays: Active Photonic Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0139823

Award Number: 0139823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luke J. Mawst mawst@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this work the PI will exploit the mode selectivity properties of
              two-dimensional arrays of closely spaced leaky-mode VCSELs to achieve
              spatially-coherent light sources. 

Two-dimensional arrays of closely spaced
              antiguided VCSELs offer a unique platform to study the optical modal properties
              of an active photonic lattice. He proposes the first comprehensive
              above-threshold study of the leaky-modes supported by such photonic lattice
              structures. The allowed leaky-mode photonic bands of 2-D active photonic
              lattices have not been studied to date. An understanding of the propagating
              leaky-modes and the influence of nonlinear gain, carrier-induced-index
              variations, and thermal lensing, above laser threshold will result in a
              valuable knowledge base for the development of next generation optical sources.
              He proposes a closely coupled experimental and theoretical program to study the
              unique properties of these structures and exploit these properties for the
              development of novel diode laser sources. 

These structures have high
              potential for the realization of compact monolithic surface emitting sources
              with high-spatial coherence. Unlike conventional VCSEL arrays, the proposed
              devices have gain placed in the low-index lattice sites, thus relying on
              long-range (coherent) coupling via leaky waves. Based on an MOCVD regrowth
              process, the built-in refractive index step of the antiguides can be quite
              large (Dn = 0.10 - 0.20), making the structure less sensitive to waveguide
              pertubations which occur above laser threshold. 

Novel device structures
              based on 2-D active photonic lattices are proposed for achieving
              spatially-coherent surface emitting sources:

1.   Laterally resonant,
              large-area spatially-coherent 2-D phase-locked arrays: Antiguided VCSEL devices
              involving large-area phase-locked arrays of rectangular- as well as of
              triangular-lattice configuration relying on radially resonant leaky-wave
              coupling, which in turn insures uniform intensity profile across the entire
              array structure, and thus coherent operation to high drive levels above
              threshold.
2.   Radiation fanout vertical cavity semiconductor optical
              amplifiers: Arrays of leaky-wave-coupled vertical-cavity surface-emitting
              amplifiers (VCSOA) hold potential not only for providing high amplified output
              powers but also act as a large-volume gain media for nonlinear interactions
              such as four-wave mixing. 
3.   Low-index defect based lasers: lattice-defect"
              VCSEL devices are proposed relying on radially antiresonant devices, which
              allow single-mode operation from emitting areas an order of magnitude larger
              than conventional VCSELs. 

The proposed devices have potential as
              high-coherent-power (> 100 mW), circular-beam monolithic sources for use as
              transmitters (l=1.3-1.55mm) or amplifier pump sources (l=0.98mm) in
              fiber-optical communication systems. 



