Title       : Ninth International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation, Relaxation and Resonance;
               Williamsburg, Virginia; June 3-7, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0139455

Award Number: 0139455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Kossler kossler@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Noakes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carey E. Stronach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5939,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will enable the attendance of students, young scientists and
              distinguished Russian and East European scientists at the Ninth International
              Conference on Muon Spin Rotation (MuSR) in Williamsburg, Virginia, June 3-7,
              2002. MuSR is in the forefront of research in the richest areas of solid-state
              physics and chemistry, such as superconductivity, weakly ordered magnetism,
              defects and diffusion.  Although MuSR was first developed in the US, this is
              the first MuSR conference coordinated by US based MuSR scientists. Many
              attendees will be from the major MuSR research facilities: TRIUMF in Vancouver,
              BC; PSI in Switzerland, RAL in the UK; and KEK in Japan. The support for
              students and young scientists will aid in their further understanding of the
              field and enable contacts with potential collaborators from the MuSR
              facilities. The support for Russian and East European scientists will encourage
              collaborative research, e.g., on understanding the high temperature
              superconductors.

This project will enable the attendance of students, young
              scientists and distinguished Russian and East European scientists at the Ninth
              International Conference on Muon Spin Rotation (MuSR) in Williamsburg,
              Virginia, June 3-7, 2002. MuSR is in the forefront of research in the richest
              areas of solid-state physics and chemistry, such as superconductivity,
              magnetism, and diffusion and trapping of this hydrogen like particle in metals.
               Although MuSR was first developed in the US, this is the first MuSR conference
              coordinated by US based MuSR scientists.  Many attendees will be from the major
              MuSR facilities, which are in Vancouver, BC; Switzerland, the UK; and in Japan.
              The support for students and young scientists will aid their further
              understanding of the field and enable contacts with potential collaborators
              from the MuSR facilities. The support for Russian and East European scientists
              will encourage collaborative research on, e.g., understanding the high
              temperature superconductors. 

