Title       : Using Neutron as a Probe to Study Strongly Correlated Electron Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a0139882

Award Number: 0139882
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pengcheng Dai pdai@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the dominant new scientific theme of our time, the
              fundamental and practical importance of understanding complex, self-organizing
              behavior exhibited in transition metal oxides (TMOs). The objective of this
              research program is to explore and understand the microscopic origins of
              various phases in the TMOs using neutron scattering as a primary tool.
              Specially, the project will focus on high-transition temperature (high-Tc)
              superconductors and colossal magneto-resistance (CMR) manganese-oxides. For
              high-Tc superconductors, the project will investigate the nature of the
              interplay between magnetism and superconductivity. For CMR manganese-oxides,
              the project will focus on understanding how the microscopic spin/lattice
              dynamics determine the bulk magnetic and transport properties of these
              materials. Neutron scattering experiments, the core part of this research
              program, will be performed mostly at the newly upgraded high-flux isotope
              reactor (HFIR) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL). However, the
              project will also utilize other world-class facilities in the U.S. and Europe
              when similar capabilities are unavailable at HFIR. The impact of this research
              program will include the training of the next generation of neutron scatters
              and elucidating the nature of the exotic properties of the TMOs.  

Physics
              in the new millennium will take us into the world of emergent complexity from
              simple and basic laws. This project addresses the fundamental physical
              processes that give rise to novel collective phenomena. The materials known to
              exhibit these collective phenomena are the strongly correlated electron
              transition metal oxides (TMOs). The understanding of these phenomena will not
              only enhance our knowledge of basic science, but also gives us the ability to
              design materials with novel and predictable properties. This project will use
              neutron scattering to investigate two families of the TMOs, the
              high-transition-temperature copper-oxide superconductors and colossal
              magneto-resistance manganese-oxides. The objective of the program is to explore
              and understand the microscopic origins of various phases in the TMOs using
              neutron as a probe. Neutron scattering experiments will be performed mostly at
              the newly upgraded high-flux isotope reactor (HFIR) at the Oak Ridge National
              Laboratory (ORNL). However, the project will also utilize other world-class
              facilities in the U.S. and Europe when similar capabilities are unavailable at
              HFIR. The impact of this research program will include the training of the next
              generation of neutron scatters and elucidating the nature of the exotic
              properties of the TMOs.  

