Title       : Integrating Biotechnology and Ecology into Science Education in Rural Schools in
               Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0139372

Award Number: 0139372
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1230539            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sujaya Rao sujaya@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn A. Royce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edith Gummer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth B. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of our Rural Science Ed. program is to offer rural schools in Oregon
              the opportunity to provide advanced and innovative inquiry-based science
              education to their students through a partnership with the academic community
              at Oregon State University.  In our program, trained NSF Fellows from Oregon
              State University, in collaboration with Teacher Mentors from participating
              rural schools, will develop inquiry-based science curricula that meet the needs
              of middle and high school children in Oregon.  The curricula will include
              simple and innovative experiments that integrate advances in biotechnology and
              ecology to encourage critical thinking about the impacts of agriculture on the
              environment, and the implications of advanced scientific research on human
              lives.

Twelve NSF Fellows, 6 graduates and 6 undergraduates from Oregon
              State University, will be selected from the disciplines of Entomology, Botany &
              Plant Pathology, Horticulture, Crop & Soil Science and Science and Math
              Education.  One graduate and one undergraduate will work as an NSF Fellow Team
              in each classroom.  Each Fellow's program will consist of the following
              activities:  on-campus instruction in science and rural education provided by
              the Department of Science & Math Education, provision of year long science
              education in participating schools, involvement in outreach activities of
              Oregon State University such as 4-H, Science & Math Investigative Learning
              Experiences, and Museum Days, and year-end evaluation of the
              program.

Science teachers from participating schools will serve as Teacher
              Mentors for NSF Fellows to facilitate development of experiments that
              complement existing science curricula.  Videos and web pages will be developed
              for experiments conducted for future use by science teachers in Oregon.  The
              program will be evaluated using 'before' and 'after' quizzes in the classroom,
              and term and year-end evaluations by K 12 students, Teacher Mentors and NSF
              Fellows.

K-12 student will benefit by hands-on experience in scientific
              research using live material and exposure to current scientific ideas and
              advanced technology to make them more competitive and better prepared for later
              schooling.  The partnership will better equip Teacher Mentors for providing
              advanced scientific inquiry based science instruction in the future.  Besides
              obtaining a stipend for their programs, NSF Fellow will benefit by the hands-on
              teaching experience that they will gain in the classroom.  The program will
              enable Oregon Styate University professionals to recruit high quality graduate
              students, provide teaching experience to complement research experience that
              students can acquire on campus, and form partnerships with Oregon schools for
              extending science education.
