Title       : REU: Undergraduate Research Experiences in Biology at James Madison University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0139553

Award Number: 0139553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Corey L. Cleland clelancl@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas E. Dennis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Daniel A. Wubah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Biology Department at James Madison University (JMU) is characterized by its
              focus on undergraduate research as the ultimate teaching tool.  This focus is
              manifested in the number of undergraduates conducting research projects (over
              100 per year) and the number of established faculty having extramurally-funded
              research programs (66%).  In the summer of 2001 a pilot summer research program
              was enormously successful in supporting the continuation of research conducted
              during the academic year and achieving the educational goals of the department.
               Funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF) will enable JMU to expand
              this pilot program to include students outside the boundaries of JMU and to
              enhance the research pedagogy within the department.
The new NSF Research
              Experiences for Undergraduates Program will provide an exciting 10-week summer
              research experience at the JMU campus.  The experience will begin with a
              research workshop aimed at ensuring that all students have the fundamental
              tools necessary to conduct their research program.  Mini-lectures and
              discussion sessions will be interspersed with experiential activities
              throughout the day and each day will end with a summary session where
              fundamental concepts will be reinforced.  Topics covered will include "thinking
              outside the box", quantitative methods, data interpretation, technical writing,
              bioethics, multimedia strategies, and an introduction to basic laboratory
              instrumentation.  The remaining 9 weeks of the experience will be largely
              devoted to research along with seminars, student research talks and
              faculty-originated case study scenarios.  It is anticipated that the research
              project conducted in the summer will continue into the academic year, either in
              a JMU laboratory or through a collaborative arrangement with the student's home
              institution.  It is also expected that the results of these projects will be
              disseminated via presentations in regional/national meetings and peer-reviewed
              journals.
Recruitment will focus on four primary groups of constituents within
              our geographical region, 1) non-JMU students at institutions that do not
              support robust summer research programs, 2) students from minority-serving
              institutions, 3) community college students, and 4) JMU students.  We have
              already built liaisons with these college/universities through our recently
              funded "Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology" (UMEB) program. 
              Recruitment will be accomplished using mailings, e-mails, personal contacts,
              personal visits, and the resources of the Office of Multicultural Activities at
              JMU.  Applications will be assessed on the basis of the student's academic
              achievements/potential, minimum course requirements, potential for continuation
              of the summer research project, and ability to support the diversity of the
              program.  In addition to students, we will also recruit potential faculty
              mentors from these institutions via the use of Research Opportunity Awards to
              faculty that have active NSF grants

