Title       : FRG: Focused Research Collaborative Proposal: Differential Algebraic
               Inequalities and their Applications in Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0139715

Award Number: 0139715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218577             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jong-Shi Pang pang@mts.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Focused Research Collaboration Proposal: Differential Algebraic
Inequalities
              and their Applications to Engineering

This focused research project proposes
              a comprehensive investigation
of Differential Algebraic Inequalities (DAIs)
              and Dynamic
Complementarity Problems (DCPs), with the goal of developing
              an
extensive theory, designing and analyzing efficient algorithms,
              and
applying the results to problems in engineering of practical
importance. 
              The two problem classes of DAIs and DCPs represent a
significant extension of
              an ordinary differential equation (ODE) and a
differential algebraic equation
              (DAE). The proposed study necessitates
the use of state of the art
              mathematical programming methods in
conjunction with ODE and DAE methods to
              deal effectively with the
inequalities and complementarity conditions in a
              DAI/DCP.  The latter
are novel features that are absent in ODEs or DAEs. Since
              the main
methods for solving DCPs and DAIs in realistic situations
              are
numerical, the research will emphasize the interactions
              among
formulation, computation, and mathematical issues such as
              convergence
and approximation including numerical approximation and
              sensitivity to
parametric perturbations.

DAIs and DCPs provide a powerful
              mathematical framework for the
comprehensive treatment of a host of important
              complex system
applications that have so far received only minimal attention
              from
applied and computational mathematicians.  The project will open a
              new
chapter in applied mathematics in which classical differential
equation
              theory is merged with contemporary mathematical programming
methods. The
              deliverables of the project will a set of broadly
applicable mathematical and
              computational tools that will have a
direct impact in several distinct
              engineering disciplines including:
constrained mechanical systems with
              frictional contact arising in
robotics and manufacturing, conditional modeling
              in chemical and
hydraulic processes, and hybrid systems with
              variable-structure
control encountered in avionics, intelligent highway
              systems, and
automotive systems.

