Title       : Inverse Scattering Models and Algorithms for Functional Brain Imaging with
               Diffuse Optical Wavefields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0139968

Award Number: 0139968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric L. Miller elmiller@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Boas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Misha Kilmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0139968
Miller
This project is concerned with modeling and algorithmic issues
              surrounding functional brain imaging from diffuse optical wave data. The
              primary objective is to efficiently obtain high-quality spatial and temporal
              three-dimensional image maps of hemodynamic processes in the brain from
              sparsely sampled scattered wavefield data in conjunction with auxiliary data
              collected from fMRI scans.  The specific aims are:  1) development of spatial
              and temporal inversion algorithms that exploit the high spatial resolution of
              simultaneously available MRI and fMRI data as well as the high temporal
              resolution of diffuse optical wavefield data, 2) fast solution of the
              underlying forward problem that models that physics of the diffuse optical
              scattering problem and 3) validation of the algorithms and efficiency using
              data from experimental studies.

One level of efficiency and accuracy will be
              achieved by developing a low-dimensional, spatially adaptive parameterization
              of the unknown physical parameters (specifically, optical scattering and
              absorption coefficients) that reduces the ill-posedness of the inverse problem
              and concentrates degrees of freedom so as to focus resolution over cortical
              regions of interest. Further spatial accuracy will be achieved by
              constraint-based incorporation of anatomical information provided by MRI and
              fMRI images. To attain better computational efficiency, the proposed work will
              also focus on parallel, preconditioned Krylov subspace methods for solving the
              linearized subproblems that arise at every iteration of the inversion process.
              In the interest of amortizing the cost in temporal imaging, the proposed
              research will also address how to optimally exploit information obtained from
              previous reconstructions. All modeling and algorithmic work will be validated
              and modified based on experimentally obtained diffuse optical and MRI data.

