Title       : Extending the Summer Systematics Institute as an REU Site at the California
               Academy of Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0139215

Award Number: 0139215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Mooi rmooi@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Funding from the National Science Foundation will bring seven undergraduates
              to the California Academy of Sciences for an 8-week summer session in the
              Academy's Summer Systematics Institute.  Recruitment will be on a national
              level, with selection emphasis given to female students and students from
              groups traditionally underrepresented in the biological sciences. 
              African-Americans, Native-Americans, and Latinos are especially encouraged to
              participate.  Participants will receive a stipend, housing allowance and travel
              funds to and from his/her place of residence.  Each prospective intern will
              apply to work with an Academy research scientist on a research project. 
              Successful applicants will participate in formal lectures in systematic
              biology, tours of each of the Academy's nine research departments, and research
              seminars in systematic biology.  Students will work on directed projects that
              provide them with an introduction to the problem and organisms to be studied
              and introduce them to the data collection, interpretation, and dissemination
              aspects of research in systematic biology.  Each student will produce a
              manuscript of the project's results, in the form of a scientific paper, and
              make an oral presentation of their results to their peers.  Evaluations of
              interns and participating Academy staff will be conducted each year with a view
              towards improving the Institute for succeeding years.  


