Title       : Collaborative Research: E-Volving the Open Workshop on Decision-Based Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0139702

Award Number: 0139702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda C. Schmidt lschmidt@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding for the continued conduct of an open workshop on
              decision-based design. The workshop will be conducted via a series of
              face-to-face meetings, and with continuing interaction between all interested
              parties via electronic and Internet technologies throughout the three-year
              continuation period.  Specifically, the workshop will include the continuation
              of a web site for conduct of the workshop.  A primary component of the workshop
              will be the continual, open development and dissemination of the philosophical,
              theoretical and practical results of the workshop discussions and activities. 
              The workshop will continue to concentrate on a diversity of research efforts
              directed at the development of a theory of engineering design based on the
              emerging notion that engineering design is a decision making process amenable
              to the tools and theories that have developed in the field of decision theory. 
              Specific goals for this phase of the workshop include continued development of
              a mathematically sound theory of engineering design, the building of a
              repository of foundational materials (a lexicon, case studies, references, text
              materials), the establishment of ties between decision-based design and other
              areas of science, and the transfer of decision-based design tools to industry.
              The workshop web site address will be located at: 
              
http://dbd.eng.buffalo.edu/

This workshop will provide new directions for
              research and education in engineering design. New theoretical concepts should
              lead to approaches to engineering design that will enable the design of better
              products, products that have greater market appeal, cost less, have lower
              environmental impact, and that are more friendly for customers. Further, these
              concepts are likely to lead to entirely new approaches to engineering
              education, with a strong focus on engineering design as a decision making
              process.
