Title       : Next Generation Neutrinoless Double Beta Decay Experiments CUORE/CUORICINO
               (130Te) and Majorana (76Ge)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0139294

Award Number: 0139294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $609325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank T. Avignone   (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl Rosenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Horacio A. Farach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USC Research Foundation
	      901 Sumter Street
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7201      NUCLEAR ASTROPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The neutrino is the lightest known elementary particle.  It has no electric
              charge but has an intrinsic angular-momentum(or spin) of one half unit of
              Planck's constant just like it's cousin the electron. Discovered in 1957 by
              Reines and Cowan, it remains one of the least understood particles in the
              elementary zoo.  According to conventional wisdom, in modern cosmology the
              universe is densely populated with neutrinos.  Accordingly,if they would have a
              large enough mass, they could have played an important role in the evolution of
              the universe in it's early stages and even at present.  Approximately 90% of
              the mass of the universe has not been identified.  In 1998 it was announced
              that
neutrinos resulting from the decay of cosmic-ray muons in the atmosphere
              were found to oscillate between different families.  This would require that
              they do have some mass but such experiments do not yield how much.  The rate of
              the hypothesized rare radioactive decay called double-beta decay can yield this
              very valuable information when combined with the neutrino oscillation results. 
              The interesting version of this phenomenon would result if a nucleus would
              decay by emitting two electrons and nothing else.  An important conservation
              law would be violated by such a process unless two anti-neutrinos were also
              emitted with the electrons.  Since the electrons are leptons and the
              anti-neutrinos are anti-leptons the total number of leptons is conserved in the
              the decay with anti-neutrinos.  For the decay to occur without anti-neutrinos,
              neutrinos in general must have mass and an important symmetry in physics must
              be violated.  The Majorana and CUORE experiments, which are the subjects of
              this proposal, are next generation no-neutrino double-beta decay experiments
              with an improvement in the sensitivity to neutrino mass that is predicted to be
              about one hundred times better than the best experiments done to
              date.
Considering all the data available, they have a significant
              probability
for discovery, for being able to provide important information on
              the
mass of neutrinos as well as to determine if neutrinos are there
              own
anti-particles.  CUORICINO is a smaller first step towards building
              the
full version of CUORE.


