Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Plant Cell Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0139555

Award Number: 0139555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219533             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth A. Bray elizabeth.bray@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia N. Bailey-Serres  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Plant Cell Biology (CEPCEB) in association with the Genomics
              Institute at the University of California, Riverside (UCR) is committed to
              provide fulfilling research experiences to undergraduates.  As a Research
              Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site, CEPCEB will bring research
              experiences to students of two- and four-year colleges who have limited
              opportunity to learn about the excitement and career options that research in
              plant cell biology offers.  Outreach efforts will be centered on a number of
              colleges in Southern California with high enrollment of underrepresented
              groups.  Qualified students will be encouraged to apply for the 10-week
              residential summer research program; eight students will be accepted each
              summer.  Each student will have a faculty and a graduate or postgraduate
              mentor.  In the initial week of the program, students will be introduced to the
              basics of plant cell biology as well as developing areas in plant cell biology
              in which UCR has expertise, including genomics, proteomics and bioinformatics,
              through a series of lecture/laboratory exercises.  Students will then spend
              nine weeks on a research project of their choice.  To further enrich the
              students and to guide them toward graduate studies, students will participate
              in workshops to enhance learning skills and professional development, and to
              discuss ethics in science.  In addition to the ten-week research experience, a
              three-week summer laboratory course called Arabidopsis Biology will be offered.
               During this course, students will use Arabidopsis to study basic concepts in
              plant biology.  Students who complete this course will be given priority for
              admission to the 10-week research experience the following summer, although the
              course is not a prerequisite.  Students requesting information about the
              program should contact the Genomics Institute at (909) 787-2601
              (genomics@ucr.edu) or Dr. Elizabeth Bray at (909) 787-4548 (bray@citrus.ucr.
              edu).  

The anticipated impacts of the NSF-sponsored REU are numerous. 
              These include an increased awareness of research options in the broad area of
              plant cell biology and expanded research opportunities for students at
              "Hispanic Serving Institutes" and "Minority Post Secondary Institutes" in
              Southern California.  The underlying goals of this educational outreach program
              are to encourage completion of four-year degrees by underrepresented students
              and to present research plant biology as a career option to young biologists

