Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site in Biology: Ecology, Behavior and
               Physiology of Exotic Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0139028

Award Number: 0139028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164786             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert U. Fischer cfruf@eiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric K. Bollinger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Illinois Univ
	      600 Lincoln Avenue
	      Charleston, IL  619203099    217/581-2921

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Eastern Illinois University (EIU) Biology Department's Research Experience
              for Undergraduates Program, funded by the National Science Foundation, will
              provide an intensive research experience for 10 undergraduate students during
              the summers of 2002 and 2003.  The research experiences centered on the
              ecology, behavior and physiology of exotic species is designed to (1) stimulate
              the student's interest, intellectual independence and project ownership, (2)
              develop each student's technical skills and understanding of the research
              process, and (3) foster an appreciation of the cooperation and interdependence
              necessary for research teams to achieve success.  To accomplish these
              objectives participants will be recruited nationally and selected based on
              their professional goals, motivation and maturity, and academic achievements. 
              Students will be fully immersed in the research process as they choose their
              own research problem, write a proposal, conduct the work, and report their
              results and conclusions.  Each participant will work closely with an individual
              mentor and as a member of a research team.  Opportunities to interact and
              collaborate with other faculty and research teams will be provided through an
              orientation retreat, weekly group meetings, and a series of formal workshops
              and field trips.  In addition,  "visiting scientists", recognized leaders in
              the field of conservation biology, will spend 1-2 days apiece interacting with
              program participants by presenting seminars, participating in informal
              discussion groups, and critiquing research projects.  The overall goal of the
              10-week research experience is to foster in each participant an understanding
              of the research process, encouraging each student's growth from dependent
              learner to independent researcher to interdependent member of a scientific
              team.
