Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Semiconductor Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0139064

Award Number: 0139064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Neumark Dan@radon.cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the spectroscopy and dynamics of size-selected group IV
              and III-V semiconductor clusters using several experimental techniques based on
              negative ion photodetachment to characterize how the properties of these
              species vary with size and stoichiometry. The corresponding bulk compounds play
              a key role in the semiconductor and electronics industries so these studies are
              highly relevant to nano-device technologies in that they probe how the
              properties of the bulk materials evolve from their atomic and molecular
              constituents. The project will focus on binary III-V nitride compounds, silicon
              clusters, and indium phosphide clusters. Properties of interest include
              vibrational frequencies and electronic state splittings in small clusters, the
              evolution of valence and conduction bands as the cluster size increases,
              electronic relaxation dynamics in excited states of the clusters, and the
              fragmentation patterns resulting from photodissociation. In all the
              experiments, mass-selected beams of semiconductor cluster anions are generated
              and photodetached. The primary experimental method is fixed-frequency anion
              photoelectron spectroscopy, which provides a general means to determine the
              electronic and vibrational structure of a size-selected neutral cluster. This
              technique will be complemented by tunable laser photodetachment, time-resolved
              photoelectron spectroscopy, and fast beam photofragment translational
              spectroscopy experiments.
%%%
Understanding how physical and chemical
              properties of matter evolve with size is crucial to many potential applications
              designed to meet significant societal needs. Emphasis is placed on select
              elemental clusters, for which the corresponding bulk compounds play a major
              role in the fabrication of fast devices such as transistors and photodiodes.
              The proposed studies are important because they provide training for future
              scientists and engineers in key areas of national interests.


