Title       : Geometric Methods in Automorphic Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0139986

Award Number: 0139986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84298              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Mark Goresky goresky@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : R,Goresky
	      Inst. for Adv. Study
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8295

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Langlands-Shelstad conjecture (and its special case, the so-called
              fundamental lemma) has emerged as one of the most pressing and stubborn
              problems in the modern approach to automorphic forms and representation theory.
               The principal investigator, together with his colleagues Robert MacPherson and
              Robert Kottwitz, have discovered that the kappa-orbital integrals which occur
              in the fundamental lemma may be expressed as the trace of Frobenius acting on
              the cohomology of an "affine Springer fiber".  So the (conjectured) fundamental
              lemma is equivalent to a (fairly complicated) statement concerning the
              structure of the cohomology groups of affine Springer fibers.  (An affine
              Springer fiber is the fixed point set, on the flag manifold of a loop group, or
              of a Kac-Moody Lie group, of the vectorfield which is determined by a
              semisimple element in the Lie algebra of the group.  These researchers have
              been able to prove the required cohomological statement for affine Springer
              fibers which are associated to elements 
in unramified tori in the loop group.
               They are addressing the many technical problems associated with understanding
              the homology of affine Springer fibers associated to elements of ramified
              tori.

In the 1970's, R. Langlands (of the Institute for Advanced Study in
              Princeton N.J.) developed an elaborate theory, indicating that there should be
              deep and hidden connections between several widely separated areas in
              mathematics:  number theory, representation theory, algebraic geometry, and
              automorphic forms.  He showed, for example, how results from representation
              theory could be used to deduce results in number theory.  This vision was so
              far-reaching and broad in scope that it became known as "Langlands' program",
              and it is perhaps the mathematician's version of "grand unification".  However,
              most of this program was conjectural and to some degree, even speculative. 
              Progress on these conjectures was slow at first, as research in this subject
              demands an understanding of several different, highly technical branches of
              mathematics.  Nevertheless, after decades of research by scores of dedicated
              and talented mathematicians worldwide, enormous progress has been made on
              Langlands' conjectures.  For example, Andrew Wiles' celebrated proof of
              "Fermat's Last Theorem" depends in an essential way on some of these results. 
              However, one step in this program, which was originally felt to be a relatively
              minor one, has turned out to be one of the most difficult questions in
the
              area: the so-called "fundamental lemma" (and its generalization, the
              Langlands-Shelstad conjecture).  While the supporting evidence for this
              conjecture is overwhelming, the conjecture has only been proven, after
              Herculean efforts, in a handful of special cases.  It is a stubborn obstacle
              which threatens to indefinitely delay further progress in the area.  The
              principal investigator and his colleagues Robert MacPherson (Institute for
              Advanced Study) and Robert Kottwitz (University of Chicago) have discovered
              that the Langlands-Shelstad conjecture may be restated in terms of the
              geometrical properties of certain objects ("affine Springer fibers") which have
              recently attracted the attention of mathematicians for completely different
              reasons.  Using these geometric techniques, the investigator and his colleagues
              expect to outline a proof for the Langlands-Shelstad conjecture in a broad
              class of cases, the so-called "unramified" cases.  They are also addressing the
              many difficulties involved with the remaining "ramified" cases.  It is expected
              that this exciting connection between Langlands' program and "Springer theory"
              will lead to new developments in both subjects.

