Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates at Prairie View A&M University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0139930

Award Number: 0139930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Carson-Isabelle llf94@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Gloria Regisford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Prairie View A&M U
	      P O Box 667
	      Prairie View, TX  774460667    936/857-4494

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Prairie View A&M University (PVAMU), a historically black university (HBU),
              will establish a year round undergraduate research program which will provide
              research experience for minority undergraduates in a positive friendly
              environment.  Four students will participate during the academic year while
              eight  (four preferably from community colleges) will participate during the
              ten week summer program.  These students will work with pre-selected mentors on
              research projects in electrical engineering, mechanical engineering,
              biochemistry, physics and agriculture focused on "Material Science for Space
              and Aerospace Applications."  The academic research program will start Fall
              semester while the summer program will start around the start of June. 
              Orientation will begin on day 1 of the academic year, and revisited at the
              beginning of the summer program.  Faculty mentors will meet with their students
              to focus on the progress and/or problems in research projects.  Seminars will
              be held weekly throughout the program.  Speakers will be invited from
              research-intensive universities (Baylor College of Medicine, University of
              Texas Houston Medical School and MD Anderson Cancer Center), industry and
              government.  Representation of minority and female presenters will be given
              special attention.  A seminar series will give the students an appreciation of
              the diversity of available research fields.  A panel of minority and women
              scientists from academia, industry and government will discuss the job
              opportunities that are available to persons who are involved in scientific
              research.  A second panel discussion will involve former students of PVAMU who
              have entered Ph.D. programs at Research Intensive Universities (RIUs).  There
              will be three workshops throughout the academic year and summer which will be
              half-day sessions with open discussion and will include computer tools and
              technology, scientific writing, and professional career development.  Field
              trips will be arranged to Research Intensive Universities (RIU), agencies and
              companies such as the Texas Medical Center (TMC) and NASA Johnson Space Center
              throughout the program.   At the end of the ten-week summer session, students
              will present their research in oral and written form.  E-mail:
              Laura_Carson@pvamu.edu or Gloria_Regisford@pvamu.edu for information and an
              application.




