Title       : REU on Human Technology Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0139480

Award Number: 0139480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randa L. Shehab rlshehab@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carmela Gottesman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for a Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site on
              Human Technology Interactions at the University of Oklahoma. This
              interdisciplinary REU Site will give undergraduates the opportunity to engage
              in research on human-technical systems. A total of 12 students, 10 funded by
              NSF and 2 funded by OU will spend eight weeks in the program. The students'
              time will be divided into three activities: individual research, team research,
              and collective activities. Each student will participate in individual research
              within an active laboratory. Research assistantships will be available in
              Cognitive Psychology, Social Psychology, Computer Science, Industrial
              Engineering, Library and Information Studies, History of Science, Information
              Systems, and Communication. A distinguishing characteristic of this program is
              that students will also participate on one of three multidisciplinary research
              teams composed of undergraduates and supervised by faculty and graduate
              students.   To futher promote the experience of scientific inquiry, students
              will also participate in seminar and workshop series and special events.  A
              multi-session ethics workshop will allow students to explore ethical issues in
              a variety of fields.   Students will be recruited nationally and regionally
              with an emphasis on students who would otherwise have little opportunity to
              gain research experience or to develop technical expertise. 
This award
              contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
              into careers in science through active undergraduate research experiences. 


