Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Tropical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0139515

Award Number: 0139515
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary S. Hartshorn ghartsho@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Organization for Tropical Studies (OTS), a consortium of 64 research
              universities, plans to implement a three-year REU program at the La Selva
              Biological Station in Costa Rica.  This project will provide hands-on,
              field-oriented research experiences to undergraduate students from throughout
              the United States, including minority students identified through the OTS
              Minority Scholars Program.  This program provides support for ten
              undergraduates each year to have a ten-week research experience at La Selva,
              located in the lowland rainforest of Costa Rica. Students selected to
              participate in the REU Program will be paired with a research mentor at La
              Selva and will be responsible for supervising all aspects of the student's
              research design;

Though the students targeted for the REU research
              experience will be participants in OTS' Undergraduate Program, REU fellowships
              will also be available on a competitive basis to undergraduates who have not
              participated in an OTS undergraduate course.  Most importantly, through the OTS
              National Fellowship Advisory Committee a major effort will be made to recruit
              students from under-represented groups in the sciences.
 
The overall goals
              and objectives of the REU Program at La Selva are:

(1) Encourage student
              interest in careers in field research and tropical ecology.  
(2) Establish a
              clear understanding of the design of field experiments and the logic and
              application of statistical analysis.   
(3) Build skills in the interpretation
              of the results of scientific experiments and the communication of these results
              to both technical and non-technical audiences.  
(4) To introduce students
              through scientific study to the importance of tropical ecosystems and
              facilitate a full understanding of evolution and ecology.   
(5) Increase the
              participation in research of women, ethnic minorities and economically
              disadvantaged students.

The REU students will have an immersion experience
              in a tropical rain forest setting that will likely become a career-determining
              summer.  They will develop intellectual and practical skills in one of the
              world's most important ecosystems and contribute to improved understanding of
              the biodiversity conservation and ecological research priorities.

