Title       : REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Mathematics at California
               State University - San Bernardino
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0139426

Award Number: 0139426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Chavez jchavez@csusb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rolland Trapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      5500 University Parkway
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    909/880-5929

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              California State University, San Bernardino, one of 23 campuses of the largest
              public university system and a designated Hispanic Serving Institution, hosts
              this REU in Mathematics.  The program provides the opportunity for eight
              undergraduate students, primarily from groups underrepresented in mathematics,
              to carry out guided independent and collaborative research in a residential
              environment.  For eight weeks during each of the summers of 2002 through 2004,
              participants will increase their level of mathematical independence by
              completing well-designed research projects.  

The objectives of the REU in
              Mathematics at CSUSB are to
	Get undergraduates actively involved in, and
              enthusiastic about, mathematical research,
	Move students towards mathematical
              independence and maturity, and
	Encourage participants to pursue careers in
              mathematics in either academia or industry.

Effective recruitment is
              essential to achieving these objectives, and minimum requirements for
              participants include a course in Combinatorics or Discrete Math as well as a
              class that requires proofs.  Participants will be chosen in March of each year,
              and the program will run from late June through mid-August.  

Research
              projects will be taken from topics in Combinatorics and Knot Theory, with a
              group of students working in each field.  Projects within a given field will be
              chosen so that significant mathematical interaction occurs between students
              working in the same field.  Moreover, participants will work closely with
              experienced faculty advisors to complete background reading related to their
              topic, give presentations on relevant material, and begin writing a
              journal-style paper.  As the summer progresses, students will perform their own
              literature searches, make independent discoveries and conduct creative
              mathematical research.  In addition to regular presentations and paper
              assignments, each student will create a poster describing their results, give a
              twenty-minute final presentation to the campus community at CSUSB, and complete
              a journal-style paper about their project.  Thus participants will have a
              comprehensive research experience, as well as having communicated mathematics
              visually, verbally, and in writing.

Field trips that introduce participants
              to careers and graduate school in mathematics have been scheduled. 
              Recreational trips will also be taken in an effort to maximize moral and
              minimize monotony.  

Upon completing this program students will have
              actively experienced mathematical research, increased their level of
              mathematical maturity, and have been introduced to career paths that involve
              mathematics.  The result is a student that is better prepared to pursue a
              career in mathematics and more aware of the available career options.

For
              further information regarding the REU in Mathematics at CSUSB contact Dr.
              Joseph Chavez by phone at (909) 880-5363, via e-mail at jchavez@csusb.edu, or
              visit the web site http://www.math.csusb.edu/reu.

