Title       : Chomology of Arithmetic Groups and Galois Representations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0139287

Award Number: 0139287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91032              (Estimated)
Investigator: Avner Ash avner.ash@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator, together with various collaborators, studies
the
              cohomology of arithmetic groups as modules over an algebra of Hecke
operators.
                He considers conjectures connecting  (1) mod-p cohomology
classes of
              congruence groups which are eigenclasses for all the Hecke
operators  with (2)
              mod-p representations of the Galois (symmetry) group
of the algebraic numbers.
               These conjectures amount to saying there should
exist reciprocity laws
              (usually non-abelian) connecting the two types of
objects.  The conjectures
              are tested computationally, which leads to
further refinements of them.  The
              principal investigator outlines an
approach for proving them in some special
              cases.  Another set of computer
calculations probe for the existence of
              automorphic representations of
cohomological type which are not lifted from
              smaller rank groups.  These
are conjecturally connected with reciprocity laws
              of Langlands type.
Finally, the investigator and a colleague develop a theory
              of p-adic
families of not necessarily p-ordinary cohomology classes for
              congruence
groups.  They use this to study the question whether
              non-lifted
automorphic representations are "p-adically rigid".
	
Algebraic
              number theory studies the properties of polynomial
functions and equations
              whose coefficients are whole numbers.  Ever since
Descartes invented analytic
              geometry in the early 1600's, the ability to
solve algebraic equations has
              been central to mathematics, science and
engineering.  In the last 50 years a
              new set of applications of number
theory has opened up in the field of
              cryptography.  The principal
investigator studies delicate questions involving
              the fine structure and
properties of solutions to certain systems of algebraic
              equations.
Although one can often obtain approximate solutions using
              computers, there
are many very subtle and difficult questions concerning the
              existence and
form of the exact solutions. There are a number of conjectures
              on the
table to explain what is going on, and the principal investigator
              has
contributed some of them.  He and his colleagues study these
              conjectures
by verifying them in some cases by extensive computer
              calculations, and by
proving them in special cases.  At the core of this
              research is the
surprising connection with geometric objects ("cohomology
              classes") that
can be constructed in spaces of n-dimensional crystal lattices.
               

