Title       : Computational Modeling of Interdiffusion Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0139705

Award Number: 0139705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278001             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Morral j.morral@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yunzhi Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The project is aimed at deeper development of the science of interdiffusion
              taking into account the type and shape of diffusion paths and the effect of
              microstructure morphology on diffusion. An objective of the study is to develop
              verified and validated computational models that can make quantitative
              predictions of interdiffusion kinetics and microstructural evolution as
              functions of processing and test variables. It will lead to a greater
              understanding of interdiffusion kinetics and microstructural evolution as
              functions of processing and test variables. The formation of interdiffusion 
              microstructures can lead to significant changes in properties of the structural
              components in various fields such as materials protection, composites, metal
              joining, and heat-treating. It is desirable to know how to promote or prevent
              interdiffusion and hence control the interdiffusion microstructure, and to
              model the changes in order to predict the service life of components. The
              approach will integrate error function analyses, finite difference and phase
              field modeling in order to predict the precipitate morphology, and to calculate
              its effect on interdiffusion. The proposed research activities will impact
              science, technology and education. The further development of multicomponent
              diffusion concepts and corresponding modeling techniques will provide impetus
              for including the topic in graduate courses on diffusion. As a result,
              engineers and scientists will be better prepared to work on technological
              problems that by their nature involve diffusion in complex commercial alloys.
              

This research develops an improved understanding of fundamentals related to
              interdiffusion in multi-component and multiphase systems, which will help in
              the interpretation of experimental data taken in both industry and academe. By
              developing verified and validated computational models that have the capability
              to deal with the complexity of commercial alloy systems, it will be possible to
              apply them to assist in the design of practical processes that involve
              interdiffusion.

