Title       : Collaborative Research: Stochastic Methods for Fractional Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0139927

Award Number: 0139927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $595330             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Meerschaert mcubed@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Brownian motion, the scaling limit of a simple random walk, is a stochastic
              model for diffusion. Probability densities for this stochastic process solve
              the classical diffusion equation. A continuous time random walk is a simple
              random walk subordinated to a renewal process, used in physics to model
              anomalous diffusion. Increments of the simple random walk represents particle
              jumps, and the renewal epochs represent the particle jump times. Infinite
              variance particle jumps cause superdiffusion, in which a cloud of particles
              spreads faster than the classical model predicts. Infinite mean waiting times
              lead to subdiffusion. Scaling limits of continuous time random walks are
              stochastic processes whose densities solve fractional partial differential
              equations. Infinite variance particle jumps lead to operator stable Levy
              motions, while infinite mean waiting times induce subordination to an inverse
              stable subordinator. Fractional derivatives are generators of stable continuous
              convolution semigroups. The research funded by this grant is developing a sound
              mathematical basis for this physical theory, and pursuing practical
              applications to problems in contaminant transport. The goals of this research
              include limit theory for continuous time random walks with possible dependence
              between the jump sizes and the waiting times, extension to more realistic
              multidimensional jump vectors with matrix scaling to allow different rates of
              particle spreading in each coordinate, parallel development of multiscaling
              fractional derivative operators in space, analysis of the fundamental physical
              basis of fractional diffusion to elucidate the physical meaning of the model
              parameters, development of useful statistical methods for parameter estimation,
              numerical methods for fractional partial differential equations, and
              application of these methods to real data from laboratory and field experiments
              and remediation efforts involving porous media and fracture flow. 
	Movement
              of contaminants in a mountain stream takes place over a vast range of time
              scales. A majority will move away quickly, but a small amount can be caught in
              eddies for minutes or days. Another fraction may move into the relatively
              motionless water beneath the streambed, and it may take months or years for the
              last molecules to disappear completely. The movement of contaminants in
              underground water spreads over a similar range of time scales. Our team of
              mathematicians and hydrogeologists uses modern interdisciplinary research
              methods to develop accurate models for the movement and spread of these
              contaminants. Much more than an academic exercise, this work is needed for
              realistic models of contaminant and nutrient movement in drinking water
              supplies. The research is necessary because existing diffusion models greatly
              underestimate the time and concentration at which contaminants arrive
              downstream, when compared to actual data. 
