Title       : REU Site: Structure and Function of Biological Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0139619

Award Number: 0139619
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206395             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Lynn Zimmerman zimmerma@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Experiences in Molecular Biology Academic Research Careers (EMBARC) Program
              at UMBC offers a focused, comprehensive ten-week residential summer research
              program to ten undergraduates recruited from two and four year colleges.  This
              program, which is supported by the National Science Foundation as one of its
              Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Sites, offers a $3,000 student
              summer stipend with paid campus housing and program activities.  EMBARC
              Trainees will be paired with faculty mentors to guide their individual research
              projects, which will be focused on the Structure and Function of Biological
              Molecules.  Faculty mentors will be drawn from three departments at UMBC: 
              Biological Sciences, Chemistry and Biochemistry, and Chemical and Biochemical
              Engineering.

EMBARC Trainees will work closely with their faculty research
              mentors to ensure the quality of the student experience.  In addition to
              conducting individual research projects, EMBARC Trainees will participate in an
              Ethics in Science Course and a GRE Preparation Course stressing math and verbal
              skills.  To enhance research training and promote the pursuit of post
              baccalaureate education, each EMBARC Trainee will also be paired with a
              graduate student peer mentor, who will be selected from underrepresented groups
              in the sciences whenever possible.  They will participate in field trips and
              team building activities with other undergraduate researchers, mentors and peer
              mentors.  Program outcomes include the creation of student portfolios and
              presentation of research projects at an end-of-the-summer Research Fest. 
              Parents and advisors/mentors from home institutions will be invited to the
              Research Fest, which will showcase each student's efforts and will encourage
              continued support for post program research activities and the pursuit of
              careers in science. 

