Title       : REU Site - Summer Undergraduate Research Program in Biochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0139246

Award Number: 0139246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary R. Kunkel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Agricul Exp Sta
	      The Agriculture Program
	      College Station, TX  778432147    979/845-4761

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics at Texas A&M University is
              sponsoring a NSF-Research Experiences for Undergraduates Site for undergraduate
              research in biochemistry during the summers of 2002 - 2004.  The major goals of
              this program are to prepare students to pursue graduate training and careers in
              research and to instill in those students an appreciation of the effort and
              satisfaction involved in this pursuit.  Students will be trained in a diverse
              array of modern biochemical methods in a vibrant department, and will develop
              effective oral and written communication skills to describe scientific
              projects.  Up to fifteen students will be selected to participate in a 10-week
              summer program that will coincide with the summer session at the university
              (typically from the end of May until early August).  Although not strictly
              limited to this geographical area, we will focus our recruiting efforts on
              students who have completed their junior or sophomore year at colleges and
              universities in Texas and mid-Southern states, particularly those from
              institutions that do not offer doctoral degrees.  Applications from students in
              underrepresented minority groups are particularly encouraged.  Undergraduate
              participants will perform cutting-edge research in biochemistry while
              integrated into pre-existing laboratory groups of graduate students,
              postdoctoral fellows, undergraduate students and technicians.  At the
              conclusion of the program the students will present their research
              accomplishments in both written and oral reports.
