Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis Using tert-Butanesulfinamide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a0139468

Award Number: 0139468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Ellman jellman@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The foci of this research are fourfold and all involve the development of
              methodology based on the use of chiral tert-butanesulfinamide.  The goals
              include:  Asymmetric synthesis and applications of highly substituted
              beta-amino acids; reactions of metalloenamines derived from tert-butanesulfinyl
              imines, in particular for the synthesis of 1,3-amino alcohols; parallel
              asymmetric synthesis of amines in solution and solid support for the rapid
              preparation of natural products and compounds with interesting biological
              properties; development of tert-butanesulfinamide derived ligands as a new
              class of ligands for asymmetric catalysis.

With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Jonathan A.
              Ellman of the Department of Chemistry at the University of California,
              Berkeley.  Professor Ellman will focus his work on exploring the applications
              of tert-butanesulfinamide to asymmetric synthesis.  Since more than 75% of
              drugs and drug candidates contain amine functionality, the work could have
              significant impact on the pharmaceutical industry.  The research also provides
              an excellent training ground for students in current organic synthesis.
