Title       : SGER: Stable Isotopic Determination of Microbial Carbon Sources In Streams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0139439

Award Number: 0139439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87740              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Ziegler susanz@uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9150,9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The main objective of the proposed research is to develop and test the use of
              the stable carbon isotope composition of bacterial phospholipid fatty acids
              (PLFA) for the investigation of microbial carbon sources in streams. The
              question of how well the isotopic composition of organic matter sources in
              streams can be resolved over different spatial and temporal scales remains
              unanswered. Additionally, the stable carbon isotope composition of bacterial
              PLFA is a new method that has yet to be related to dissolved organic matter
              (DOM), a more challenging task due to the heterogeneous composition of
              compounds of varying isotopic composition that form DOM. The proposed research
              will establish the use of the proposed approach for investigating
              biogeochemical processes of stream ecosystems. The specific objectives of the
              proposed research will be to determine: (1) the relationship between the stable
              carbon isotope composition of bacterial PLFA and DOM, (2) the separation in the
              stable carbon isotope composition of allochthonous versus autochthonous
              materials across spatial and temporal scales within streams, and (3) how the
              stable carbon isotope composition of organic matter and bacterial PLFA are
              related in streams. The objectives of the study will be accomplished through
              both laboratory and field investigations of the isotopic composition of DOM,
              bacterial PLFA and organic matter sources in two stream ecosystems with
              contrasting watersheds. The relationship between the stable carbon isotope
              composition of DOM and the PLFA of both free and attached bacteria will be
              determined in experiments of natural assemblages of stream bacteria in both
              enrichment cultures and glass bead bioreactors grown on different sources of
              stream DOM. These experiments will represent the first studies to investigate
              the isotopic composition of individual fatty acids of natural assemblages of
              bacteria in relation to DOM. The ability to determine the source of carbon
              fueling bacterial activity would advance understanding of the biogeochemical
              cycling of DOM in the aquatic environment, and the linkage between DOM
              composition and microbial food web dynamics.
