Title       : Research Experiences in Estuarine Science for Undergraduates at Mote Marine
               Laboratory, with Special Focus on Native Pacific Islanders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0139392

Award Number: 0139392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126847             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Gelsleichter jimg@mote.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Kirkpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mote Marine Lab
	      1600 Ken Thompson Parkway
	      Sarasota, FL  342361004    941/388-4441

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to initiate a Research Experience for Undergraduates
              (REU) site that will provide a ten-week summer research experience in estuarine
              science for a total of eight students each year.  A team of over 30 faculty
              mentors will help the students develop research projects on the physical,
              chemical and biological aspects of estuaries. Their research site will be
              Charlotte Harbor, one of Florida's largest and most ecologically and
              economically important estuaries. At the end of the program, students will
              develop a presentation on their research project and will be encouraged to
              present their results at a major scientific conference. One important aspect of
              this REU site is that the PI will attempt to recruit at leat 3 or 4 Native
              Pacific Islanders (NPI's) each year. Recruitment of NPI's will be facilitated
              by a subcontract to the University of Hawaii's Hawaiian Internship Program. The
              proposal is based on the theory that mentoring and networking are the most
              effective methods for recruiting students into a profession and for training
              young researchers. This program will provide students with an in-depth
              understanding of the ecology of an estuarine system. Plans for the site include
              all the essential elements for an excellent REU site. The students will receive
              one-on-one mentoring from researchers and will gain a broad understanding of
              the scientific process. This program also fills an important niche in the
              continuum of program supported under the REU program by the Division of Ocean
              Sciences as it will be the only site that will focus on recruiting Native
              Pacific Islanders into ocean sciences.
