Title       : High Risk Exploratory Research: Hunter-Gatherers of the Southern French Alps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0139866

Award Number: 0139866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14868              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An archaeological survey in the southern French Alps will be carried out as the
              first, pilot phase in long-term, comparative research.  The survey will focus
              on the late Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods of the Stone Age, ca. 13,000 -
              6,000 BC, and will seek to understand:  1) how areas at higher elevations were
              colonized after the end of the last ice age and how they were integrated with
              the coast and lowlands, 2) how the Alpine ecology affected cultural adaptations
              and their change through time, 3) how this area's economies differed from those
              of the quite different environments of central Europe, where the investigator's
              previous work has concentrated,  and 4) what role the last hunter-gatherers in
              this region played in the transition to agricultural societies.  A variety of
              different field techniques, including surface-walking of plowed fields, coring
              of upland bogs, and test-trenching  at the base of rockshelters will be used in
              initial investigations of two promising areas:  the upper valley of the Loup
              River and the basin of the Lac d'Allos.  Analysis of collections of stone
              artifacts will give particular attention to stone raw materials and their
              sources, the technology of stone tool manufacture, and the typology of stone
              artifacts.  These data will facilitate comparisons with better known regions,
              such as the lower Rhone Valley to the west and Italian Liguria to the east, as
              well as forming the basis for interpretations of patterns of movement and the
              organization of technology.  Other types of artifacts, such as bone and shell,
              will allow preliminary inferences about site activities, movement, and
              exchange.


The "Neolithic Revolution", the transition from a hunting and
              gathering to a settled village agricultural and pastoral lifestyle, constitutes
              a significant change in human adaptation and set the stage for the rise of
              civilization. Thus archaeologists wish to understand how it occurred and Dr.
              Jochim's exploratory research, if successful, has the potential to shed
              additional light on this process. Because student assistants are included in
              the fieldwork, the project will also serve a valuable training function.

