Title       : Quark-Gluon and Hadronic Degrees of Freedom in Few-Body Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0139973

Award Number: 0139973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabine E. Jeschonnek jeschonnek.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1285      NUCLEAR THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project investigates the transition from hadronic degrees of
              freedom to quark-gluon degrees of freedom in several systems, both nucleons and
              light nuclei. This will be done by investigating short-range structure in light
              nuclei on the one hand, and quark-hadron duality on the other hand. Both parts
              of the research program are immediately relevant to the experimental program at
              Jefferson Lab. This project will contribute to current research at a national
              facility, and provide training for students at The Ohio State
              University.

Coincidence electron scattering from nuclei is the canonical
              tool for investigating short-range structures. Many properties of nuclei can be
              described in a picture containing only nucleons, deltas, and the lightest
              mesons. However, it is clear that when one proceeds to smaller distances, or
              higher energies and momenta used to explore the nuclei, one will find a
              situation where the relevant degrees of freedom are no longer the hadrons, but
              quarks and gluons. Appropriate theoretical tools for disentangling the nuclear
              ground state information from the data will be developed and tested, and
              suitable observables will be identified. I will also perform conventional
              nuclear physics baseline calculations for processes in which one expects to
              observe the onset of color transparency.

Quark-hadron duality states that in
              certain kinematical regions, the proper average of hadronic observables is
              described by a perturbative QCD result. While this phenomenon is well
              established experimentally, a satisfying theoretical explanation of duality is
              still lacking. Modeling duality and studying how it arises in simple models is
              the most promising road to understanding duality. This project will continue
              this approach. I will focus on providing the necessary theoretical
              understanding for the highly promising applications of duality, which will
              allow for the extraction of deep inelastic information from resonance data.

