Title       : REU Site: Discrete Random Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0139291

Award Number: 0139291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant P. Godbole godbolea@etsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Tennessee State Univ
	      P O Box 70565
	      Johnson City, TN  37614    423/232-5640

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This three-year project "Discrete Random Structures" will enable the Principal
              Investigator, Anant Godbole, to consolidate his involvement with undergraduate
              research by leading eight students each year in a series of 
contemporary and
              high-level research endeavours, each designed to convince the participants that
              they may contribute in a meaningful way to the development of the field of
              mathematics.  The team-members' problems, while emanating in areas such as
              combinatorics; number theory; graph theory; geometry; algorithms; and molecular
              biology, will have a stochastic flavor -- so that solutions will be sought
              through the use of methods in contemporary probability and classical analysis. 
              The participants will be selected after a nationwide search, and will spend two
              months at East Tennessee State University during the summer. Based on the
              Prinicipal Investigator's track record over the last twelve years, it can be
              predicted that the student  
researchers will each work on an average of two
              problems, either individually or in teams of two or more, and be able to make
              significant progress on at least one of these endeavors. The students' findings
              will be presented at national meetings such as the Annual AMS/MAA Meeting, or
              at a carefully selected 
Probability/Combinatorics conference.  As in the
              past, every effort will be made to submit the students' papers to high-level
              journals for possible publication.  We expect to select students from a broad
              range of colleges and universities, and are totally committed to the vigorous
              recruitment of women, minorities and disabled students. 

