Title       : Construction of a Variable Frequency Ka Band [26-40 GHz] Pulsed EPR Spectrometer
               for Multi-Dimensional ESEEM and ENDOR Studies of Metalloproteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a0139459

Award Number: 0139459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385908             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Enemark jenemark@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances A. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arnold Raitsimring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award supports the development of a variable frequency pulsed Ka-band
              (26-40 GHz) EPR spectrometer for electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM)
              and electron-nuclear double/triple resonance (ENDOR/ENQOR) studies of proteins
              containing paramagnetic metal atoms. Paramagnetic metal centers in biomolecules
              are exquisitely sensitive "beacons", whose magnetic coupling to nearby magnetic
              nuclei reveal the immediate surroundings of the metal atom and can thereby
              provide detailed information about catalytic reaction pathways. Ligands with
              coordinated O, N, or S atoms play crucial roles in the paramagnetic metal
              centers of many biomolecules.  The hardware and software to be developed will
              enable powerful multi-dimensional pulsed EPR methods to be extended to the
              investigation of nearby magnetic nuclei such as 17O and 33S. In addition, this
              new instrument will substantially simplify the analysis of coupling with 14N
              atoms. The hyperfine interaction (hfi) and nuclear quadrupole (nqi) parameters
              obtained for these atoms will provide direct insight into their paramagetic
              metal centers.  The project includes construction of the instrument, and
              development of software for data acquisition, data processing and spectral
              simulation. The initial applications of this new pulsed EPR spectrometer system
              will be to the catalytic processes of molybdenum enzymes and ferriheme
              electron-transfer proteins.  However, this advanced pulsed EPR instrument will
              be a powerful tool that will enable the surroundings of paramagnetic metal
              centers in biological systems to be mapped out in unprecedented detail by
              biochemists, biophysicists and bioinorganic chemists. A large number of
              national and international collaborative studies are envisioned once the
              instrument becomes fully operational, and the software developed in this
              project will be made generally available to the scientific community.  
