Title       : Reconstructing Rivers: Fluvial Environments of Cretaceous Strata in Dinosaur
               National Monument, an REU Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0139373

Award Number: 0139373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie A. Maxson JMAXSON@GAC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gustavus Adolphus College
	      
	      Saint Peter, MN  56082    507/931-8000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project will provide students with an exceptional opportunity to contribute
              to a timely, important research problem in sedimentary geology.  Eight
              undergraduate students, along with two student Teaching assistants and the PI,
              will conduct field and laboratory research to determine the sedimentary history
              of fossil-bearing Lower Cretaceious strata in Dinosaur National Monument, Utah
              and Colorado.  Recent discovery of a new bone bed within Dinosaur National
              Mounument (DNM) has led paleontologists to recognize that large sauropods,
              previously thought to be restricted to Eurasia in mid-Cretaceious time, were
              still extant in North America.  Sedimentologic analysis, especially facies
              interpretation to characterize ancient dinosaur habitats, is relatively
              undeveloped in the Cretaceous strata that contain the newly discovered sauropod
              skeletons.

This research project will progressively develop students'
              research skills toward understanding and interpreting the sedimentology of the
              Cretaceious Cedar Mountain formation.  The project combines field work in
              fluvial sedimentology with analog modeling of fluvial processes.  The results
              of this project will be highly significant to North American paleontologists,
              and will thus provide student participants with an immediate sense of the
              relevance of their research.  Throughout the program, the PI and visiting
              scientists will develop students' thinking about conducting research based on
              observation and interpretation, and the development of actualistic facies
              models.
