Title       : Local Spectroscopy of Ferromagnetic/Superconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0139936

Award Number: 0139936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Chandrasekhar v-chandrasekhar@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              It is proposed to conduct local spectroscopic and potentiometric measurements on
              submicron scale devices to investigate some of the most interesting issues in
              mesoscopic physics. The tools that will be developed will enable a host of new
              experimental investigations that would not be possible by any other
              means.

The probe to be used in these studies is scanning tunneling
              microscopy (STM), one that has been used extensively in recent years to
              investigate structures on the nanometer scale. The requirements of the proposed
              experiments necessitate the assembly of a number of experimental techniques in
              one experimental tool, which has not been done before. After assembly of the
              instrument, the experiments to be performed involve imaging the magnetic
              vortices created in a superconducting film by an external magnetic field, and
              by the magnetic field emanating from ferromagnetic particles embedded in the
              film. The project will entail a close collaboration with Professor Herve'
              Courtois' group at the CRTBT in Grenoble, France.

Ferromagnets are becoming
              increasingly important as components of a wide variety of potentially useful
              devices. These experiments seek to answer a number of fundamental questions
              regarding the properties of ferromagnets on the nanometer scale, and their
              interactions with other materials such as superconductors. Given the increasing
              importance of scanning probe microscopies in investigating and characterizing
              the properties of nanoscale systems, the students involved in this project will
              be well-trained in techniques that will be useful in their future careers,
              whether those careers are in industry, academia, or government laboratories.

