Title       : REU Site: Developing Student Scientists: Collaborative Research in the Life
               Sciences at Davidson College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0139153

Award Number: 0139153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Dorcas midorcas@davidson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Stanback  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Davidson College
	      Box 5000,
	      Davidson, NC  280355000    704/894-2000

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The NSF Research Experiences for Undergraduates program makes effective use of
              mentoring and networking to recruit and train young researchers.  As a newly
              named REU site, Davidson College has funding to support 10 undergraduate
              students for 10 weeks of intensive summer laboratory or field research.  Under
              the mentorship of eight Biology and two Psychology faculty, students will
              conduct independent research at all levels of the life sciences, from molecular
              biology to neuroscience to field studies of animal populations.  Formal and
              informal interactions among students and faculty will provide each participant
              with wide-ranging knowledge of biological problems and techniques.  In addition
              to the research itself, participants will take part in weekly discussions of
              their own research, current issues in the life sciences, graduate school,
              writing grant proposals, and ethical issues in research.  Participants will
              present the results of their research in a formal talk at the end of the summer
              and in a scientific paper.  We will engage in a national recruitment effort via
              the Internet and personal contacts with faculty across the US.  We will
              actively recruit African-American, Hispanic, and Native American students via
              contacts at historically black colleges and universities and other institutions
              with significant minority enrollments.  By working closely with Davidson
              College Life Science faculty and gaining a better understanding of how science
              is conducted, students will be better able to make informed decisions about
              scientific issues shaping our world today and about their own career choices.
