Title       : REU Site: Project-TRAIN-2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0139362

Award Number: 0139362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald P. Christian dchristi@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Penelope F. Kukuk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Hurley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Research Experience for Undergraduates Site project, Training American
              Indians in Environmental Biology - 2, has four objectives.  It will: (1)
              Increase the number of American Indian students entering graduate school and
              careers in environmental biology by providing research experiences and
              mentoring; (2) Expand the existing collaborative relationship between the
              University of Montana (UM) and Salish Kootenai College (SKC) to include the
              other tribal colleges in the state; (3) Increase the knowledge of UM faculty
              and students about minority issues; and (4) Disseminate throughout Indian
              country the relevance of training in environmental biology.  It will provide
              support to expand and improve an existing NSF-funded program, Undergraduate
              Mentoring in Environmental Biology: Project TRAIN by providing support for
              eight additional summer fellowships and increasing the number of fellowships
              from six to fourteen per summer.  Students will be recruited from Montana's
              seven tribal colleges and those from other tribal colleges in the region. 
              

The summer research experience will consist of an eight-week program, with
              possible extension to 12 weeks based on student interest and performance as
              well as project requirements.  Each fellow will participate in an independent
              research project under the supervision of an academic mentor.  Fellows will
              have the opportunity to choose from a broad array of topics in Environmental
              Biology.  Faculty and staff from both UM and SKC will conduct a summer course
              in research methods as well as arranging orientation and other events as part
              of a multilayered mentoring structure where students interact with faculty,
              previous program participants and one another.

