Title       : Dissertation Improvement Grant Proposal: An Actualistic and Stable Isotope Study
               of Three Modern Kenyan Communities Living near Lake Turkana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0139494

Award Number: 0139494
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. K. Harris jwharris@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John Harris, Ms Purity Kiura will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. Her project is a study over the annual cycle by
              direct observation and stable isotope analysis of the food consumption of three
              groups of people with different subsistence strategies (the Dassanetch, Gabra
              and El-molo) living today to the East of Lake Turkana in Northern Kenya. The
              ultimate goal of this study is to provide an interpretive framework for
              investigating the subsistence strategies and diet of people believed to have
              occupied the region during the last 10,000 years (Holocene period). These three
              modern groups are not direct analogues for the Holocene peoples but do have
              diets similar to those proposed in the region by prior researchers. However, if
              by direct observations, including the analysis of food residues discarded in
              garbage pits, and by the study of stable isotope signatures of modern peoples
              that these are found to be discrete, then it may be possible to identify
              similar subsistence strategies in the regions Holocene record. 

Ms Kiura and
              her field assistants will conduct daily observations and interviews of the
              people's dietary behavior (food types, processing, preparing and sharing) while
              at the same time they will document the food remains that are discarded in
              garbage pits through the people's food processing and consumption activities.
              Stable carbon and nitrogen isotope analysis to determine the food types
              consumed will be carried out on the people's hair, bone and teeth from the
              animals consumed by the people, and also the plants eaten by these animals.
              Daily weather observations (i.e. rain, humidity, temperature and wind patterns)
              will also be recorded to provide seasonal changes in the region.

The data
              collected here will have broad implications beyond setting up a base for the
              study of the Holocene people's subsistence strategies. The data will also
              provide novel information on the dietary activities through the annual cycle of
              three modern groups of people that are poorly studied. Plants and animals in
              the region are poorly understood and this project will therefore provide very
              important information to plant physiologists, mammalogists, paleontologists and
              others. Daily weather records will also prove important to all scientists
              interested in the region's seasonal changes and effects on the overall
              environment. 


