Title       : FRG: Collaborative Research: Focused Research on Wavelets, Frames, and Operator
               Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0139261

Award Number: 0139261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher E. Heil heil@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fundamental problems are addressed in wavelet theory, non-uniform
sampling,
              frames, and the theory of spectral-tile duality. These
problems are
              inextricably interwoven by concept and
technique. Operator theory provides the
              major unifying framework,
combined with an integration of ideas from a diverse
              spectrum of
mathematics including classical Fourier analysis,
              noncommutative
harmonic analysis, representation theory, operator
              algebras,
approximation theory, and signal processing.  For example,
              the
construction, implementation, and ensuing theory of single
              dyadic
orthonormal wavelets in Euclidean space requires significant
              input
from all of these disciplines as well as deep spectral-tile
              
results.

There is intrinsic mathematical importance in the aforementioned
              
problems,  and the solutions to be formulated have broad and 
creative
              implications, both for mathematics and for applications 
in engineering and
              physics. The topics of this project have 
direct bearing on fast acquisition
              and motion problems in MRI, 
as well as in formulating algorithms for
              compression and noise 
reduction by means of proper cochlear modelling. There
              are further
applications in quantum computing and image processing, and the
              
development of non-uniform sampling strategies by this project 
play  a role
              in state of the art A/D conversion methods used in 
multifunction RF systems. 
              These interdisciplinary applications 
depending on modern mathematical
              analysis have educational 
implications in terms of cross-fertilization of
              ideas and research
opportunities for graduate students. 

