Title       : REU Site: A Collaborative Student-Faculty Research Program in the Biological
               Sciences at Hope College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0139035

Award Number: 0139035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Bultman bultmant@hope.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy M. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Biology at Hope College will utilize a grant from the NSF-REU
              program to provide research appointments for 48 undergraduate students (12 per
              summer for 4 years).  Half of the students will come from Hope College and half
              will come from other colleges and universities throughout the U.S.  We will
              make special efforts, including a formal preferred acceptance program with
              Howard University, to recruit and appoint both women and members of minority
              groups underrepresented in science.  To broaden the understanding by future
              teachers of the conduct of science, 2 student participants each year will have
              a career goal of teaching high school biology. Students will participate in
              research at all levels of biology, from characterizing a new receptor gene for
              vasopressin to studying the ecology of frugivory in a tropical cloud forest. 
              One to 3 students will be involved in internationally-based projects each year.
               Interactions among students and faculty will provide each participant with
              knowledge about a wide range of biological problems and ways in which those
              problems are addressed.  In addition to the research itself, participants will
              take part in weekly meetings aimed at improving oral and written communication
              skills, exploring ethical issues in biology, and learning about graduate school
              and career opportunities in biology.  Students will communicate results of
              their research in formal talks (at Hope and at professional meetings), in a
              poster symposium and in a scientific paper.  The Hope program will  impact the
              student participants' understanding of science, the sciences, as students
              present their results to the scientific community, and society as students move
              on to graduate schools and a variety of careers.
