Title       : GK-12 K-Through-Infinity Systemic Initiative
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a0139335

Award Number: 0139335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1443287            (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrence S. Millar millar@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter Secada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicola J. Ferrier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eileen C. Callahan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              

The goals of this KTI-S project are to: enhance the professional development
              of the participating fellows and teachers; enhance science and mathematics
              capabilities and enthusiasm among the populations served; and investigate the
              effectiveness of the methods used.   The project builds on and expands the
              K-Through-Infinity Professional Development Partnership (KTI-P), a prior GK-12
              project. Four different educational environments are included: a metropolitan
              science museum that serves urban Milwaukee schools; a local public school
              district revising its science and mathematics curricula and pedagogy; a local
              private K-16 school organization seeking to integrate its science curriculum;
              and a new District of Columbia Charter School that is working with UW-Madison
              researchers to develop its science curriculum.
 
The key element of our
              approach is a robust concept of team design developed during our first GK-12
              project and implemented in many different settings. Fellows and teachers work
              with university and school district resources to develop new curricula and
              relevant, cutting edge materials coming out of research, map the standards to
              these products, and then implement them in classroom learning environments.
              Some fellows work intensively with a small number of teachers and classrooms,
              while others work with a larger number of teachers through such mechanisms as
              summer institutes and degree programs, and then follow those teachers back into
              multiple classrooms in different schools and even different districts and
              states. 

The KTI-S teams work in ways aligned with school, district and
              state resource allocations.  KTI-S takes advantage of the four distinct
              educational settings and the extensive and intensive evaluation activities
              included to encourage Fellows, teachers and project staff to reflect on a
              larger question: how can team activities in very different settings be aligned
              with district, state, and university resources to most effectively help K-12
              students learn, and experience the excitement of, science and mathematics, and
              in ways that provide fellows valuable K-12 classroom experience.  



