Title       : Fundamental Studies of the Origin of Support Effects in Supported Monolayer
               Vanadia Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0139613

Award Number: 0139613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286361             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Vohs vohs@cheme.seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Proposal Title: 	Fundamental Studies of the Origin of Support
              Effects in Supported Monolayer Vanadia Catalysts
Proposal
              Number:		CTS-0139613
Principal Investigator:	John
              Vohs
Institution:			University of Pennsylvania


The objective of this
              project is to provide a more detailed fundamental understanding of support
              effects on monolayer vanadia catalysts.  Specific goals of the investigations
              of this system are to provide quantitative information on the nature of the
              bonding at the vanadia-support interface.  The methods by which the identity of
              the support influences the strengths and redox properties of V-O support bonds
              will be studied.  Reactivity of the catalytic surface will be characterized
              through a study of kinetic parameters for elementary surface reactions involved
              in the selective oxidation of alcohols.  The model catalytic systems studied
              will consist of vapor deposited vanadia films supported on the surfaces of
              metal oxide single crystals.  Surface sensitive spectroscopic techniques
              including high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS), x-ray
              photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and temperature programmed desorption (TPD),
              among others will be used to characterize the catalytic surface and the
              chemical species on the surface.  Supported metal oxides are used industrially
              for a variety of chemical processes including selective oxidations and the
              catalytic reduction of NOx, and this study may lead to improved methods for the
              production of catalytic materials.

