Title       : Interface Design for a Shared Control Mobility Aid for the Elderly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0139283

Award Number: 0139283
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $708890             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Wasson wasson@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin A. Felder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brendan S. Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              One of the most important factors in quality of life for the elderly is their
              ability to move about independently. Mobility impairments due to age, injury or
              disease cause a downward trend in their quality of life. Lack of independence
              and exercise can have dramatic results. Although various types of mobility aids
              exist in research labs and on the market, walkers are used more than any
              mobility aid except the cane. Our work is concerned with developing an
              intelligent walker to assist the elderly and increase the ease and safety of
              their daily travels. The benefits to the user include assistance avoiding
              dangerous situations (obstacles, drops, etc.) and help with navigation through
              cluttered environments. It is hoped that this assistance will provide the user
              with a feeling of safety and autonomy that will encourage them to move about
              more, incurring the benefits of walking and helping them to carry out the
              activities of daily living (ADLs). Our walker employs a shared control strategy
              in which both the user and the walker can provide control of the walker"s
              heading. By dynamically shifting the balance between the degree of control
              provided by the walker and that provided by the user, our prototype can extend
              the time that a user can move independently on both a long term (as user
              abilities changes with age) and a short term (as user abilities change due to
              fatigue or medicinal cycles) basis. This point is critical because our work
              seeks to augment the abilities that people possess instead of replacing them.
              While wheelchairs and other self-powered mobility aids are viable solutions for
              some people, they are not a panacea. Our work seeks to help people who can and
              want to walk.
