Title       : GOALI: Plastic Anisotropy and Bauschinger Effect: Fundamental Role of
               Second-Phase Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0139045

Award Number: 0139045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Wagoner wagoner.2@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederic Barlat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the materials and mechanics issues involved in the
              forming behavior of precipitation hardened aluminum alloys that exhibit
              preferred orientations (textures) and directionally dependent properties
              (anisotropy). The study is aimed at understanding the springback of aluminum
              alloys during their forming operations that has hither to limited their use in
              many metal forming applications. The fundamental understanding of these
              behaviors will lead to the reduction in cost associated in forming of this
              important class of structural materials. The project is a highly leveraged
              cooperative program of research directed to clarify and extend the
              microstructural basis of metallic constitutive equations to include the effects
              of second-phase particles on anisotropic hardening. The objectives of the
              project include processing of model alloys of Al-Ge-Si by the industrial
              partner (Alcoa Technical Center or ATC), heat-treatments to produce different
              microstructures and a thorough characterization of second-phase microstructures
              in terms of precipitate size, orientation, morphology, grain size, etc. The
              study will establish fundamental linkages between the precipitate structure and
              anisotropic hardening. The alloy characterization is performed using advanced
              techniques such as orientation image microscopy (OIM) and TEM along with
              extensive mechanical testing as well as mechanics modeling leading to
              constitutive forms for inputting into finite element programs. The project
              takes advantage of the expertise and experimental facilities available at both
              the Ohio State University (OSU) and ATC. The educational impact of this work
              lies in close contact of the graduate students with the industrial counterpart
              through summer internships as well as the research direction by the
              co-investigator from ATC.
%%%
The project is a close collaboration between
              OSU and ATC with crosscutting implications to research areas in metals,
              mechanics and manufacturing. The study extends the fundamental understanding of
              the role of second- phase structures in producing anisotropic hardening
              behavior. Such knowledge is important for many research developments as well as
              commercial applications, with plausible cost reduction in the forming
              operations of aluminum alloys that are important for many technologies
              including aerospace and automotive. The close collaboration of the university
              personnel with the industrial counterparts provides significant opportunities
              for students.
***

