Title       : Systematic Biology and Bioinformatics Research Experiences for Undergraduates
               Site at BYU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0139501

Award Number: 0139501
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Duke S. Rogers Duke_Rogers@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Whiting  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh A. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Scientists who study systematics are interested in determining how living things
              are related and in understanding the evolutionary processes that generate
              biological diversity.  Bioinformatics, on the other hand, is a relatively new
              discipline whose practitioners are involved with management and analysis of
              molecular data.  Brigham Young University (BYU) has developed a summer program
              in systematics and bioinformatics to provide undergraduate students with an
              interactive and hands-on research experience.  We will recruit 30 undergraduate
              students (10 students in each of the years 2003-2005) to spend 10 weeks (June -
              August) at BYU, Provo, Utah.  Successful students will be paired with a faculty
              mentor who will assist them in conducting an original research project. 
              Potential research areas include conservation genetics, HIV evolution,
              systematics and evolutionary biology, molecular evolution, methods of phylogeny
              reconstruction, and parallel processing of large data sets.  We will recruit
              students who do not have substantial research opportunities at their own
              institutions and will focus on ethnic minority and female applicants. 
              Opportunities to interact with other students, faculty, post-docs and graduate
              students will be provided through weekly meetings, workshops and a series of
              weekend field trips.  In addition, students will present results of their
              research at a "symposium" to be held the 10th week.  The overall goals of this
              program are to assist students in understanding the scientific method of
              investigation and to expose students to the possibilities of pursuing a career
              in the biological sciences.
