Title       : REU Site Program: Undergraduate Opportunities in Tropical Ecology, Evolution and
               Natural Resources Management at the University of Hawai'i at Hilo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0139379

Award Number: 0139379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Price donaldp@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sharon Ziegler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii at Hilo
	      200 West Kawili Street
	      Hilo, HI  967204091    808/974-7444

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9150,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The study and conservation of natural resources in insular areas are necessary
              for and critical to the preservation of the myriad, unique ecosystems present. 
              This is of immediate concern in Hawai'i, with its high levels of endemism,
              geographic isolation, and biodiversity.   In order to continue and hopefully
              increase the number of future researchers focusing on these ecosystems, it is
              important to capture the interest of undergraduates.  The Island of Hawai'i,
              with its diversity and high representation of almost all ecological niches
              found in the archipelego, presents an excellent living laboratory in which to
              train these future researchers. 

This program represents a collaboration
              between the University of Hawai'i at Hilo (UHH) and state and federal research
              organizations conducting research on the Island of Hawai'i, to develop an
              undergraduate research opportunity program focused on tropical conservation
              biology.  UHH, with its growing student enrollment in sciences (more than 20%
              over the last four years alone), and diverse student base, is committed to
              providing valuable research opportunities for undergraduates with faculty
              mentors at UHH available in Biology, Marine Science, Agriculture, Forestry, and
              Natural Resource Management.  The Island of Hawai'i is also home to numerous
              agencies and offices that have ongoing conservation biology research programs. 
              The US Department of Agriculture Forest Service, the US Geological Service
              Biological Resources Division, the National Park and others work together on
              many research projects and are will to provide additional research
              opportunities for undergraduates. 

This program entails a summer component
              and a continued effort during the academic year.  Ten students will be selected
              for 10-week research experiences during the summer.  Following a one-week
              orientation, student participants will work side by side with researchers on
              conservation biology projects located on the Island of Hawai'i.  Weekly
              meetings will allow students to interact with each other and with other
              researchers and faculty, and give oral presentations on the progress of their
              individual projects.  Students will also submit written sections of their final
              report in progressive pieces throughout the summer, which will be edited,
              compiled and polished into a final report at the end of the summer.  Each
              student will give a final presentation at the end of the 10-week period. 
              Students who are attending UHH following their summer research experience and
              have shown promise to develop a publishable research project will have the
              opportunity to continue their research during the academic year.  These
              students will also be responsible for scheduled meetings throughout the
              academic year and a final presentation and paper. 
 
Information is available
              from Sharon Ziegler-Chong at UHH (telephone: 808-
933-0706; email:
              ziegler@hawaii.edu).

