Title       : Dissertation Research: MtDNA Genetic Diversity of the Prehistoric Northeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0139273

Award Number: 0139273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11625              (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Smith dgsmith@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Analysis of mitochondrial DNA obtained from skeletal materials can be used to
              examine the relatedness of long extinct populations.  This award will be used
              to investigate the biological relationships of four populations, totaling
              approximately 75 individuals, located in the Great Lakes region, as well as
              indicate some aspects of demographic history that are reflected in the pattern
              of genetic diversity. This investigation will test ancestral relationships
              proposed by linguists and archaeologists regarding the relationship between the
              diverse and expanding populations of the Archaic and Woodland periods in this
              region. 

Specifically, this study will test the genetic relationships within
              Glacial Kame and Red Ocher populations, as well as between these and Old
              Copper, Mississippian, and modern Algonquian speaking populations in the lower
              Great Lakes region. This study can help determine if archaeological
              similarities were primarily the result of cultural spreads or population
              expansions, in addition to estimating the extent of genetic differentiation
              that existed in the Great Lakes during the last 4000 years. The mtDNA of
              populations included in this study will also be compared with that of other
              ancient populations of the Lower Great Lakes region including Archaic Indian
              Knoll, early Woodland Adena, Hopewell, and Late Prehistoric Fort Ancient
              populations, all previously or currently being studied.  In addition, data
              generated from this study will contribute to the growing body of information
              that can be used to address broader questions regarding the peopling of the New
              World.


