Title       : Infrastructural Damage Assessment Using Land-Based Laser Swath Mapping
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0139382

Award Number: 0139382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Bloomquist dave@ce.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh L. Shrestha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The September 11, 2001 terrorist attack on the WTC and Pentagon has created an
              infrastructual catastrophe.  While the recovery effort is underway, engineers
              from FEMA and ASCE's disaster response teams are concurrently inspecting
              adjacent buildings for damage.  The objective of this research is to conduct
              post-disaster reconnaissance at the affected sites in order to recover
              ephemeral data for detailed damage assessment. 

This SGER award is to
              support a team from the University of Florida in using a new land-based laser
              system to produce very high-resolution 3-D "maps" of both interior and exterior
              areas of damaged buildings.  This system, based on airborne laser swath mapping
              technology, can quickly generate very valuable data, especially on damage
              related to deformations and cracking. The reflection of laser pulses (at 2 kHz)
              is used to obtain X, Y, Z coordinates and ultimately a digital elevation model.
               This results in photographic-like images and spatial coordinates with an
              absolute accuracy of 4-5 mm and a relative accuracy of 1-2 mm.  The spacing of
              data points is user selectable and can be extremely small, but for this
              research, it is anticipated that spacing of several cm for large areas and
              several mm for smaller areas such as rooms would be used.  The laser system is
              integrated with digital photography to compliment building damage analysis. 
              For example, exposed beams and columns can be checked for plumbness and
              deformations; exterior walls for lateral deformations, architectural damage and
              cracking.   Other methods of obtaining these data are very time consuming and
              less accurate.

The purpose of the data collection is threefold.  First,
              systematic collection of damage data from structures damaged, but not
              destroyed, will aid in the assessment of the structural integrity of these
              buildings.  These data should expedite damage appraisal and if warranted, their
              eventual repair.  Second, the data will serve as a valuable resource for future
              research related to performance of structures subjected to terrorist attack,
              explosions, fires, etc. It should help in the development of methods to
              minimize damage from such occurrences; and may result in better designs of
              urban structures.  Third, this work will support the development of land based
              laser swath methods that have tremendous applications in civil engineering and
              construction.   The PIs are leaders in the application of this technology to
              civil engineering related issues. 
 


