Title       : FRG: Collaborative Research: Approximation of Lyapunov Exponents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0139895

Award Number: 0139895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235481             (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Dieci dieci@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This Focused Research Group project includes investigators
from three
              different universities: Luca Dieci at Georgia
Institute of Technology, Michal
              Jolly at Indiana University, and
Erik Van Vleck at the University of Kansas. 
              The project
considers the approximation of Lyapunov exponents and
              other
spectral information for dynamical systems.  The main goal is to
study
              and implement numerical techniques to approximate Lyapunov
exponents of
              continuous dynamical systems, as defined by a system
of time dependent
              differential equations.  The investigators are
implementing and comparing
              so-called continuous and discrete QR
and SVD approaches.  They distinguish
              between linear and nonlinear
problems, the chief difference being that in the
              linear case no
approximation of solution trajectory is attempted. 
              The
investigators study Lyapunov exponents for systems of large
dimension,
              such as spatially discretized time dependent PDEs.  In
particular, they
              consider PDEs for which an inertial manifold is
known to exist, and study the
              relative merits of techniques that
compute the exponents after a prior
              inertial manifold reduction
versus those that work with the full (spatially
              discretized) PDE.
Methods that use the Jacobian and Jacobian-free methods
              are
compared.  The investigators also develop general purpose
algorithms and
              software for approximation of Lyapunov exponents
and aim to include the
              algorithms within standard software for
differential equations.
     In many
              areas of science and engineering, physical and
biological systems are modeled
              with differential equations.  In a
nutshell, a differential equation is a rule
              specifying how a
given initial state of the system evolves into future states.
               In
practice, we are given the differential equation and the initial
state,
              and need to find the solution (i.e., the evolution of the
initial condition). 
              Realistic models depend on parameters and
the solution of the differential
              equation will of course depend
on the values of the parameters as well.  The
              ultimate goal of
this project is to provide scientists with quantitive means
              of
assessing the dependency of solutions with respect to variations
of the
              initial state or the parameters in the problem.  Lyapunov
exponents, and other
              related "spectral quantities," do exactly
this.  A chief effort of the
              investigators is the development of
algorithms and computational software for
              approximation of
Lyapunov exponents and other spectra.
