Title       : REU the Impact of Energy Technologies on Natural Environmental Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0139572

Award Number: 0139572
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Jagoe   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Vaun McArthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Savannah River Ecology Laboratory's (SREL) research experiences for
              undergraduates (REU) program provides scientific training and hands-on
              experience in the process of research by actively involving undergraduates in
              projects with full time research ecologists.  Project participants will examine
              the influence of nuclear and fossil fuel energy production and associated
              technologies on selected biological and chemical properties in southeastern
              ecosystems.  SREL is located on the US Departments of Energy's 720 km2 Savannah
              River Site (SRS), where a variety of habitats including pine forests, abandoned
              farmlands and freshwater wetlands adjoin industrial facilities and
              anthropogenetically-disturbed areas.  Participant selection is based on written
              statements of interests and goals in the application, letters of
              recommendation, and academic record.  We seek diversity and actively recruit
              minority applicants.

The objective of this program is to provide the next
              generation of ecologists and environmental scientists with an introduction to
              the practice of scientific research.  Students accepted into the program
              perform independent research projects that interface with ongoing research
              programs at SREL.  Faculty members actively engaged in research and publication
              are paired with students with compatible research interests.  At the beginning
              of their residence, students participate in a series of workshops led by SREL
              faculty and staff on research design, ethics, data collection and processing,
              and oral and written presentation of results.  They also prepare a formal
              research proposal in collaboration with their faculty advisor.  Students
              receive hands-on training while performing their projects, as well as through
              brown bag seminar-discussion groups, formal seminars, group field trips to
              representative biomes of the southeast, and collegial interactions among
              themselves and permanent research staff and faculty.  Near the conclusion of
              their residence, there is a formal workshop on graduate study.  Each student
              must present a brief seminar on their project before their peers and SREL
              faculty and staff.  They also prepare a scientific manuscript based on their
              research, and participate in an exit interview and survey to provide feedback
              for program improvement.  These activities continue and refine undergraduate
              research training at SREL, which began over 30 years ago, and has involved over
              600 undergraduate participants to date.  This type of hands-on training and
              experience has proved highly beneficial in attracting quality students to
              careers in environmental science, and preparing them for graduate study and
              future research endeavors. 

