Title       : REU Site: Excavation and Reconstruction of a Northern Plains Bison Kill Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a0139431

Award Number: 0139431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155778             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Bradley lbradley@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Royce C. Engstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site on "Excavation and Reconstruction of a
              Northern Plains Bison Kill Site" at the University of South Dakota.  The
              project represents a unique cooperation between academic units of the
              University and the W.H. Over Museum, a natural history museum which resides on
              the University Campus.  The project is highly interdisciplinary and provides
              opportunities for students with a wide variety of backgrounds, including social
              science, physical and natural science, education, and museum science.  The
              scientific aspects of the REU Site project are threefold:  (1) the excavation
              of the bison kill site using state-of-the-art archaeological methodology; (2)
              analysis and documentation of the artifacts taken from the Site; and (3) an
              educational program consisting of a professional exhibit at the museum and an
              accompanying K-12 curricular module.  In addition to the scientific component,
              the Site will offer students  field trips, social events, weekly discussions,
              and written and oral presentation of results in a variety of local and national
              venues.  This award will support eight students per year for three years.  In
              addition to students from the University of South Dakota and smaller schools in
              the surrounding region, an emphasis will be placed on involving Native American
              students who are enrolled at two tribal colleges in South Dakota.

This award
              contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students
              into careers in science through active undergraduate research
              experiences.



