Title       : Applications of Super-enhanced Two-photon Stimulated Emission Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a0139991

Award Number: 0139991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Gauthier gauthier@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1290      QUANTUM OPTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this program is to develop two-photon lasers that operate in
              different regimes and that are based on a new technique for super-enhancing the
              two-photon stimulated emission process in laser driven potassium. The
              researchers are using this device to explore the operating characteristics of a
              broad-area two-photon laser that is expected to spontaneously form
              two-dimensional bright localized structures in a dark background (transverse
              spatial solitons), a topic of current interested in the nonlinear and laser
              dynamics communities. They are also investigating whether the system displays
              quantum images, that is, quantum-correlated spatial structures. In addition,
              the researchers are performing experiments to determine whether the
              single-transverse-mode version of the laser is capable of generating bright
              polarization-entangled twin beams of light, which may be useful in application
              such as quantum lithography, for example. In the final phase of the project,
              the researchers are using an ultra-high-finesse optical resonator to head
              toward the regime of strong atom-cavity coupling for two-photon processes,
              which may find applications in multiple photon quantum state engineering and
              the controlled generation of two-photon states. The research is being conducted
              in an interdisciplinary environment that has been successful in recruiting and
              retaining women scientists. An international collaboration is another important
              educational aspect of the program.	
