Title       : REU Site Proposal: The Calder Center Summer Undergraduate Research Program in
               Ecology and Field Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0139767

Award Number: 0139767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105613             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Wehr wehr@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4651

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Calder Summer Undergraduate Research (CSUR) program will provide eight
              undergraduate students each summer the opportunity for independent research in
              ecology and field biology at the Louis Calder Center, Fordham University's
              biological field station.  Since 1967, the Calder Center has provided
              undergraduate and graduate students opportunities to study relatively
              undisturbed communities near an urban center, and has afforded many urban
              students their first opportunity to examine the natural world first hand.  As
              part of this mission, the Calder Center and Fordham University have established
              the CSUR program.

The CSUR program is a 12-week, intensive curriculum in
              which students learn the fundamentals of experimental design, use of the
              scientific literature, data collection and analysis, preparation of
              manuscripts, and oral presentation.  A core component of the program is an
              independent research project each student will conduct in conjunction with
              faculty mentors.  Projects may be developed in a broad range of topics
              including aquatic ecology, forest ecology, physiological ecology of plants and
              animals, soil ecology, vector ecology, and wildlife conservation.  Students
              will also participate in weekly scientific seminars, seminar courses on the
              philosophy of science and ethics in science, and a student exchange program
              with the American Museum of Natural History.  In addition, CSUR participants
              will be able to interact with other undergraduate and graduate students at the
              Calder Center who are supported through university fellowships and extramural
              grants.
 
The CSUR-REU project targets highly motivated students interested
              in pursuing a career in ecology, especially those who are from institutions
              that offer limited opportunities for independent research, are from urban
              backgrounds, or are from groups under-represented in science.  In addition to
              these considerations, students will be selected based on academic performance,
              research interests and potential, and previous research experience.  Students
              interested in participating in the program may contact Dr. John Wehr at
              914-273-3078 ext. 11 or at wehr@fordham.edu for information and application
              forms.  Students may also obtain information and forms online at
              http://www.fordham.edu/calder_center/calder-center/CSUR-Program.html

