Title       : REU Sites: Summer Undergraduate Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0139576

Award Number: 0139576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harriet G. Taylor                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Pless pless@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cindy Grimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,9250,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0139576
Pless, Robert
Washington University

TITLE: Summer Undergraduate
              Research Program


The department has a long history of supporting
              undergraduate summer research opportunities, and these opportunities will exist
              with or without external support.  However, external support does further
              particular NSF objectives having to do with the size of the program, the
              quality of the student experience, and the balance f student recruiting.
In
              particular, the requested funding would:

oMaintain an efficient size of the
              program, sixteen summer students.  In addition to summer research projects
              funded from their research funds, this gives a critical
mass of students that
              improves the overall student experience.

oFoster a broader range f student
              projects.

oClearly separate the objectives of the program from individual
              faculty research agendas. Faculty who support students from individual research
              grants tend to be conservative in hiring and must choose projects that serve
              the objectives of their funding sources. This may negatively impact both the
              student experience and the student selection.
There are three explicit goals
              for this REU program. First, to give undergraduates from many backgrounds the
              opportunity and training to participate in frontier research.
Second, to
              foster and extend the undergraduate research culture already present at
              Washington University.  Third, to create a supportive and encouraging
              environment to do research.
This first goal will be met with a targeted
              advertising campaign. This campaign will not exclude any source of potential
              students, but will focus n (a) predominately teaching colleges, (b)
              historically minority schools, (c) non-computer science departments.
Second, a
              coherent program involving a designated group of summer research program
              students gives a reason to organize events, a social group, and a critical mass
              for which it is appropriate to offer programs which aid all undergraduate
              students involved in research. Finally, we propose a program that includes an
              explicit training component to teach students the tools t attack research
              problems effectively. A set of defined check points during the course of the
              summer will allow program coordinators to identify and solve potential
              problems.

