Title       : Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0139950

Award Number: 0139950
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3900001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel L. Tabor tabor@nucott.physics.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Cottle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kirby W. Kemper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1233      HEAVY ION NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award wil support the experimental nuclear physics group at
Florida State
              University.  The research will be carried out at the
FSU Tandem/LINAC
              accelerator facility and at other laboratories
around the U.S.  Nine FSU
              faculty members are actively involved. 
Research focus areas include a variety
              of nuclear reactions of
astrophysical importance, isospin purity of nuclei,
              new insights
into nuclear collective behavior, and properties of loosely
              bound
"halo" nuclei.  The FSU has had primary responsibility for the
              Ring
Imaging Cherenkov detector for the PHENIX experiment at the
Relativistic
              Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC), and will pursue electron
measurements to look for
              nuclear medium effects on the perperties of
light vector mesons.  At Jefferson
              Laboratory, the FSU group will
use high-quality tagged photon beams at the
              CLAS detector to search
fo rmesons with so-called exotic quantum numbers. 
              This activity
also ties directly to participation in the development of
              the
proposed Hall D detector for Jefferson Laboratory.  Graduate
education
              will be an essential component of the group's activities.


