Title       : REU Sites: Undergraduate Computer Research (UnCoRe) for Women at Oakland
               University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0139580

Award Number: 0139580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Harriet G. Taylor                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288384             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ishwar K. Sethi isethi@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fatma Mili  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,9250,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0139580
Sethi, Ishwar
Oakland University

TITLE: Undergraduate Computer
              Research for Women at Oakland University

The primary objective of the
              proposed REU Site is to promote graduate studies in Computer Science
              and
Engineering to bright, talented undergraduate women students. The
              objective will be achieved by creating a
nurturing environment and a first
              hand experience in the activities most directly related to graduate study and
              research careers, and by targeting the pool of recruitment to women from
              undergraduate institutions and women from majors related to Computer Science
              and Engineering. We are planning on enrolling eight students in each of the
              three summers covered by this program. The activities planned include
              conducting research as part of a team, communicating research results orally
              through presentations and in writing through research reports, and
              disseminating project information and results through the web. In addition,
              each participant will attend a national conference to gain an up-close
              experience about research as a profession, and be enrolled in ACM and SWE
              (Society of Women
Engineers).

The national and local statistics [2] confirm
              the existence of a large pool of women students who have the
Intellectual
              potential and the academic preparation for graduate studies in Computer Science
              and Engineering, but who never receive the exposure and motivation that led
              them to such career choices. The proposed REU Site will actively seek and
              recruit such students from Oakland University as well as from neighboring
              undergraduate institutions. There are many 2 and 4-year colleges in the
              geographical vicinity of Oakland University with limited or non-existent
              research programs. Examples of near-by four-year institutions that will be
              targeted include Central Michigan University, Eastern Michigan University,
              Lawrence Technological University, University of Detroit-Mercy, Madonna
              University and University of Michigan at Flint. The two-year colleges that will
              be targeted for participants include Macomb Community College, Oakland
              Community College, Henry Ford Community College, Marygrove College and
              Rochester College.
The intellectual focus of the proposed REU Site will be
              intelligent information processing and management. This focus was selected both
              because it represents a unifying theme to the research activities of the
              investigators and other faculty participants, and because it is an area at the
              edge of research with a wealth of applications. The match between the faculty's
              research and the selected focus provides a natural setting for students to get
              involved in on-going research projects, and an opportunity to follow up on this
              research and continue to contribute after completion of their REU
              participation. The wealth of potential and existing applications of the
              selected area of focus will serve as a great motivator for the undergraduate
              students targeted.

