Title       : Paleoclimate from Mount Everest Ice Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0139491

Award Number: 0139491
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Mayewski paul.mayewski@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl J. Kreutz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shichang Kang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrei Kurbatov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon S. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this research is to analyze three ice cores collected by a
              joint Chinese-US team of researchers in the spring of 2001.  At that time, a
              117-meter ice core was recovered from the East Rongbuk (ERC) glacier at 6500
              meters above sea level.  In addition to these analyses, the researchers will
              participate in a joint Chinese-US expedition to the region to retrieve modern
              day glaciological and meteorological data to aid in the interpretation of the
              ice core data.

Based on local accumulation rates and layer thinning
              estimates, the new 117-meter ERC core likely represents at least several
              centuries of snow deposition.  Thus, the researchers have the opportunity to
              develop a calibrated, high-resolution paleoclimate record from the region that
              will complement previous paleoclimatological research from Mt. Everest and
              Central Asia.

The analysis of the ice cores will focus on producing a
              detailed time-series of major ion concentrations (i.e., chloride, nitrate,
              sulfate, calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium and ammonium), stable isotope
              ratios (i.e., oxygen and deuterium), and total element concentration (i.e.,
              iron, aluminum, calcium, and sulfur). 

These data will be used to
              develop:
-- high-resolution time series of Late Holocene climate variability
              for the region involving atmospheric circulation, temperature, and
              precipitation, and 
-- detailed environmental records of biomass burning, dust
              storms, anthropogenic pollutants, and marine and continental biogenic source
              productivity. 

The analyses of the ice cores could increase our
              understanding of the atmospheric dynamics of an important weather system that
              impacts a heavily populated region of the world.  The interaction and
              cooperation of scientific colleagues from the United States and China will
              enhance the prospects for success.
