Title       : Environmental Signal Transduction: An Interdisciplinary Research Experience for
               Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0139204

Award Number: 0139204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322682             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan R. Stapleton susan.stapleton@wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen B. Malcolm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The program provides a collaborative research atmosphere for undergraduate
              students in the sciences to work with faculty mentors in the Departments of
              Biological Sciences and Chemistry at Western Michigan University. 
              Participating faculty and their students focus on basic and applied approaches
              to interdisciplinary understanding of signal transduction cascades at different
              scales of biological organization from molecules to ecosystems.  Signal
              transduction is the study of mechanisms by which biological molecules or
              chemical agents initiate action within cells, tissues, organisms or
              systems.

Emphases within the program include (1) interdisciplinary research
              under the broad umbrella of environmental signal transduction, (2) student
              ownership of research, (3) ethical conduct within a research environment, (4)
              the development and implementation of defensible scientific methods, (5) active
              recruitment of underrepresented groups to a career in science, (6)
              peer-motivated and mentor-motivated interactions within a cohort of
              collaborators, (7) communication, presentation and publication of research
              results, and (8) post-research experience tracking to encourage the pursuit of
              a career in science.

Interactions within the group lead to new and
              innovative ways of studying biologically relevant signals that have broad
              applications in agriculture, health, and the environment.  Research projects
              within the program vary from signal cascades within cells that may trigger
              immune responses to disease, to physiological responses to heavy metal stress,
              to the impact of genetically engineered plant products on non-target organisms.
               Students are exposed to a wide range of scientific methods and modern
              equipment, in both laboratory and field settings, and they are encouraged to
              take full advantage of available facilities.

Students benefit scientifically
              from addressing highly focused questions from an interdisciplinary perspective
              and the communication of results from team efforts.  Participating students
              also benefit socially and personally from deeply motivating interactions within
              a culture of deep commitment, interdisciplinary respect and societal relevance.
               In today's highly competitive research environment, the ability to apply a
              wide range of methods, skills, ideas, and theories from multiple disciplines is
              vital to the solution of both applied and conceptual problems. 

