Title       : Computational Studies of Lithium Dialkylamide Mixed Aggregates in Enolization
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0139076

Award Number: 0139076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence M. Pratt lpratt@fisk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fisk University
	      1000 Seventeenth Avenue North
	      Nashville, TN  372083051    615/329-8500

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this work is to use ab initio calculations to determine the
              mechanisms leading to the observed stereochemistries from enolate condensation
              reactions.  Lithium dialkyl amide bases are used for enolate generation and
              these form mixed aggregates in solution.  Geometry optimization will be
              performed on each observed and suspected mixed aggregate using both
              microsolvation and bulk solvation models.  Geometry optimization will then be
              repeated for lithium aggregate-ketone or ester complexes to determine relative
              activation energies leading to stereoisomeric enolates.  Enolate condensations
              are one of the most important carbon-carbon bond forming reactions available to
              organic chemists and this work should lead to a better understanding of the
              mechanisms of those reactions.

With this award, the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of Dr. Lawrence M.
              Pratt of the Department of Chemistry at Fisk University.  Dr. Pratt will use
              molecular modelling and calculations to better understand a class of chemical
              reactions know as enolate condensation reactions.  Enolate condensations are
              one of the most important carbon-carbon bond forming reactions available to
              organic chemists and this work should lead to a better understanding of how
              those reactions are occurring.  Students trained as a result of working on this
              project will gain experience in theoretical organic chemistry and molecular
              modelling, hence they will have skills needed by the pharmaceutical and
              speciality chemicals industries.
