Title       : REU: Ecosystem-level Processes in Oligotrophic Pine Barrens Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0139132

Award Number: 0139132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141648             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Franzi david.franzi@Plattsburgh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tim Mihuc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Plattsburgh
	      
	      Plattsburgh, NY  12901    518/564-2000

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Center for Earth and Environmental Science at Plattsburgh State University
              (PSU) and the W. H. Miner Agricultural Research Institute will provide an
              eight-week summer research experience for 12 highly motivated undergraduate
              students interested in ecosystem research.  The PSU summer research program
              will involve an interdisciplinary investigation of ecosystem-level processes in
              the sandstone-pavement jack pine barrens in northeastern New York.  the
              physical environment of the pine barrens strongly influences ecosystem
              processes such as runoff, organic matter decomposition and nutrient cycling,
              and aquatic and terrestrial habitats.  This special ecosystem is a distinctive
              component of the Champlain-Adirondack Biosphere Resserve and the REU studies
              will have significance for organizations like the Adirondack Nautre conservancy
              and Nature Conservancy Canada, which are developing management plans for these
              areas.  The sandstone pavement ecosystems have been a focus of undergraduate
              research at PSU since 1972 and the REU program will build upon these ongoing
              efforts.

The principal objectives of the Plattsburgh REU program are to
              promote the professional development of our undergraduate researchers and
              instill a better appreciation for ecosystem complexity, function and value. 
              The REU participants, individually and in small groups, will work closely with
              the program's faculty mentors on research projects ranging from surface and
              ground water hydrogeology, forest biochemistry (nutrient cycling) and
              terrestrial plant, aquatic and wetlands ecology.
