Title       : Summer Student Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0139181

Award Number: 0139181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173046             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Harrison deh@jax.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jackson Laboratory
	      600 Main Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    /   -

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Jackson Laboratory's Summer Student Program has provided a life-altering
              10-week research apprenticeship for thousands of high school and college
              students for more than seventy years.  The program immerses students in
              laboratory science: hypothesis-driven research, rigorous testing of ideas using
              the experimental method, collecting and interpreting experimental results to
              arrive at a conclusion, and reporting results in an open forum.  It inculcates
              the unyielding demand for intellectual honesty in reporting and interpreting
              results.   The object is to introduce students to the real nature of research
              and change perceptions of how science is done.

Each summer student
              participant conducts original hands-on research as a contributing member of a
              sponsoring scientist's research team. Projects are tailored to the student's
              background and interests. Each student's independent project focuses on a vital
              subject such as cancer, the use of computers in biology, aging, genetics, how
              the immune system fights disease, or diseases of the nervous system. Students
              devote most of their effort to their individual research projects, but the
              program also provides formal exposure to the breadth of genetics research at
              the Laboratory, to different paths leading to careers in science, and to
              consideration of the ethical conduct of research. The overall theme is to
              introduce students to the professional life and habits of mind of a
              scientist.

Science is both a body of knowledge and a way of exploring the
              natural world. In school, students are exposed to the body of knowledge but
              often do not appreciate the creative nature of scientific research. A research
              program changes these misperceptions. Alumni report that these lessons last a
              lifetime, shape careers, and change the way participants perceive their world. 
              Students develop a close working relationship with a research scientist and
              come to better understand the profound satisfaction of a career in advancing
              human understanding of nature; more than 95% of Jackson REU participants are
              now in graduate or medical school or are employed in science.

