Title       : REU Site: Research in Prokaryotic Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0139083

Award Number: 0139083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209892             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Neidle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy R. Hoover  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this REU Site program (Research in Prokaryotic Biology) is to
              introduce undergraduate students to exciting areas of microbial research and to
              increase their awareness about careers in science.  This goal will be achieved
              through an intensive, approximately 9-week long, hands-on summer laboratory
              research program in the Microbiology Department of the University of Georgia in
              Athens.  Ten undergraduate student participants will be recruited from
              undergraduate institutions with limited research opportunities in Microbiology.
               In addition, students who are members of groups that are underrepresented in
              the scientific community will be encouraged to participate in the
              program.

REU participants will conduct independent projects under the
              supervision of faculty members, postdoctoral researchers and graduate students.
               A wide variety of research topics will address the diverse functions of
              prokaryotic organisms (bacteria and archaea).  State-of-the-art techniques will
              be used in interdisciplinary approaches that combine knowledge from the fields
              of Genetics, Biochemistry, Physiology, Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology, and
              Ecology.  Microbial investigations will address broad questions ranging from
              the role of prokaryotes in environmental and geochemical processes to their
              role in human health.  Research experiences should generate enthusiasm among
              the students for the scientific topics and help them understand more about
              graduate education and careers in science.

To enhance the research
              experience, the REU students will have informal meetings with faculty, attend
              scientific seminars, join the weekly research meetings of their lab groups, and
              participate in ethics-in-science workshops.  Students will present their
              research results at the end of the summer.  This program will have a
              significant impact both on science and education.  The students will advance
              the research programs of the faculty mentors.  Moreover, the exchange of ideas
              among faculty and students from around the country will help spread awareness
              of the importance of prokaryotic biology.  Students will be able to communicate
              what they learn about scientific careers to their peers at their home
              institutions.



