Title       : US--Ghana Summer Undergraduate Research Experience for US Students at the
               University of Cape Coast: Bio Diversity in the Tropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0139175

Award Number: 0139175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Wubah wubahda@jmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 5728, Med Arts West 22-B
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 5928,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0139175
Wubah

This two-year grant supports the participation of eight
              undergraduate students (four per year) in a summer research program in Ghana. 
              The students will be supervised by Dr. Daniel Wubah, Associate Dean of the
              College of Science and Mathematics at James Madison University, and Dr. Kobina
              Yankson, Dean of the Faculty of Science, and other faculty members at the
              University of Cape Coast (UCC).  Students will also be assigned peer mentors,
              who will be senior level UCC students engaged in research projects in the
              faculty mentor's laboratory.  The students' projects will emphasize the
              importance of biodiversity to the health of ecosystems, and the human and
              environmental factors that impact biodiversity.  Site visits will be made to
              nature preserves and national parks to examine the characteristics and
              components of biologically diverse habitats.  The undergraduate students will
              participate in group meetings, research seminars, field trips, and technical
              workshops, and they will also take part in activities that will increase their
              knowledge about Ghanaian culture.  At the end of the six-weeks the students
              will present their work in both oral and poster formats at an end-of-program
              symposium.  Upon their return to the United States, the students will also
              present the results of their work at campus, regional, and national meetings. 
              These research projects are expected to increase the students' understanding of
              the ecology and biodiversity in a tropical region of West Africa, improve their
              skills in critical thinking and problem solving, and broaden their
              understanding of how science is conducted in a developing country. The project
              will also provide the students opportunities to develop collaborative linkages
              with the Ghanaian faculty and students.  It is anticipated that the results of
              this program will increase their competitiveness for graduate and professional
              studies within the life sciences.  This grant also promotes a collaborative
              linkage between a predominantly undergraduate institution in the United States,
              James Madison University, and a Sub-Saharan Africa university, University of
              Cape Coast, that is actively engaged in research in the biological sciences.

