Title       : REU Site-Summer Undergraduate Research Focus Anthropogenic Impacts on the
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0139195

Award Number: 0139195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sally E. O'Connor                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzzette F. Chopin schopin@falcon.tamucc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene J. Billiot  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TX A&M U Corpus Christi
	      6300 Ocean Drive
	      Corpus Christi, TX  784125503    361/825-2497

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The major objective of the ten week Summer Undergraduate Research Focus
              (SURF)-Anthropogenic Impacts on the Environment program is to provide research
              experiences and education for ten undergraduate students, particularly female
              and minority students.  Recruitment efforts focus on students who are not
              likely to have research opportunities at their home institutions, for example
              students at community colleges.
The common focus of the research activities is
              an investigation of the effects of human activities on the environment,
              particularly the coastal environment.  Research projects will be mentored by
              faculty members of the Department of Physical & Life Science Department at
              Texas A&M University-Corpus Christi.  The research opportunities reflect the
              interdisciplinary nature of this department.  Hands-on laboratory and field
              experiences will be provided by faculty members representing the disciplines of
              biology, chemistry, environmental science, geosciences, and mariculture.  The
              goals of the program are to improve the critical thinking ability and
              communication skills of the students, and to prepare them for a professional
              career in the sciences.  The intended impact is to provide hands-on science
              experiences to foster life-long science learning and to increase the number of
              minority students pursuing advanced degrees in science.
Following an initial
              one-week orientation, the standard weekly schedule includes four days of
              laboratory/field research, a half day excursion and another half day of group
              meetings.  The group meetings include a debriefing session to assess and
              address student progress, problems and concerns; a journal club; professional
              skills activities; and an ethics in science component.
SURF will conclude with
              a symposium in which the students deliver oral or poster presentations of their
              research.  In addition to the ten-week summer program, students are funded to
              present their research at one regional or national conference during the
              regular academic year.

