Title       : Science and Technology Enhancement Program Project STEP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0139312

Award Number: 0139312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1377000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant R. Kukreti Anant.Kukreti@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne Soled  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shafiqul Islam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thaddeus W. Fowler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 7179      GRAD TEACHING FELLOWS IN K-12
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7179,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project STEP, involves graduate and undergraduate Fellows, secondary science and
              mathematics teachers, University of Cincinnati faculty and a graphics/web
              developer, working in teams to design, develop, and implement hands-on
              activities and technology-driven inquiry-based projects which relate to the
              students' community issues, as vehicles to teach science and math skills.
              Activities will be incorporated into lessons, demonstrations, laboratory
              exercises, individual and group projects, and field experiences to enable
              middle and high school students to directly experience authentic learning
              practices that requires them to use higher-order thinking skills; encourage
              creative problem-solving skills that require collaborative learning, teamwork,
              writing, and presentation; cultivate an interest in service learning in which
              students are active participants, achieve outcomes that show a perceptible
              impact, and engage in evaluative reflection; and better motivate and prepare
              secondary school students for advanced education.  The Fellows will be trained
              to create and implement these activities by taking an educational methods
              course, an advanced course in instructional technology, and by serving as
              teaching assistants and tutors in guiding summer academies for middle and high
              school students.  Quantitative formative and summative evaluation will be
              conducted to assess the project's effectiveness on Fellows' teaching skills,
              its impact on middle and high school science and mathematics education, and to
              continually improve the program as it develops.  This project is receiving
              partial support from the Directorate for Engineering.
