Title       : Research on Riots, Protest, and Activism (REU Site)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0139296

Award Number: 0139296
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Myers Myers.33@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds for an REU Site in Sociology at the University of
              Notre Dame.  The program will support 24 students over the course of three
              years.  The substantive focus of the Site will be centered on protest and
              activism with an emphasis on urban rioting and violent protest in the U.S.
              during the 1960s.  The data driving the research are the contents of a recently
              re-discovered archive of data on riots, race relations, and civil rights
              activism in the 1960s.  Very little of these data have ever been analyzed or
              even systematically compiled and summarized; therefore students will have the
              opportunity to make substantial contributions to the recently resurgent
              sociological literature about racial rioting and collective violence.  The
              year-lengh program will allow sustained engagement with the research project
              and thereby a rich research experience.  Students will begin by engaging in
              foundational activities such as reviewing literature and learning about how to
              process and interpret the specific kinds of data available to them for the
              project.  Following this, students will develop their own research topics,
              write formal proposals, and compile the data necessary to complete their
              projects.  The second half of the experience will focus on the execution of
              their research plans and writing of formal research reports.  The Site will
              culminate with a mini-conference in which the students will present their work.
               Students will also be encouraged to submit their reports to social science
              conferences and to revise toward publication.

This award contributes to the
              Foundation's continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in
              science through active undergraduate research experiences.


