Title       : "Quasilinearization Approach to Nonlinear Problems in Physics"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0139959

Award Number: 0139959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Tabakin tabakin@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0130059
Tabakin

Past research on predicting spin observables in the
              photoproduction of mesons led us to an interest in the general dynamics of
              spin, which is an integral part of the new field of quantum computing. 
              Examination of strong interaction dynamics led us to the subject of nonlinear
              interactions.  Therefore, the focus of our research evolved into two
              directions; (1) the application and development of a new approach to solving
              nonlinear equations and (2) the study of the behavior of qubits (typically an
              atomic or nuclear spin system) and their role in quantum computing and
              information.

A novel quasilinearization method has already been shown, with
              Prof. Mandelzweig (Hebrew University), to yield rapid convergence for a wide
              range of nonlinear Physics problems.  We plan to combine that method with a
              wavelet basis approach to examine nonlinear shock-wave and soliton problems. 
              Development of methods for treating nonlinear dynamics has broad applications
              in many other fields, such as in biology and economics, where effects are
              enhanced by dependence on higher powers of interaction.

Quantum Computing
              hopes to use quantum spin effects to perform otherwise impossible computational
              feats.  We will focus on developing a computer simulation of a quantum
              computer. The time evolution of the spin density matrix for a quantum computer
              will include quantum gates and error corrections, plus the effect of the
              environment.  The goal will be to study the stability of a quantum computer
              under the influence of loss of quantum coherence and entanglement.   This will
              indicate the feasibility of producing an actual quantum computer.

Graduate
              student researchers will work in both of these activities, which provide
              excellent and broad training that will lead to opportunities for them in many
              directions.


