Title       : University of Delaware Summer Undergraduate Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a0139014

Award Number: 0139014
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Rom                           
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227170             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ana I. Dittel adittel@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Kirchman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1690      EDUCATION/HUMAN RESOURCES,OCE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award provides renewed funding for a Research Experience for Undergraduates
              (REU) site that will host a total of ten students during ten weeks of summer
              research. Students will be working with researchers at the University of
              Delaware's College of Marine Studies (CMS) located in Lewes, DE.  Students will
              also participate in a series of seminars and workshops exploring issues related
              to marine science, career options, and graduate education. The program recruits
              juniors and senior undergraduate students nationwide.  These students are able
              to pursue research in a broad range of marine science, environmental science
              and marine engineering fields.

The program has an excellent record of
              success with past groups of students and contains all the important elements of
              a good REU program, including a thorough orientation program, a well-designed
              lecture series, a research cruise, an ethics program, and required oral and
              written presentations. Past publication rates by students have been excellent.
              The number of scientists involved in the program and potential research
              projects for students is excellent. 

The proposal is based on the theory
              that mentoring and networking are the most effective methods for recruiting
              students into a profession and for training young researchers. It will advance
              students' awareness concerning important environmental issues. Students
              selected for participation in this program gain a significant appreciation for
              the scientific process and often pursue a career in a scientific field.
              Matching funding provided by the University includes approximately one month of
              salary for the PIs.

