Title       : A Structured Approach to Identifying SEA Parameters from Measured Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9908326

Award Number: 9908326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Keltie keltie@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Richard F. Keltie, Ph.D.
North Carolina State University
Proposal No.: 
              CMS-9908326
Title:   A Structured Approach to Identifying SEA Parameters From
              Measured Data
Abstract:
This research project deals with the development and
              refinement of analysis techniques necessary to extract valid Statistical Energy
              Analysis (SEA) parameters from measured system data. SEA is a methodology that
              permits prediction of system structural dynamic and structural acoustic
              response in frequency regimes where the finite element method is not feasible.
              The use of SEA in engineering design could be significantly increased if the
              necessary SEA parameters can be obtained efficiently and accurately. The goal
              of this research is to develop system identification techniques and data
              acquisition methods that will allow for the determination of these required
              parameters, such as coupling loss factors. This goal will be accomplished
              through extensive testing using realistic engineering systems.  Eigensystem
              identification methods, applied both in the time domain and in the frequency
              domain, will be used to estimate SEA parameters as a function of spatial
              averaging and spatial extent. Both direct inversion of the steady-state energy
              coupling matrix and a state space realization of the transient response energy
              will be examined. The results of this research will define the data acquisition
              and analysis techniques required for obtaining necessary SEA parameters. These
              results will permit the technique to be implemented more easily and with more
              confidence by designers and analysts, allowing for a significant expansion of
              the method in engineering design practice.


