Title       : Design of Next Generation Factory Layouts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a9908437

Award Number: 9908437
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saif Benjaafar saif@ie.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Posner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shahrukh A. Irani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sunderesh S. Heragu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of design tools for layouts of
              factories that either operate in highly volatile environments or produce a
              large variety of products. For these factories, being able to quickly
              reconfigure resources to meet changing needs is critical. Therefore, a focus of
              this research is on identifying layout configurations that are highly flexible,
              modular and reconfigurable. Because the performance criteria of the flexible
              factory are different from those of the traditional factory (for example, scope
              is more important than scale, responsiveness is more important than cost, and
              reconfigurability is more important than efficiency), the existing performance
              metrics used to evaluate layouts reflect poorly these priorities. 
              Consequently, this research will develop new evaluation criteria for layout
              design that explicitly account for flexibility and responsiveness.  Since the
              operational performance of factories (for example, the ability to produce a
              large variety of products, manufacture products in small batches, offer
              customers short lead times, or introduce new products frequently) can be
              directly affected by layout, this research will also develop analytical models
              that allow better understanding of the relationship between layout
              configuration and operational performance. 

If successful, this research
              will identify new layout configurations that are more suitable for the emerging
              needs of the agile factory.  These layouts will be flexible, modular and more
              easily reconfigurable.  Flexibility, modularity, and reconfigurability, will
              save factories the need to redesign their layouts each time their operating
              requirements change or new products are introduced.  The new design tools will
              provide systematic and efficient methods for configuring and managing these new
              layouts.  Being able to design layouts with the operational requirements of
              agility in mind (for example, higher variety, shorter time-to-market and
              shorter manufacturing lead times) will mean greater competitive advantage.
