Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Aspects of Northern Paiute Grammar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2001  
File        : a9908986

Award Number: 9908986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott DeLancey delancey@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The NSF-supported research will be on the grammar of Northern
Paiute (Numic,
              Uto-Aztecan).  The dissertation, Aspects of Northern Paiute
Grammar, will be
              an exploration of word-formation processes, syntax, and
discourse-related
              topics surrounding referent-tracking and topicality and
will include a body of
              analyzed texts.  The dissertation topic was chosen
to accomplish two
              interconnected aims:  1)  present a thorough description
of the major aspects
              of Northern Paiute grammar and 2)  provide the
linguistics community with
              information for theoretical and comparative
purposes on a language about which
              very little has ever been published.

The project includes text collection
              and analysis as the basis for
exploring various aspects of Northern Paiute
              grammar.  Texts of various
genres -- traditional, ethno-historical, and
              autobiographical narrative as
well as the recounting of daily experiences and
              conversation in the
language -- will be recorded, analyzed, and entered into a
              computer
database; this will ensure a variety of grammatical forms and styles
              in
context for this and future studies as well as provide the community
              with
documentation of the language for the purpose of preservation.  Members
              of
the Burns Paiute community will assist in this project both in the role
              of
consultants and, through training, in the process of transcription
              and
translation.  This will help to ensure that tribal members will be able
              to
continue their involvement in documentation and preservation
              efforts.

Besides using audio tape to record texts, video recordings
              will
also be made.  From the point of view of text analysis, video
              provides
insight into the text in ways that audio cannot--most notably by
              including
gestural content.  From the perspective of the community, video is
              often
more accessible, particularly to younger generations, and can be
              more
easily utilized in language teaching situations.  This project
              is
specifically designed to benefit two communities:  1) the
              scientific
community in linguistics, by providing important data on
              a
little-documented and endangered human language, and 2) the Northern
Paiute
              communities who wish to have more information
on their language of heritage.
