Title       : Mercury Contamination and Biogeochemical Cycling in the Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a9908895

Award Number: 9908895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473272             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Fitzgerald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,1079,5201,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-9908895
Fitzgerald

Limited knowledge exists on atmospheric,
              terrestrial and marine cycling of mercury in the polar regions or on the impact
              from pollution-derived mercury The atmosphere is the principle route by which
              mercury is transferred at the Earth's surface. The major species transported is
              elemental mercury (Hg0) which has an atmospheric residence time of one-two
              years. Therefore, natural and anthropogenic mercury can be readily dispersed
              intra- and inter-hemispherically, including the Arctic.

The Principal
              Investigator will address four hypotheses: 1) the remote U.S. Arctic region has
              been affected by increases in mercury contamination similar to that observed in
              other remote regions; 23 oligotrophic Arctic lakes have significant evasional
              losses of mercury, especially Hg0 if these lakes behave like temperate
              lacustrine systems, then in-situ Hg0 production and emission will be favored by
              high pH, higher reactive levels mercury levels and a greater in-situ supply of
              reducing agents; 3) the linear correlation between mercury and 210Pb found in
              Arctic rainwater from other locations is observed in the Arctic and this
              behavior can be used to constrain wet atmospheric flux of mercury to lakes and
              watersheds; 4) Hg0 is the predominant mercury cycling product in the oxic zone
              of the Arctic lakes, net in-situ synthesis of monomethylmercury (MMHg) is most
              significant in redox zones transition zones.

The Principal Investigator will
              develop an experimental design which includes extensive field and laboratory
              investigations. These activities are divided into four categories: 1)
              atmospheric mercury deposition and speciation deterininations; 2) sediment core
              collection, mercury analysis and geochronology using 210Pb dating; 3) in-lake
              mercury speciation and cycling studies; and 4) laboratory simulations and
              incubation experiments. This research should provide high quality
              biogeochemcial data needed for quantitative assessment of the human-related
              mercury emissions over the past 150 years. It should help to decipher current
              and historic evidence of the impact from this deposition as reflected by MMHg
              production and accumulation in aquatic ecosystems and amplification in the
              natural re-emission of mercury from water sources due to the presence of
              pollutant-derived mercury. This information will improve models of the
              global.and regional biogeochernical cycling of mercury and assessing the impact
              associated with pollutant-derived mercury in the environment.

