Title       : Methods for Solving Linear and Nonlinear Mixed Integer Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a9908038

Award Number: 9908038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjay Mehrotra mehrotra@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Several inventory, production and process planning, layout, location,
              logistics, budgeting, financial planning and investment problems are modeled as
              linear or nonlinear mixed integer programs.  These models arise when optimizing
              operations of medium to large size enterprises and are considered very hard. 
              Although models for practical problems involve thousands of variables, only
              problems of very small size
(a few hundred variables) have been solved in
              practice. Previous work introduced several new ideas towards solving these
              problems.  These are: (1) development of a new branch-and-cut method for mixed
              convex 0-1 problems; (2) the use of nonlinear cuts for nonlinear and linear
              mixed 0-1 problems; and (3) generating cuts at near optimal vertex solutions
              for mixed linear 0-1 and integer problems.  These ideas need further refinement
              to convert them into a practical computational methodology for solving
              general-purpose linear and nonlinear mixed integer programs.  This project will
              study the effectiveness of cuts 
generated using disjunctive programs for the
              convex mixed 0-1 problems, and will investigate how these cuts can be generated
               efficiently.  The use of semi-definite relaxations in this context will be
              investigated as well as their value in solving nonlinear mixed 0-1 programs. 
              The use of nonlinear cuts for solving these problems will also be
              investigated.
      If successful, this research will increase the size of
              difficult nonlinear integer program that can be successfully solved by an order
              of magnitude.  The research has an experimental and software development
              (computational) component where extensive testing will be performed to validate
              the practicality of the researched ideas.  Since the research is on development
              of methods for solving linear and nonlinear integer models with general
              structure, from a practical point of view, a successful outcome is expected to
              have the widest impact in solving real world models.

