Title       : Durability of the Bond Between Concrete and Fiber-Reinforced Polymer Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9908293

Award Number: 9908293
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael F. Petrou petrou@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jed S. Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kent A. Harries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor Giurgiutiu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thanasis D. Papathanasiou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9908293
Petrou
Fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) composites offer a practical and
              revoluntionary method of rehabilitating the Nation's infrastructure.  A
              significant obstacle to their widespread acceptance, however is our inability
              to predict the durability of the composite-to-concrete bond.  The objective of
              this research is to develop appropriate methodology for predicting the
              long-term durability of the compostie-to-concrete bond from short-term
              accelerated aging test methods.  A multi-disciplinary team of Civil, Mechanical
              and Chemical Engineering faculty and students will employ both natural
              weathering techniques and accelerated aging tests to investigate durability
              characteristics of the composite-to-concrete bond.  Various non-destructive
              evaluation techniques will be developed and employed to characterize durability
              of bond parameters.  Detailed phenomenological modeling based on generated test
              results will be initiated to develop a fundamental understanding of bond
              deterioration, to predict bond degradation.

The significance of this
              research is that the accelerated test methods and durability prediction
              procedures that will be developed are based on a fundamental understanding of
              the mechanisms of bond deterioration.  The research results will be readily
              implemented in civil engineering design practice.   This will permit the civil
              engingeering community to more fully utilize the potential of FRP materials for
              infrastruture rehabilitation.

