Title       : PGE/SEP: Teaching Inclusive Science and Engineering to Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2002    
File        : a9908931

Award Number: 9908931
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97244              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen F. Mappen emappen@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Shailor  (Principal Investigator former)
              John W. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Helen M. Buettner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joanna Regulska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie Siewierski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harriet Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Inclusive Science and Engineering will create an innovative and inclusive
              environment for learning science and engineering for women undergraduates at
              Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey of New Brunswick (Rutgers NB). It
              will accomplish this through a sequence of (1) faculty development workshops
              and interdisciplinary faculty seminar, and (2) engineering studies modules
              taught in engineering, science, and women's studies courses.  Inclusive Science
              and Engineering will build upon research and models of how social, learning,
              and teaching factors facilitate the interest, motivation, and achievement in
              the sciences for girls and women.

Inclusive Science and Engineering builds
              upon the current knowledge and programs at Rutgers-NB, in particular,
              pre-college educational SMET programs, a strong women's studies program, the
              experience of an undergraduate college for women and a recent symposium among
              faculty members of science, engineering, women's studies and humanities
              departments.  Inclusive Science and Engineering will be a model program that
              will be replicable in educating both faculty and undergraduates at other large,
              public, research universities across the nation.  It will also aim to have a
              positive impact on the recruitment and retention of undergraduate women in
              SMET.

