Title       : Collaborative Research: Multivariate Methods for On-Line and Off-Line Quality
               Control and Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9908013

Award Number: 9908013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83932              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Woodall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Tuscaloosa
	      P.O. Box 870104
	      Tuscaloosa, AL  354870104    205/348-5152

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                    This research is a collaborative effort with Georgia Institute of
              Technolog.  This grant provides funding for the development and evaluation of
              new statistical methods to be used to monitor and improve manufacturing
              processes. These methods are to be applied in situations for which quality
              depends on several related quality measurements. The research involves both
              off-line and on-line methods. The off-line methods require the design of
              experiments and the most informative and efficient analysis of the resulting
              data. Emphasis is on the robust design of processes and products so that their
              performance is less sensitive to hard-to-control noise factors, such as
              environmental conditions during and after production.  Robust design improves
              product quality, manufacturability, and reliability. The on-line methods use
              data collected over time to detect changes in the process for which action is
              required. The use of multivariate outputs results in more reliable decisions
              about the process. Also, the methods developed will apply in cases for which
              the usual assumptions, such as multivariate normality, are not valid. Attribute
              data, for example, will be considered.
      The results of this research will
              lead to new statistical methods for improving design of products and
              manufacturing processes. It will also lead to more reliable methods for
              monitoring the quality of processes over time to detect important process
              changes. This will make quality improvement activities more effective in the
              design, development, and  production stages of manufacturing.

