Title       : Real-Time Measurement of Shear Zone Development in Soil Models Using Time Domain
               Reflectometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9908342

Award Number: 9908342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Pierce piercec@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Fragaszy  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9908342
Pierce
The objective of this research is to develop a time domain
              reflectometry
(TDR)-based method of detecting and measuring, in real-time, the
              development of
internal shear zones within centrifuge models of soil
              structures.  TDR is
analogous to radar in that voltage is pulsed along a
              coaxial cable to detect
electromagnetic faults.  When a cable is embedded in a
              deforming geologic
material, the cable shears and reflects a small percentage
              of voltage.  The
ability to measure internal shear zone development during
              testing will provide
a powerful tool to investigate the behavior of soil
              subjected to a wide variety
of loading conditions.  It will also allow more
              comprehensive comparisons of
physical model behavior to numerical predictions
              than currently possible.  The
advantages of real-time measurement of internal
              shear zone development will be
demonstrated through the modeling of
              overconsolidated clay slopes.  Prior
centrifuge studies of overconsolidated
              clay slopes have shown that sudden
failures involve block-type motion along a
              distinct failure surface.  In
addition to the benefits provided by the
              instrumentation aspects of this
project, the investigators will evaluate the
              effects of grain size, soil shear
strength and stiffness, and the use of grout
              on TDR measurements in soil. 
Finally, the results of this work will aid in
              the development of field use of
TDR in soils.

The project is divided into
              four main tasks: 1) TDR instrumentation
development; 2) laboratory feasibility
              testing; 3) centrifuge development
testing; and 4) centrifuge modeling of
              overconsolidated clay slopes.  In the
first task, the investigators will use a
              modified direct shear device to
determine the effects of soil grain size, soil
              strength and grout encapsulation
on shear displacement measurements using
              different TDR cables.  In the second
task, the investigators will conduct
              small- and large-scale bearing capacity
model tests to evaluate the ability of
              TDR to detect multiple shear zones, the
quality and reproducibility of the
              data, and the robustness of selected cables
under these conditions.  In the
              third task, bearing capacity tests will be
conducted at the University of
              Florida using a geotechnical centrifuge with a
radius of 1.85m, a maximum
              acceleration of 100g and a maximum payload of
approximately 70kg to
              demonstrate the ability of the TDR system to work in a
centrifuge environment.
               The accuracy and reliability of TDR measurements will
be evaluated and
              centrifuge results will be compared to the large-scale
laboratory tests.  The
              final task utilizes the new instrumentation to evaluate
internal shear
              development in overconsolidated slopes.  Long-term and
short-term tests on
              overconsolidated clay slopes instrumented with TDR cables
and LVDTs will be
              conducted.  The objectives are to determine if internal shear
displacements
              occur prior to failure; if shear displacements can be detected
prior to
              surface movement; and how the location of these displacements relates
to the
              internal stress-state of the slopes.
***

