Title       : Producibility Models for the Class of Geometric Position Tolerance Controls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9908268

Award Number: 9908268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282609             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Amine Lehtihet lvo@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom M. Cavalier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of probabilistic models to
              perform the mapping of position tolerance constraints and process capability
              data into a quantitative measure of yield.  The class of position tolerance
              controls addressed by this research represents the dominant class of
              specification constraints used worldwide in industrial production work spanning
              mechanical, electronic (printed circuit boards and related assemblies) and
              other products.  A generic 3-dimensional manufacturing error model will be used
              as input to the formulation of producibility models for the two broad classes
              of position tolerance control and their variants.  Exact or approximate
              numerical solutions to these models will be developed and an investigation of
              sensitivity analysis will be performed that will elucidate and quantify the
              effect of important design and manufacturing error variables on producibility
              of the class of position tolerance control.  A technological implementation of
              these models will be demonstrated by way of an experimental evaluation of their
              predictive power.

If successful, the results of this research will lead to
              models and solution procedures that will provide, for the first time, a
              quantitative measure of the effect of position tolerance control scheme
              variables on producibility.  The research project will also enable a rational
              comparative evaluation of competing position tolerance control schemes on the
              basis of producibility.  Design engineers with access to basic manufacturing
              process capability data will be able to assess the producibility of feasible
              position tolerance control schemes upstream, at the design stage. 
              Manufacturing engineers confronted with the realization of a given position
              tolerance control scheme will be able to evaluate the minimum accuracy and
              precision required to meet yield requirements.  Demonstration of the
              technological implementation of these models and solutions in a production
              setting will provide a rational argument to promote adoption of producibility
              models as a valuable complementary document to present dimensioning and
              tolerancing standards.
