Title       : Invariant, Intra-Class Retrieval in Digital Image Databases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a9908441

Award Number: 9908441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuan-Fang Wang yfwang@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many image databases employ image features that describe the aggregate shape and
              color properties of a class of objects, and hence, are only capable of
              "inter-classes" discrimination (e.g., airplanes vs. butterflies). These
              features are sensitive to incidental changes in camera viewpoint and scene
              illumination, which severely constrain the appearance of query objects. The
              goal of this project is to design a set of new image-derived features which
              utilize detailed local image analysis to enable discriminating objects of very
              similar appearance within the same class (e.g., "intra-class" discrimination of
              different species of butterflies in a database of butterflies). These new
              features capture the essential traits of imaged objects in a way that is
              insensitive to incidental changes in both global environmental factors, such as
              viewpoint and illumination, and local configuration, such as shape deformation
              and articulated motion. The project addresses the efficiency and utility issues
              in deploying these invariant features in large, real-world image databases. In
              particular, flexible class templates are constructed for automating image
              segmentation and cataloging of database objects. Invariant image features are
              organized in a hierarchical manner, using both image-derived and
              domain-specific information, for efficient pruning of unlikely matches. A
              representation strategy, which combines global structure models with local
              invariant features, is used to achieve recognition insensitive to incidental
              articulated motion and deformation. As a result, the new image features are
              highly discriminative yet insensitive to incidental changes in shape,
              viewpoint, and illumination. In  particular, they enable invariant, intra-class
              image retrieval, i.e., highly precise recognition and retrieval of images in
              large databases of similar objects (e.g., retrieving images of Old World
              Swallowtails from a database of butterflies) with few constraints on the
              appearance of query images. The results of the project will be disseminated by
              scientific papers, software that can be downloaded, and prototype image
              databases that can be queried on the Web.  
http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~yfwang

