Title       : Reliability Analysis for Industrial Systems with Interdependency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9908035

Award Number: 9908035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Kvam paul.kvam@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports research for the development of statistical models for
              interdependent systems.  Specific systems under investigation are those for
              which the failure of a component within the system affects the reliability of
              the remaining components.  The main goal of this research is to characterize
              this dependence 
statistically, using as few assumptions as needed about the
              component lifetime distributions. Several tools are used to identify the
              dynamic nature of a system, including reliability estimation, correspondent
              reliability uncertainty measurement, and statistical tests for interdependence.
               The load share model, first derived in 
textile engineering to describe the
              failure of individual fibers within a bundle, is used as a basis for
              characterizing component interdependencies.  Statistical tests for load sharing
              rules include a test to see if the load-sharing environment exists, and a test
              of whether the system stress causes components to fail at an increasing rate as
              other components fail.  Component classes of interest (e.g., those with
              increasing failure rate) corresponding to specific applications are emphasized
              in this research project.
     Applications of the statistical methods are
              designed for various industries. The research is motivated by problems in the
              nuclear industry where components in a power plant can suffer decreased
              reliability if nearby components are degraded or failed.  In the field of
              software reliability, the time until a program bug is found in the software
              depends on what other bugs exist in the software.  Methods derived here can
              help in the estimation of dynamic software reliability problems like this one.
              Other examples include materials 
testing.  Metal fatigue, for example, is
              often characterized by crack growth.  In a given specimen, several cracks can
              exist in the material, but the largest one inherits most of the applied stress,
              and thus will grow at a faster rate than the other cracks. This provides a
              platform for extending the load-share model to degradation 
models in
              materials engineering.
