Title       : DC Acts: An Action Coalition to Support Science, Mathematics and Technology
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a9908862

Award Number: 9908862
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Thomasena H. Woods                      
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3971520            (Estimated)
Investigator: Maxine F. Singer msinger@pst.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Vance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirley M. Malcom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
DC ACTS is an action project based on the premise that systemic reform of
              science, mathematics, and technology (SMT) education can support positive
              changes for all parts of the educational system. For teachers, it can yield
              empowerment and confidence based on knowledge of what is to be taught, how to
              teach, and how and when to access assistance. Students can learn more, learn
              better and demonstrate high levels of achievement in rigorous SMT course work.
              Administrators can gain key skills related to restructuring schools,
              accelerating learning and supporting teachers in SMT. Schools can make
              fundamental changes in their core missions to promote high expectations and
              achievement by all. And the educational system can embrace the larger community
              as part of its learning community, and rebuild and transform itself into a
              research-based, student-focused organization.

When reform becomes systemic,
              the positive changes in SMT education should be self-propagating. Research has
              led us to greater understanding of the amount, quality and form of education
              likely to lead to changes in capacity for a teacher. These research guides the
              professional opportunities proposed under DC ACTS. It also informs us of the
              nature of interactions needed to change a school, and therefore guides the
              whole-school reform proposed under DC ACTS. However, a validated research base
              for successful reorganization of an urban school system does not currently
              exist. We intend for the DC ACTS experience to contribute to the development of
              such a research base.

The District of Columbia Public Schools (DCPS),
              Carnegie Institution of Washington (CIW), and American Association for the
              Advancement of Science (AAAS) propose the following actions to support and
              implement our plan for system-wide change:
1. Establish a system of
              needs-based SMT professional education and professional
              development
opportunities for teachers, administrators, content specialists,
              lead teachers and resource
teachers to initiate long-term reform efforts that
              focus on. standards. Key initiatives will include
implementation of Project
              2061's professional development tools; a practicum approach where
teachers
              will implement and reflect on content and pedagogy using summer school for
              students
as a learning laboratory: and the integration of DC ACTS Fellows -
              scientists and mathematicians
- in classrooms to support teachers.
2.  Reform
              policies to increase enrollment, participation, and achievement in SMT.
              Alignment of
district policies and existing reforms in support of the DC ACTS
              vision for reform will be
implemented. In some instances, new policies will be
              implemented to support the reform.
3.  Ensure that the best research, best
              thinking and best practices guide decisions about DCPS
resources to achieve
              coherence and alignment.
4.  Build parent and community support for reform by
              providing guidance on what students need to
know and be able to do and at what
              level of competence. Provide models, materials and
workshops for
              community-based activities that support SMT learning. Provide strategies
              for
developing political support for school reform. Partner with universities,
              businesses, and other
community organizations to collaborate on most effective
              practices and experiences. Intel,
Microsoft, and Hewlett Packard will provide
              technology support in the form of professional
development, computers, and
              software.
5.  Data from SAT 9 scores, School Profiles, Student Profiles,
              classroom observations, and surveys
will be collected to inform the degree of
              achievement of stated objectives.
6.  Talent spotting, reviewing cluster
              patterns and providing interventions through curriculum,
materials, and
              teacher education will be implemented to increase enrollment and achievement
              in
AP courses.

Horizon Research, Inc. (HRI) (Appendix A) proposes an
              external evaluation that is similarly comprehensive and attentive to the
              systemic nature of the project. The evaluation will comprise three components.
              The formative component will focus on the quality of project activities and DC
              ACTS' progress toward its goals. The summative component will focus on project
              impacts. Finally, HRI will include a technical assistance component focused on
              helping DC ACTS staff work with the extensive data the project plans to
              collect. HRI will also train DC ACTS staff in using a classroom observation
              protocol.

