Title       : Political Ecology of Catastrophic Regional Fire in Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9908647

Award Number: 9908647
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107280             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Randolph energy@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The study investigates the changing political ecology of catastrophic regional
              fires in Indonesia over approximately the past 15 years, with particular
              attention to the devastating fires in 1997-98. The specific focus is on the
              changing relationships between the political-economic, ecological, and
              meteorological phenomena which, together, have caused or exacerbated a series
              of catastrophic regional fires in Kalimantan (Indonesian Borneo) and elsewhere
              in Indonesia. Implications of these changes, at multiple spatial scales and
              institutional levels, for land and forest use, regional planning, and reform of
              national policy on land development and natural resource tenure, use, and
              development will be examined. The research is framed within regional political
              ecology approaches, and case studies will be conducted addressing the
              political-economic causes of wildfires; decisions to clear vegetation by
              burning under high-risk conditions; uses of fire in resource conflicts;
              ambiguity concerning intentional versus accidental fire; socially
              differentiated effects of the fires, and institutional responses to them.
              Current and historical policy and planning documents, interviews, news and
              research reports, and other sources will provide information to analyze
              shifting debates about fires in Indonesia, and about appropriate action to
              prevent future wildfire disasters.

The research provides insight into the
              vulnerability of marginalized rural people, communities, and parts of community
              landscapes to the impacts of catastrophic fires. It will analyze
              interpretations underpinning long-term policy and emergency responses to past
              fires, and action to reduce risks of future fires, by local communities,
              government bodies, organizations in civil society, businesses, and researchers.
              Results of this study will contribute to better understanding of the rationale
              underlying practices that have led to catastrophic fires, and may contribute to
              reform of land and resource development policies, and recognition of local
              communities' resource rights and management practices.

