Title       : Strategic Issues on Yield, Reliability, and Their Relationship in Semiconductor
               Manufacturing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9908207

Award Number: 9908207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Way Kuo way@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for studying the reliability and yield relationship
              and its association with burn-in at the wafer level.  In order to guarantee the
              required reliability of integrated circuits (ICs), burn-in has been conducted
              as an effective method for removing infant mortalities.  Semiconductor yield is
              a process-dependent quality parameter; burn-in a time dependent control
              parameter; and reliability both a time- and a process-dependent parameter. 
              This study models yield and reliability by inter-relating these three
              parameters.  This study will investigate the following key issues:  (1) to
              apply the physics of failure mechanisms to find a relationship between yield
              and reliability, (2) to develop a yield-reliability relation model and to
              theoretically justify  this model for semiconductor manufacturing, (3) to
              determine burn-in effect on yield, based on the relation model, and  (4) to
              find optimal burn-in strategies for semiconductors which include yield gain and
              yield loss.

If successful, the relation model can be used to predict the
              reliability  of new products.  In addition, the projected reliability of gate
              oxide and other defects may be found.  By combining burn-in effect with the
              yield-reliability relation model, it is possible to find the minimum effort for
              meeting the reliability requirement at a given operation time. To arrive at a
              rational decision regarding yield, this research describes models which give
              optimal burn-in times and levels.  It can be used to find a cost-effective
              burn-in solution at the wafer level and the die level. The burn-in coverage
              strategy will provide an optimal approach for implementing the burn-in system. 
              The research  study will be the first to provide solutions to the
              yield-reliability problems in an analytically justified way.
    
