Title       : Applied Probability in Financial Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9908106

Award Number: 9908106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Kou kou@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This project  focuses on two aspects of applied probability in financial
              engineering: (1) applying useful techniques from operations research to option
              pricing; and  (2) applying results from option pricing to engineering.  The
              tools to used are those from applied probability, including renewal theory,
              marked point processes, duality and stochastic calculus.  More precisely, the
              following four problems will be studied within the above two categories, with a
              focus on the first category:   (1) Using renewal theory to price discrete
              exotic options, such as discrete barrier and lookback options, which are widely
              used in foreign currency markets.  (2) Using marked point processes to study
              interest rate models, and to price interest rate derivatives, such as caps and
              caplets.  (3) Using duality to study pricing of options in incomplete markets,
              in market with portfolio constraints, and in markets with different interest
              rates for borrowing and leading. (4) Although the main focus will be to apply
              operations research techniques to finance,  there is an additional plan to
              study pricing of electricity options, and its applications to pricing of
              electricity generators and transmissions, as an application of financial
              methods to operations research. Potential improvements in teaching and lecture
              notes that may result from the project are also suggested.
     If successful,
              the results of this research will lead to a better understanding of  the risks
              and benefits of financial derivatives;  and,  the role of using financial
              derivatives, such as electricity options, interest rate derivatives, and
              currency options, to help U.S.  utility and manufacture industries to reduce
              their financial risks.  For example,  commodity, foreign currency, and interest
              rate risks, particularly to hedge the financial risks in deregulated utility
              markets.  
