Title       : Impact of Improved Initialization on Warm-Season Mesoscale Rainfall Prediction
               in a Nonhydrostatic Eta Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a9908932

Award Number: 9908932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $227680             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Gallus wgallus@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Moti Segal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond W. Arritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is a continuation of work begun with NSF/NOAA-U.S. Weather
              Research Program support using a nonhydrostatic version of the NCEP Eta model
              with fine (~ 10 km) horizontal resolution to study the effect of improved
              initialization on predictions of warm-season rainfall in the central United
              States.  New simulations will be run for cases in the upper Midwest, in Iowa
              and Minnesota, where there is a dense mesonetwork of surface observing sites
              exists that can provide extensive data sets for validation and verification. 
              The primary emphasis will be improved initialization and simulation of storms
              associated with meso-beta forcing, including cold pool/outflow boundaries,
              lower atmosphere moist tongues and weak front situations.

The use of data
              from the dense surface mesonetwork as well as satellite cloud data assimilation
              will improve initialization of the temperature and moisture in the boundary
              layer. A detailed treatment of land-atmosphere interaction will be included in
              the simulations. Ensembles of simulations will be performed considering
              perturbations within the range of the uncertainties in the derived rneso-beta
              initial characteristics to assess model prediction credibility.  Some of the
              techniques for improved initialization are readily available, whereas others
              will be developed or modified during this second phase of the research. The
              uniqueness of the effort is that it will explore refined grid initialization
              impacts on local mesoscale precipitation prediction, using non-routine
              observational input.  This research will facilitate future advances in
              operational forecasting by establishing the most beneficial uses of available
              higher resolution initial data. Also, the study will improve our understanding
              of development of intense local storms in the upper Midwest.

