Title       : PGE/SEP: Mother-Daughter Academy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  2000   
File        : a9908811

Award Number: 9908811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neda S. Fabris   (Principal Investigator current)
              Milton Randle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 The School of Engineering and Technology at California State University, Los
              Angeles (CSULA) will expand its Mother-Daughter Academy in order to attract and
              increase the number of female high school students to study engineering.  The
              Mother-Daughter Academy invites a group of mother-daughter teams, a female high
              school student and her mother to participate in an introduction to engineering
              workshop.  CSULA will conduct and evaluate the impact of two different models
              of our Mother-Daughter Academy and conduct a "Summer Enhancement Workshop" for
              daughters only.
   The workshops will be a continuation and enhancement to the
              Mother-Daughter Academy which have been developed and conducted by the PI since
              1995 at CSULA and funded by lottery monies of the State of California.  The
              workshops have been very well received and have achieved national focus through
              a featured article in the February 1998 ASEE PRIZM magazine and the CBS radio
              program the "OSGOOD FILES" (broadcast March 22 and 27, 1999).
   The
              year-round academy will consist of six sessions, five hours long.  In session
              one, the Mother-Daughter participants will be introduced to engineering careers
              and female role models:  students, practicing engineers and faculty.  In the
              following four sessions, the participants will be introduced to different
              branches of engineering:  mechanical, civil, electrical, materials and
              manufacturing.  Each session will consist of lectures, demonstration
              experiments, and hands-on contests.  The last session will be a visit to a
              high-tech local company.  The more intensive two-week session will be conducted
              six three-hour evenings in June.  The summer workshop will teach the
              participants how to succeed in a university setting studying engineering.  It
              will include math and science enhancement classes, introduction to university,
              teamwork skills and time management classes.
   The Mother-Daughter Academy
              participants will be recruited and selected from the schools participating in
              the Mathematics, Engineering, Science Achievement (MESA) program schools.  The
              MESA office will be responsible for monitoring and tracking the success of the
              participants and their choice of career.
   The Mother-Daughter Academy
              focuses on juniors in high school who, often even with sufficient math
              background, do not consider engineering as their future careers, due to the
              lack of female role models, encouragement of parents, as well as an
              insufficient understanding of engineering in general.  We hope to mitigate this
              deficiency and obtain the following goals:
a) Encourage girls to consider
              engineering as a viable option for their future careers,
b) Dispel the myth
              that engineering is physically difficult and "non-feminine", 
c) Raise the
              level of scientific knowledge of the general population (especially
              female),
d) Foster appreciation of the general public for engineering
              professions.
   We hope that in the future this project will be disseminated
              around the country starting the movement BRING YOUR MOTHER TO SCHOOL,  to
              complement existing:  BRING YOUR DAUGHTERS TO WORK.

