Title       : Time Dependent Size Effects in Compressively-Loaded Concrete
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9908344

Award Number: 9908344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodor Krauthammer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9908344
Krauthammer
TIME-DEPENDENT SIZE EFFECTS IN COMPRESSIVELY-LOADED
              CONCRETE

Summary

It has been shown for structural concrete subjefted to
              static/slow loading rates that the specimen size influences its behavior.
              However, no information is available on the effect of higher loading rate on
              the size effect. Structural concrete can be subjected to high loading rates,
              such as those associated with dropped objects, vehicle collision into
              structures, accidental industrial explosions, etc. The size effe ' ct is a
              phenomenon explained by fracture mechanics, and it is related to the energy
              balance during the fracture process. Although the structural response and
              damage evolution are expected to be size-dependent, it is not clear how the
              time dimension affects this phenomenon. It is proposed to combined testing and
              numerical simulations aimed at enhancing the understanding of the size effect
              phenomenon by studying the possible effects of loading rate on it. The testing
              activities on compressively-loaded concrete cylinders will focus on collecting
              test data whose analysis could provide evidence on the effect of loading rate
              on the size effect for structural concrete in compression. Parallel
              computational simulations will be used to perform 'numerical tests' of the same
              structural/material samples, and to explore the role of the time dimension on
              the physical phenomena that contribute to the size effect on these structures.
              The proposed tests will be used to study the behavior of cylindrical concrete
              specimens under high rate compressive forces, corresponding to impact
              velocities of up to 10 m/s. These specimens will be related to standard 6" X
              12" (diameter X height, both in inches) concrete cylinders used for determining
              the uniaxial compressive strength of concrete. The proposed dimensions for the
              test specimens are: 3" X 6", 611 X 12", 1211 X 24", and 24" X 48". The tests
              will be performed at the Pennsylvania State University (PSU), with supporting
              validation tests at the University of British Columbia (UBC), Canada, and at
              the National defense Academy (NDA), Japan, under a purchased services contract
              with these organizations. The tests at different test facilities with their
              drop hammer devices are planned to insure test data objectivity. The PI for
              this study will perform these tests, in cooperation with colleagues at the
              other research organizations. This approach will not only

enable	a wiaer
              range of-test data, but also mean ng u comparisons between
data obtained with
              different devices. Such a comparison could have very
important implications in
              formulating a modified size effect law that
includes a consideration of
              time.

