Title       : The Effect of Internal Scales in Soil Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a9908390

Award Number: 9908390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Carlos Santamarina carlos@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9908390
Santamarina
The behavior of soils and fractured rocks is
              determined by the discrete nature
of these media and by the inherent presence
              of multiple internal scales.
Indeed, it is increasingly more apparent that the
              mean and variance of soil
parameters are not sufficient to characterize a soil
              mass and to predict its
potential behavior. Furthermore, subtle yet important
              aspects of scales and
interactions among scales need to be understood to
              better comprehend soil
behavior. 

The goal of this study is to discern
              unique phenomena in soils given the
coexistence of multiple internal scales
              (spatial and temporal), and their
effect on macroscale soil behavior. The
              proposed study centers on the following
geotechnical processes: diffusion
              (selected because of its apparent
insensitivity to internal scales), drained
              stress-strain behavior, pore
pressure (generation, dissipation and coupling).
              These processes will be
addressed with integral experimental and analytical
              tasks. A complementary
research phase will be driven towards the development
              of engineering design
procedures.

This research has the potential for the
              clarification and fundamental
explanation of frequently observed behavior in
              geo-mechanic and
geo-environmental situations, and for the discovery of unique
              phenomena related
to multiple scales and their interaction. Results from this
              research will guide
the development of enhanced procedures for the
              interpretation of
high-resolution site characterization data (e.g., piezo-CPT
              and geophysical
tests such as GPR and tomographic images). Furthermore, these
              results will also
promote the development of enhanced engineering design
              methodologies that
recognize multiple internal scales in global response
              (foundation engineering,
dynamic response, contamination and remediation,
              petroleum geomechanics).
***


