Title       : Studies in Stochastic Production Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a9908235

Award Number: 9908235
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192545             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermo Gallego ggallego@ieor.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of computer-based mathematical
              models for finite-capacity production systems, including single-item models
              with random demand, multi-item models that share a critical capacitated
              resource, and supply chains with finite production capacity and random demands.
               For single item models the aim is to first determine the class of
              finite-capacity stochastic production systems for which the optimal policy has
              a simple form. The next goal is to determine a broad class of models whose cost
              function can be written in a form that has been successfully used in the study
              of inventory problems where items are ordered rather than manufactured. This
              special form of cost function guarantees, via sensitivity and worst case
              analyses, the robustness of heuristics obtained based on the solution of
              systems with deterministic demands, as well as distribution-free cost upper
              bounds. These heuristics will then be extended to multiple items sharing a
              critical capacitated resource and to multi-item,  multi-stage systems with
              finite production capacity and random demands.  The objective is to obtain
              structural and sensitivity analysis results for a wide variety of production
              and demand environments, and to use these results to develop efficient
              algorithms and near-optimal heuristics.

If successful, the results of this
              research will lead to an improved understanding, and better ability to manage
              production and inventories in manufacturing systems facing random demands. 
              Improved understanding of such systems will come from the sensitivity analysis
              of cost functions and from closed form cost upper bounds that reveal the cost
              impact of randomness in the worst case.  Better ability to manage such systems
              will come from the development of computer based efficient algorithms and
              robust heuristics.

