Title       : Workshop: Geography in the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9908279

Award Number: 9908279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This workshop focuses on the topic of 'Geography in the 21st Century' with the
              overall objective of bringing together a collection of visionary thinkers from
              the field to discuss a broad array of topics around the following questions:
              What topical areas in geographic research will emerge as the most important in
              the near and mid-distant future?  Will research in the 21st Century be
              dominated by single researchers or groups of researchers from one discipline or
              will multi-investigator, cross-disciplinary efforts better serve the dominant
              topical areas?  How do we effectively, efficiently, and quickly transfer and
              integrate cutting-edge research into the educational arena?  What are promising
              technological areas that will facilitate geographic research and teaching? How
              do we train teachers to train other teachers to use the resources and
              technologies that are becoming available in a computer-based information
              society?  Ultimately, the vision is to design and develop a National Geography
              Learning Network that will facilitate the implementation of answers to each of
              the above questions?  

For the workshop, selected individuals will be asked
              to prepare a brief introductory statement to help guide general discussion on
              each topic.  General discussion will be taped and the original contributors,
              along with two other volunteers, will enlarge the original paper to include the
              essence of workshop discussion.  These individual reports will be edited and
              combined by the workshop coordinator to produce a White Paper for distribution
              to NSF and to be made available to members of the Association of American
              Geographers, the National Council for Geographic Education, and to other
              academic or non-academic bodies or individuals who express an interest in the
              topic.  The White Paper will be taken as a central planning document for
              attempts by the Association of American Geographers to develop a web-based
              National Geography Learning Network.

