Title       : Multi-Scale Experimental Investigation of Sliding Friction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a9908218

Award Number: 9908218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Glaser glaser@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lane R. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0510703   Rock Fracture Mechanics                 
              0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
Program Ref : 1038,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9908218
Glaser
Engineers have always relied on rate- and state-dependent
              constitutive models
(behavioral criteria). Recent advances by the
              condensed-matter physics
community have resulted in hypothetical theoretical
              mechanisms responsible for
frictional resistance to sliding. These models
              explain behaviors from angstrom
scale to kilometers-long earthquake
              dislocations, and provide a theoretical
framework for understanding material
              creep as well as self-healing slip on the
San Andreas fault.  Since there has
              been little direct experimental proof that
the posited fundamental physical
              mechanisms indeed are at work, the PIs will
leverage their experimental and
              interpretive ability to image these
micro-mechanisms. Given that the
              fundamental kinematics of frictional junctions
results in production of
              phonons (vibrational, hence acoustic, energy), the
combination of quantitative
              acoustic emission and waveform inversion is
uniquely able to image these
              kinematics. Glaser has developed surface and
embeddable sensors proven capable
              by NIST of measuring picometer displacements
from 10 kHz to 1 MHz to within 3
              dB.  Studies show that the dynamic record
transduced by these sensors match
              the theoretical kinematic waveforms
remarkably well, allowing whole-waveform
              inversion for source kinematics rather
than single-point moment tensor
              inversion. 

The results of this project will further science and engineering
              on several
levels. Fundamental understanding of the physical mechanisms behind
              sliding
friction, leading to improvement of basic understanding of the
              physical world. 
This will help refine current empirical understanding of
              friction and allow
great improvement in mechanical design from nanomachines to
              sub-kilometer-scale
structures.  In addition, fundamental questions about
              kilometer-scale
earthquake source mechanisms will be answered, in particular
              the issues
surrounding the notion of self-healing slip, thereby leading to an
              improved
understanding of the earthquake dislocation mechanism, and ultimately
              improved
seismic safety.
***

