Title       : System Identification of Inelastic Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9908194

Award Number: 9908194
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206341             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fai Ma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

SYSTEM IDENTIFICATION OF INELASTIC STRUCTURES

Fai Ma
Professor
              of Applied Mechanics
Department of Mechanical Engineering
University of
              California
Berkeley, California 94720

The lack of a fundamental and
              comprehensive theory of hysteresis is a major barrier to successful design of
              structures against earthquakes and strong winds. Many structural systems with
              significant hysteresis, for example wood buildings, steel bridges, and
              reinforced concrete towers are critical elements of our built environment. They
              provide some of the most basic and important services required by our
              communities such as housing, commerce, transport, and communications. Despite
              their obvious importance, and their huge replacement costs, the design and
              analysis of the majority of these structures is based on overly simplistic or
              iii some cases flawed assumptions of internal energy dissipation. A practical
              model of hysteresis that would match experimental observations on real
              structures is much desired.

The generalized version of a differential model
              of hysteresis can curve-fit practically any hysteresis trace with a suitable
              choice of the model parameters. In cyclic performance tests of inelastic
              systems, load-displacement traces are routinely documented. Using system
              identification techniques, it appears highly feasible to estimate the model
              parameters of differential hysteresis of inelastic structures from the
              extensive base of experimental data. A fundamental objective of this proposed
              project is to do just that.

In a period of three years, three specific tasks
              of great significance will be performed.
First, specialized identification
              algorithms will be constructed for inelastic systems to estimate their
              parameters of differential hysteresis from experimental data. These algorithms
              will treat strength degradation, stiffness degradation, as well as pinching
              characteristics of hysteresis.
Second, once the model of hysteresis has been
              determined by system identification using data from an experiment, the same
              model will be analyzed to predict the response of a similarly configured
              structure subjected to other forms of cyclic excitation. This task will be
              carried out with an emphasis on the evaluation of seismic performance of
              inelastic structures. Third, test data collected under different conditions
              will be interpreted by system identification to assist in the design of a set
              of recommended protocols for cyclic tests of wood systems.


