Title       : San Francisco Urban Systemic Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a9908165

Award Number: 9908165
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12744616           (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlene Ackerman cgusman@sfusd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda F. Davis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : San Francis Unif Sch Dist
	      2550 25th Avenue
	      San Francisco, CA  94116    415/759-2950

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD) proposes to significantly
              advance the science, mathematics, and technology education (SMT) of all K-12
              students through the San Francisco Urban Systemic Program (SFUSP).  The SFUSP
              accomplishes this task by building on the extant infrastructure that serves as
              the foundation for the District's Urban Systemic Program (USP) implementation
              plan.  This infrastructure is characterized by an exemplary leadership team,
              content standards for science and mathematics based on the State's Curricula
              Framework entitled Educational Standards for Science and Mathematics, a
              comprehensive accountability plan, policies in support of SMT education for
              all, the convergence of fiscal and intellectual resources for a single K-12
              program for SMT, and a shared vision among all sectors of the broader community
              in support of the teaching and learning of science and mathematics,
              system-wide.  

To accomplish the USP goals, the SFUSD provides all of its
              students with the fundamentals of mathematics and science so that their
              understanding, ability, and academic achievement enable them to perform at or
              above their peers from around the world.  The SFUSD goals are: (1) to increase
              the science, mathematics, and technological knowledge of teachers; (2) to
              develop an effective pedagogy; (3) to support a coherent and cohesive
              curriculum and assessment system in which technology is appropriately
              integrated; and (4) to increase the number of students who will meet the
              system's more rigorous graduation requirements.

The infrastructure was
              developed over a 14-year period guided by a shared vision for reform at the
              District level.  Significant external fiscal and intellectual resources from
              business and industry, national foundations and educational agencies, NSF and
              other federal entities were integrated to support key elements of the
              foundation.  The well-defined implementation plan advance to full scale the
              district's capacity to provide a standards-based science, mathematics, and
              technology education for all students.



