Title       : High Latitude Mesospheric Dynamic and Chemistry Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9908598

Award Number: 9908598
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $266622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary R. Swenson swenson1@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan Z. Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study has two objectives:
1) a primary objective, to measure and study the
              Acoustic Gravity Wave (AGW) structure and flux into the mesosphere at
              Sonderstrom, Greenland, a high latitude station.  The studies of structure in
              airglow imagery can now be used to calculate the vertical flux of horizontal
              momentum carried by the AGWs with large vertical wavelengths.  Airglow imagers
              are uniquely capable of measuring the AGWs with large phase speeds (short
              periods) that carry the major portion of the wave momentum flux in the
              mesosphere.  Specifically, comparisons will be made to similar measurements
              being made at Albuquerque, N.M., a low-mid latitude station, and South Pole
              station.
2) A secondary objective, to make measurements of, and study,
              mesospheric emissions related to sporadic metal layers in the mesosphere. 
              Recent studies suggest these may involve high latitude layers and, there may be
              chemical heating associated with some releases.

For extracting intrinsic
              wave measurements, it is important to make Doppler corrections for winds.  A
              meteor radar is now active at Sonderstrom which is able to make this
              measurement.  Rayleigh lidar routinely make scattering measurements of
              structure in the stratosphere and lower mesosphere and Na lidar in the upper
              mesosphere.  The lidars observe slower speed AGWs that complement the spectrum
              observed by the airglow.  This data will be assimilated and used to 1) quantify
              the vertical flux of horizontal momentum and energy carried by the waves at
              Sondrestrom, and 2) compared with data being gathered at a low latitude site,
              Albuquerque.

Atmospheric dynamic and chemical processes at high latitude are
              unique, especially the thin and sporadic layer phenomena.  It is important to
              resolve the chemical processes during these events through the measurements of
              airglow chemiluminescent emissions. Routine measurements of airglows will be
              accomplished by spectral discrimination of key emissions with a continuous
              night time operation of a spectrometer and photometers.

