Title       : Smart Fiber Optics System for Condition Monitoring of Railway Bridges
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1999 
File        : a9908651

Award Number: 9908651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jamshid Ghaboussi jghabous@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shun L. Chuang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Foutch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Smart Fiber Optics System for Condition Monitoring of Railway Bridges

The
              planned High-Speed Rail (HSR) operation on bridges that also carry heavy
              freight traffic increases the importance of assuring the safety of these
              bridges. The consequences of a bridge failure in connection with a high-speed
              passenger train could seriously disrupt service and potentially be
              catastrophic. Bridges are major assets of railroads because of their high
              replacement cost. They are also among the most critical elements of railroad
              lines because of the potential liability if they fail under a train, and the
              disruption in service that would result from a failure. Consequently it is
              vital from an economic, safety, and operations standpoint that bridge health be
              carefully monitored for immediate problems and that potential difficulties be
              detected before they become critical.
We propose to develop an
              easy-to-install, remote-sensing bridge condition monitoring system using
              advanced computational intelligence methods and specially designed fiber optics
              instrumentation. The data from this advanced sensing system will be
              automatically collected and analyzed for condition monitoring. The proposed
              system will be cost effective and will address HSR safety concerns by
              continuously monitoring both short and long-term aspects of bridge health. The
              first part of the system will allow continuous detection of major damage or
              defects that would pose an immediate safety hazard and would require closure of
              the bridge. These will include major structural damage, loss of alignment, or
              loss of support due to accidents or natural causes, such as earthquakes, strong
              wind, or flash floods. The second component of the system will be triggered by
              the approaching of train and will monitor the condition of the bridge by using
              the train itself to perform a load test. The relatively high live to dead load
              ratio, combined with the predictable location and distribution of loads
              characteristic of a train on a railroad bridge, enables repeated measurement
              and reliable, ongoing assessment using computational intelligence methods. This
              aspect of the system will enable frequent, economical monitoring of bridge
              health and allow much better management of bridge maintenance and repair.
The
              main objective of the proposed research is to develop and test a system for
              continuous condition monitoring of railway bridges under service loads using
              computational intelligence methods and fiber optics. The proposed system will
              be capable of continuous condition monitoring of the instrumented and remotely
              sensed railway bridges under normal train traffic loading. The proposed
              research will be conducted in three stages. In the first stage, the
              computational intelligence based smart condition monitoring methodology will be
              further expanded and improved and the associated software will be developed.
              The development and testing of fiber optic detection systems will take place in
              the second stage of the proposed research. In the last phase of the proposed
              research the smart condition monitoring system and fiber optics system will be
              tested in the structural laboratory on a scale model of a railway. After the
              successful completion of the three stages of the proposed research, extensive
              field-testing will be undertaken during the continuation of the research in the
              next project.

