Title       : Workshop on DSP for Sampled Coherent Aperture Systems: Challenges, Synergies,
               and Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1999       
File        : a9908652

Award Number: 9908652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth D. Silverstein silverstein@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In coherent imaging systems the transmitted and/or received coherent signals are
              spread over a spatially extended coherent aperture. Here, the definition of
              coherence relates to signals that exhibit a stationary phase relationship over
              the aperture.  Coherent imaging uses an extended coherent aperture to enhance
              the resolution and reduce the signal to noise ratio of the desired images.
              Coherent apertures can either be continuous, such as a lens in an optical
              system, or discrete, spatially sampled apertures, often referred to as phased
              arrays. Some examples of phased array systems are electromagnetic-microwave
              surveillance and synthetic aperture imaging radars, and ultrasound transducers
              in medical ultrasound. 

This workshop will bring together a group of
              distinguished scientists and engineers from academia, government and industry
              for the purpose of exploring the role of advanced digital signal processing
              techniques in (discrete, spatially sampled) coherent imaging systems. The
              workshop will meet for two and a half days to assess and document current
              advances and recommend potential future research and development
              opportunities.

