Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center Competitive Renewal: U of New
               Mexico-Rutgers Ceramic and Composite Materials Center (CCMC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2000    
File        : a9908205

Award Number: 9908205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Abhaya K. Datye datye@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9102,9162,9231,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funding to support the Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Center on Ceramic and Composite Materials at the University of New
              Mexico with Rutgers University as the affiliate partner.  The mission of the
              center is to develop new, interdisciplinary technologies to make the United
              States more competitive in ceramic science and engineering and to transfer
              these technologies to its industrial members.  The center will combine the
              research on ceramic synthesis and highly loaded polymers at the University of
              New Mexico with the research on ceramic processing and microstructure-property
              relationships at Rutgers University.  The focus of the research is on the
              science and technology needed to synthesize and process advanced materials with
              the microstructures needed to fulfill the property requirements as well as
              cost, shape, and reliability requirements of emerging engineering applications.
               The approach includes research aimed at understanding the relationships
              between starting materials, chemistry, and processing parameters to the
              structures and properties of the finished materials. Processing techniques used
              are sol-gel synthesis, vapor phase synthesis, and powder processing.  The
              Center will be led by an Executive Director at the University of New Mexico and
              a Director at Rutgers University.  The Center has an Industrial Advisory Board
              composed of representatives from the industry affiliates and partners.
