Title       : GOALI: Molecular Modeling of Confined Nano-Phases and Nano-Porous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a9908535

Award Number: 9908535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223498             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins keg@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
	CTS-9908535
	Gubbins, K./N. C. State

	Activated carbons are the
              most widely used of all industrial adsorbents. They have two main advantages:
              (a) they are cheap, since they are made from readily available materials (wood,
              lignite, etc.), (b) they adsorb a wide range of fluids and materials very
              strongly, and are highly selective.  The latter property derives from the fact
              that the carbon atoms are very high.

Despite these advantages, activated
              carbons have proved very difficult to characterize because of their complex and
              amorphous structure.  In general they possess both micropores (less than 2 nm
              in width) and also some mesopores (larger than 2 nm) linked in a complex pore
              structure.  Some information on this structure can be obtained from small angle
              x-ray or neutron scattering (SAXS and SANS), and from high resolution
              
	transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM).  However, the picture of the  
              structure is incomplete from experiment.  A realistic structural model of the
              carbon, at the molecular level, is needed in order to interpret other
              experiment on these materials, to determine pore size distributions, and to
              predict selective adsorption and pore phase transitions for the wide range of
              chemical systems used in industry.  The current models used for this
purpose
              (arrays of independent slit pores) are known to be much over simplified, and
              are too crude for industrial needs.

	We have recently developed protocols
              based on molecular simulation to construct much more realistic models of
              carbons at the atomic level.  These are based on Reverse Monte Carlo, which
              matches the structure of the model to the structure factor (SAXS or SANS) and
              HRTEM data from experiment.  The resulting models agree well with other
              experimental measures of the carbons, and there is good reason to believe that
              they are quite accurate representations of the real materials, A long range
              goal is to use these simulation methods to construct a data bank of materials
              which could be used to match data for particular industrial carbons.  Such a
              data bank can be used for characterization of a wide range of carbons, and
              subsequent prediction of their adsorption and separation behavior.


Most of
              the expertise for synthesizing these carbons, and in addition most of the
              characterization and adsorption data, resides in industry.  We need access to
              samples of these materials, and particularly advice on future directions for
              the modeling, in order to ensure that our research follows directions that are
              most relevant and useful for industry.  Westvaco is a major world producer of
              these carbons.  Westvaco's Charleston Technical Center has a number of leading
              experts in synthesis and characterization of activated carbons,
              particularly:

                      Dr. Jacek Jagiello, Research Chemist


