Title       : PGE/SEP: Transactional Writing and Biographical Storytelling: Empowering Latina
               Girls to Win at Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9908749

Award Number: 9908749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cristina Jose Kampfner carino@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Girls and women in our society are lost to the fields of science and mathematics
              that they grow through adolescence, and deprived of these opportunities for
              creativity, fulfillment, and income. Serious inequities result. The situation
              is unusually negative for Latina students, especially those born in this
              country. This collaboration between the School of the Americas, a bilingual
              Detroit public school, and Eastern Michigan University brings both academics
              research and school-systems resources to bear on the problem.

This project
              will answer the question: Can poor girls in a bilingual school develop and
              retain positive attitudes toward science and mathematics through combining
              transactional  writing and storytelling by positive role models? The students
              are in critical levels, grades six through eight.

The project is based on
              successful work whose results will transfer to this setting a bilingual public
              school in a poor neighborhood. The previous study is "Empowering  Women and
              Girls to Win at Mathematics." Transactional writing and role-model-relevant
              story-telling programs offer promising and ingenious methodologies for drawing
              female students into continuing involvement with mathematics. The rigorous
              research design includes experimental and control groups and pre- and
              post-testing, and will give a clear answer to the important question we are
              addressing.

