Title       : Dissertation Research: Reproductive Success and Genetic Population Structure In
               Wedge-Capped Capuchin Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1999       
File        : a9908455

Award Number: 9908455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don J. Melnick djm7@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A cornerstone of the theory of the evolution of most physical and behavioral
              traits has been the degree to which those traits enhance the reproductive
              success of the individuals who have them.  However, despite its importance in
              explaining evolution, particularly the evolution of our own behavior and those
              of other primates, very few studies of wild non-human primates have obtained
              any estimates of reproductive success. This is due largely to the fact that it
              is difficult to obtain the long-term demographic data and genetic analyses
              required to make these estimates.

The proposed study will use molecular
              genetic markers with a high power of resolution, in conjunction with twenty-one
              years of demographic and behavioral data, to assess directly reproductive
              success in a wild New World primate species, the wedge-capped capuchin (Cebus
              olivaceus).  These molecular tools will allow the determination of parentage,
              other kinds of relatedness (sibling, cousin, etc.), the genetic and social
              boundaries of maternally related kin, and the degree of relatedness between
              females and the non-offspring to which they sometimes deliver care.  All of
              these measures will help to define the ways in which certain behaviors render a
              greater chance of having offspring and other kin, all of whom carry a
              progenitor's genes.  They will also allow us to assess the ways in which
              individual behaviors and group organization determine the distribution of
              genetic traits across a population.

Through this study, we will begin to get
              some idea of the degree to which characteristics such as single male breeding
              monopoly, female sedentism, and the care for non-offspring and other types of
              nepotism have real reproductive and genetic consequences.  By knowing this, it
              will provide the basis for more careful explanations of the evolution of
              primate behaviors, many of which parallel our own.

