Title       : GOALI: Development of a High Precision Curvature Modification Technique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a9908176

Award Number: 9908176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xianfan Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Tam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry
              (GOALI) project is to develop a laser-based technique to adjust curvatures of
              computer hard drive components precisely, and to develop a fundamental
              understanding of the physical phenomena involved. This project will be
              conducted jointly by Purdue University and IBM.  Manufacturing of components of
              high capacity computer hard drives requires curvature control with precision
              better than 10-4 degrees.  Currently, there is no technique available to
              achieve such high precision.  The laser-based technique to be developed will
              utilize a pulsed laser to heat and produce localized deformation on hard drive
              components.  Because only a very small area is heated and deformed, the
              curvature is altered precisely by each laser pulse.  Preliminary studies
              conducted have demonstrated the feasibility of this technique. Fundamental
              studies will be conducted to understand the laser curvature modification
              process and to quantitatively relate the processing parameters to the resulted
              curvature change.  A laser curvature adjustment process will be developed and
              implemented in manufacturing.  
Results of the fundamental studies will serve
              as guidelines for the manufacturing process. The success of the research will
              be instrumental to the development of high capacity computer hard drives, and
              will help the U. S. companies to maintain the leading position in hard drive
              manufacturing.  This project will also provide research opportunities to
              several graduate and undergraduate students.  In addition, a large number of
              students will be educated with this advanced laser technology through taking a
              new dual graduate/undergraduate level course on laser processing.  Tberefore,
              this project will contribute to the human resource development in the area of
              laser-based manufacturing technology.

