Title       : Enhanced Polymer-Polymer Blending and Polymer-Fiber/Particle Compounding Using
               Supercritical Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9908289

Award Number: 9908289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359828             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Tomasko   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ly James Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore the potential of using supercritical (dense gas)
              carbon dioxide in the blending and compounding of advanced polymers and
              composites based on single and twin-screw extrusion processes. Carbon dioxide
              is an inexpensive, nontoxic, and unregulated solvent.  Not only can it replace
              liquid organic solvents in conventional processing operations but, due to the
              unique properties available in the supercritical state, it can lead to
              completely new manufacturing processes and products in the polymer and
              composite industry.    Since more than 50% of all commercial polymers are in
              the form of blends or compounds, perhaps the greatest impact on polymer
              processing can be achieved through advances in polymer-polymer blending and
              polymer-fiber/particle compounding.  Supercritical carbon dioxide is currently
              being used extensively in the food industry due to its benign nature.  The
              regulatory environment surrounding the chemical and plastic industries creates
              an opportunity to translate some of the successes of supercritical fluids to
              the polymer processing area.  

Experiments will investigate the dissolution
              of supercritical carbon dioxide into various polymers to establish the affect
              upon glass transition temperature, melt viscosity, chain mobility, density, and
              surface tension.  These effects can be used to improve mixing, wettability, and
              molecular diffusion in polymer and composite processing.  To facilitate the
              transfer of fundamental research into application, the project includes several
              levels of industrial involvement ranging from new process concepts to extruder
              screw design. The researchers will work closely with the industrial advisory 
              group, including material suppliers and extruder makers, to develop techniques
              of using supercritical carbon dioxide to enhance polymer-polymer,
              polymer-fiber, and polymer-nanoparticle mixing in mechanical and reactive
              blending and compounding.

