Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Grammatical Encoding during Sentence Production among
               Native and Non-Native Speakers of Japanese
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1999  
File        : a9908397

Award Number: 9908397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1999  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6029               (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrill F. Garrett garrett@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project studies basic processing skills involved in learning to speak
a
              second language (L2). The special focus of this work is sentence
production in
              learners of Japanese as a second language. For L2 learners
to become
              proficient speakers, they must have more than passive knowledge
of words and
              grammatical rules (e.g., that used in reading). They must
learn to use their
              knowledge to rapidly build new sentences. Because
Japanese has structures that
              are fundamentally different from English (the
native language (L1) of the L2
              learners in this study), transfer from L1
to L2 is difficult and we can better
              evaluate new production skills.  Two
processes essential to fluent production
              are: fast, accurate word
retrieval and access to the grammatical structures in
              which words can
appear. These are examined in two steps.

- First, native
              Japanese speakers performance is examined to establish
patterns of fluent L1
              production. Two modes of evaluation are used: (1)
retrieval of the grammatical
              information linked to words is studied in
experimentally elicited "tip of the
              tongue" states; (2) grammatical
processes that select case particle words
              (e.g., subject-marker ga and
object-marker o) are analyzed in naturally
              occurring and experimentally
elicited speech errors.
 
- Second, "L2
              knowledge" for learners of Japanese is examined. L2 speakers
of different
              proficiency levels participate in multiple tasks; some tasks
provide data
              reflecting grammatical knowledge (e.g., sentence judgment
tasks,
              fill-in-the-blank tests), while others elicit use of grammatical
knowledge
              (e.g., case particles) during speech. The gap between L2
speakers knowledge
              and oral performance is examined to reveal their
sentence production
              processes. This is compared to the L1 data patterns.

Results of these
              studies will shed light on basic mechanisms common across
languages and on
              language-specific processes that Japanese L2 learners
must acquire. As we
              better understand such language performance, we also
gain information that may
              improve foreign language instruction.
