Title       : Collaborative Research: Multivariate Methods for On-Line and Off-Line Quality
               Control and Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9908032

Award Number: 9908032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83665              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwok-Leung Tsui ktsui@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                  This research is a collaborative effort with the University of
              Alabama-Tuscaloosa.  This grant provides funding for the development and
              evaluation of new statistical methods to be used to monitor and improve
              manufacturing processes.  These methods are to be applied in situations for
              which quality depends on several related quality measurements. The research
              involves both off-line and on-line methods.  The off-line methods require the
              design of experiments and the most informative and efficient analysis of the
              resulting data. Emphasis is on the robust design of processes and products so
              that their performance is less sensitive to hard-to-control noise factors, such
              as environmental conditions during and after production.  Robust design
              improves product quality, manufacturability, and reliability. The on-line
              methods use data collected over time to detect changes in the process for which
              action is required.  The use of multivariate outputs results in more reliable
              decisions about the process.  Also, the methods developed will apply in cases
              for which the usual assumptions, such as multivariate normality, are not valid.
              Attribute data, for example, will be considered.
      The results of this
              research will lead to new statistical methods for improving design of products
              and manufacturing processes.  It will also lead to more reliable methods for
              monitoring the quality of processes over time to detect important process
              changes. This will make quality improvement activities more effective in the
              design, development, and  production stages of manufacturing.

