Title       : Development of an Implantable Optical Glucose Sensor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a9908439

Award Number: 9908439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard L. Cote cote@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael V. Pishko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908439
Cote
Diabetes mellitus is a chronic disease that, if unregulated, can
              give rise to large fluctuations in blood glucose levels.  In order to maintain
              normal glucose levels, blood glucose must be monitored frequently throughout
              the day.  In this proposal a plan is forwarded to design and develop novel
              implantable, fluorescent-doped, intradermal polymer transducers that will be
              combined with an optical probe to quantify blood glucose levels.

Currently,
              only invasive blood glucose monitors are commercially available, which require
              a finger stick for each reading. In this research, fluorescence-tagged polymer
              microspheres will be injected 0.15 mm below the epidermis in a manner
              equivalent to a tattoo.  The polymers used in this research will be made from
              crosslinked hydrogels of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) which have been shown by
              this team and others to be stable, nontoxic, and non-antigenic in vivo. 
              Polymer hydrogel microspheres that exhibit fluorescence intensity proportional
              to glucose in the surrounding media will be fabricated from photopolymerized
              PEG containing a concanavalin A (a glucose binding protein abbreviated ConA)
              fluorophore conjugate and a dextran-fluorophore conjugate.  Both ConA and
              dextran will be tethered to the gel backbone to prevent instability due to
              leaching.  In the absence of glucose, ConA and dextran are non-covalently
              bound, resulting in the quenching of the dextran fluorophore.  In the presence
              of glucose, dextran is displaced from ConA binding sites (in proportion to the
              glucose concentration), resulting in an increase in the fluorescence of the
              dextran fluorophore.  After implantation by injection 150 mm below the skin,
              the glucose specific fluorescent microspheres, when illuminated, will act as a
              "smart tattoo" and will emit light at an intensity proportional to the glucose
              concentration in the interstitial fluid surrounding the microspheres.
  
To
              acquire the emitted light through the skin, an optical sensor will be designed,
              constructed and optimized based on analysis of light propagation through the
              turbid medium.  The system (consisting of the microspheres and optical sensor)
              will initially be studied using simply glucose solution in a test cell.  The
              microspheres will then be tested in a complex multi-chemical solution followed
              by a multi-chemical solution in a test cell wrapped in 0.15 mm of pig epidermis
              in an effort to optimize the design prior to in vivo experiments. Lastly
              preliminary in vivo studies in both non-diabetic and diabetic animals will be
              performed using a hairless rat animal model.  Post-processing algorithms using
              techniques such as wavelength selection and PLS will be developed to improve
              accuracy and sensitivity of the measurement.
  
Unlike other noninvasive and
              non-specific optical approaches such as near-infrared spectroscopy reported in
              the literature, this technique promises to be highly specific to the
              concentration of glucose because of the chemical sensitivity of microsphere
              fluorescence to glucose.


