Title       : Toward a Molecular Understanding of Quantum Chemical Dynamics in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9908772

Award Number: 9908772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Barbara p.barbara@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Paul Barbara of the University of Texas is supported by a grant from the
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to continue his theoretical and
              experimental research directed at understanding quantum chemical dynamics in
              solution. Using femtosecond pump-probe optical spectroscopy as an experimental
              tool Barbara will study: 1) electronically nonadiabatic transitions in
              symmetric and asymmetric metal-metal intervalence compounds; 2) electronically
              nonadiabatic transitions in the one and two photon ionization of aqueous iodide
              solution and the two photon ionization of water; 3) vibrationally nonadiabatic
              transitions in the photodissociation, recombination, and the vibrational
              relaxation of small strongly solvated radicals with high frequency vibrations;
              and 4) the putative long-range coherent electron transfer between
              metallointercalators in DNA.  Theoretical studies are also proposed of current
              quantum theoretical models for electron transfer and vibrational
              relaxation.

Since many commercially important chemical reactions take place
              in polar solvents such as water, it is important to understand the influence
              which such solvents have on the reaction dynamics.  A number of effects, such
              as solvent cage effects,  vibrational relaxation and quantum mechanical
              tunneling, which are not present in the gas phase completely dominate condensed
              phase chemical reactions.  It is important to develop reliable theories for
              model chemical systems which can then be applied to improving the efficiency of
              commercially important chemical reactions.  The work which is being performed
              by Barbara provides an important experimental basis for the development of such
              theories.
