Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Kinodynamic Planning for Highly-Articulated Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9908746

Award Number: 9908746
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Christopher Loretz                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5200               (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kuffner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT-9908746
Kuffner

The proposed research by Dr. James J. Kuffner will
              examine kinodynamic planning for highly-articulated robots. Computations of the
              motions of highly-articulated structures such as human figures depend on a
              general architecture for animation and control. In the past, system dynamics
              have been ignored when computing motions; the advantage of this omission is
              increased simplicity and speed in computation of the result. The computed
              motions may not be physically plausible, however, by violations of force,
              torque or velocity limits. By recasting the motion planning problem as an
              optimal control problem in the system state space, new algorithms yield a
              kinodynamic solution which addresses plausibility issues. Dr. Kuffner proposes
              to develop and test these new algorithms using open-chain articulated robots,
              including humanoid-type robots.

This award supports a two-year Japan Society
              for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. James J.
              Kuffner in the Department of Mechano-Informatics at the University of Tokyo,
              Japan. Dr. Kuffner will work with Dr. Hirochika Inoue, Professor in the
              Department, on a project entitled, "Kinodynamic Planning for Articulated
              Robots." The successful results of this work have potential application to a
              wide variety of complex dynamical systems, including robot hovercrafts,
              satellites, articulated robot arms and humanoid robots, submarines, car-like
              robots, or robot planes and helicopters. The proposed work will benefit through
              collaboration with the Japanese host laboratory, where Dr. Kuffner will have
              access to the necessary experimental systems, equipment and expertise
***.


