Title       : Space-Time Correlation Imaging of Objects in Random Media
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9908849

Award Number: 9908849
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194799             (Estimated)
Investigator: Akira Ishimaru ishimaru@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yasuo Kuga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908849
Ishimaru

Many natural and man-made media vary randomly in space and
              time and are
called "random media."  Examples are atmospheric turbulence,
              ocean waves,
rain, fog, snow, vegetation, terrain, biological media, and
              disordered
media.  Optical and acoustical waves and microwaves propagating
              through
these media experience random fluctuations, and these interactions
              between
the waves and the random media affect a broad range of practical
              problems
such as detection, identification and imaging of objects, remote
              sensing of
media, and communications through such media.  In this project, The
              PI's
emphasize the development of theories to deal with realistic problems
              which
involve both deterministic objects and random media, rather than
              ideal
homogeneous random media.  Practical applications include imaging
              in
clutter environment, medical imaging, and sensing of buried objects.  The
              PI's
stress the development of generalized space-time correlation
              techniques,
polarization correlations, and stochastic Green's functions for
              the purpose
of detection and imaging of objects in random media.  Specific
              topics to be
investigated include (1) Generalized space-time correlation
              techniques for
imaging in random media, (2) Ultra-wideband vector radiative
              transfer, (3)
Sources and objects near rough surfaces and object-medium
              interactions and
(4) Applications to development of materials and techniques. 
              They plan to
continue to emphasize human resource development and training of
              graduate
and undergraduate students in all three areas: analytical, numerical
              and
experimental.  This work is directed to the basic research on
              the
development of theories of imaging and remote sensing of objects
              in
geophysical and biological media and applications to medical
              optics,
ultrasound imaging, radars and lidars, remote sensing, and
              inverse
scattering theories.
***




