Title       : Workshop for the Advancement and Retention of Underrepresented and Minority
               Engineering Educators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9908066

Award Number: 9908066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mardi C. Hastings hastings.6@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              CMS-9908066
Hastings
This Civil and Mechanical Systems Division workshop is
              designed to encourage retention and advancement of qualified women and
              underrepresented minority engineering educators in pursuit of scientific and
              engineering challenges. The workshop brings together a select group of 120 of
              the nation's outstanding engineering educators. Participants are women or
              minority engineering educators who essentially have been tenure track positions
              for less than five years, or are in the final phases of their Ph.D. program and
              actively pursuing tenure track academic positions. The participants are usually
              employed in teaching and /or research positions and are actively developing
              their own unique research programs in civil, mechanical, bioengineering and
              environmental engineering disciplines. The major goals of the workshop are to
              foster technical and intellectual exchange among Ph.D level underrepresented
              and minority engineers who work in these areas; to instill in its participants,
              the sense of a technical community in which they can thrive and to which they
              can contribute; and to increase participant awareness of research and funding
              opportunities. The workshop emphasizes an integration of research and
              education. A panel of university deans discusses perspectives on reasonable
              career expectations and demands, and includes an indepth discussion of issues
              related to tenure, teaching, research, publications, funding, outreach and a
              rewarding personal life along the career path of an engineering educator. All
              participants give a brief summary of their current research interest, thus
              increasing fellow participants' awareness of the diversity of related
              opportunities for involvement in civil, mechanical and bio-environmental
              engineering research areas. The workshop proceedings include research interest
              statements from each participant, the outcome assessments, and workshop
              recommendations. 

