Title       : Probabilistic Sequential Tolerance Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9908188

Award Number: 9908188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom M. Cavalier tmc7@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. Amine Lehtihet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique Del Castillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for the development of a probabilistic approach
              to sequential tolerance control in discrete parts manufacturing. This research
              will make effective use of real-time measurement data to enhance production
              yield by considering the variability and distributions of the data throughout
              the different 
operations.  To accommodate this probabilistic approach, a
              general method for yield computation will be developed that will provide quick,
              computationally feasible and accurate estimates of yield.  The yield
              computation method will provide the measure of effectiveness that is necessary
              to drive an optimization search technique that will be tailored to provide
              accurate solutions to the probabilistic set point adjustment problem.  A data
              processing module will be developed to identify distribution (statistical)
              information that is acquired during the production process.  Also, techniques
              will be developed that provide a predictive model for determining the optimum
              frequency and location of measurements and set point adjustments.
     If
              successful, the results of this research will extend the methodologies of
              sequential tolerance control and provide a comprehensive framework for a
              probabilistic approach to sequential set point adjustment. These innovative
              techniques are used to dynamically reposition the set points of process plan
              operations to 
optimize the production of acceptable parts.  These techniques
              are especially beneficial in the production of complex low-volume,
              high-value-added machined parts, and the results of this research will make
              available an integrated set of tools and solution methodologies for this class
              of problems.  The data processing module 
will provide an effective way to
              utilize the measurements returned by advanced metrology equipment such as
              coordinate measuring machines and machine tool mounted probes.  The predictive
              model for determining the optimum frequency and location of set point
              adjustments will provide a way of reducing the cost associated with sequential
              tolerance control while still allowing significant yield improvement.

