Title       : Interfacial Melting and Frost Heave in Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a9908945

Award Number: 9908945
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399291             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Wettlaufer   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Gregory Dash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project is a three-year continuation of a theoretical and experimental
              study of the dynamics of liquid water existing at the boundaries of ice crystal
              at temperatures below the freezing point of pure water.  This process, called
              premelting, has significant consequences in the redistributing of brine in sea
              ice, the apparent migrating of contaminants through glacier ice, and the rate
              of frost heave and weathering in soils and rocks.

Premelting is common to
              virtually all types of materials, but has been most extensively studied in ice.
               It can be caused by adsorption forces, wetting, size effects, or substrate
              disorder, and involves many aspects of surface physics and phase transition
              phenomena.  The study program will include the observing of ice crystal growth
              from a contaminated solution; of unfrozen water transport between crystals as
              functions of temperature and temperature differences, as well as such studies
              between ice crystals and various substrates.  An important objective will be
              the development of useful models for ice growth and impurity transport under
              natural conditions in order to assess how grain interfaces may serve as
              chemical conduits. 

The macroscale consequences of these molecular-scale
              processes include the evolution of the electromagnetic properties of sea ice
              which are important in remote sensing, the uptake of chlorine on polar
              stratospheric cloud particles which are important in the chemistry of ozone
              destruction, the migration of impurities in ice cores which affect the
              stratigraphic isochrone estimates, and the penetration of atmospheric
              pollutants into permafrost and firn.

