Title       : Non-Invasive Temperature Estimation and Control in Titanium Casting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9908378

Award Number: 9908378
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Slawomir A. Spiewak spiewaks@engr.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Murty Kanury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project is to  develop an accurate, non-invasive method for the estimation
              of molten titanium temperature in the  Vacuum Arc Remelted (VAR) casting
              process; and,  a control strategy to assure target pour temperatures by
              adjusting arc parameters (voltage and gap) and the pour initiation instance.
              The estimation and control algorithms will employ a constitutive-empirical
              model of thermal energy conservation in the VAR process. This model will be
              continuously updated by analyzing in-process measured signals, such as the arc
              power, or temperature and flow of water that cools the crucible and electrode
              gripper. In particular, the actual temperature of the melt flowing over the
              crucible lip will be measured during each pour by infrared pyrometers to close
              the feedback loop in the estimation procedure and assure accurate temperature
              prediction for the next execution of the process.  On-line identification of
              crucial physical properties, such as the thermal resistance between the melt
              and cooling water, will facilitate predictive control of the arc power to
              accomplish target pour temperatures despite strong disturbances present in the
              process.  A prototype system will be developed and implemented in a plant that
              manufactures titanium castings for aviation, defense, space exploration and
              medical applications. 

This project should produce the prototype of a
              non-invasive temperature estimation and control system valuable to quality
              control in titanium casting.  The developed algorithms and system architecture
              may be applicable to other high performance casting processes as well.

