Title       : Dissertation Research: The Structure and Function of Trabecular Bone in the
               Proximal Femur of Strepsirhine Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9908847

Award Number: 9908847
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Kappelman jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Trabecular bone is found primarily in the joint regions of skeletal elements and
              consists of an interconnected network of bony rods and plates.  It has been
              hypothesized for over a hundred years that trabecular bone plays an important
              structural role in the musculoskeletal system of animals and that it
              dynamically responds to applied loads through growth.  Despite this
              hypothesized importance, there has been very little work examining the
              structure and mechanics of trabecular bone.  The objectives of this study are
              threefold: 1) to quantify the three-dimensional structure of trabecular bone in
              the femoral head of lorises and galagos - small primates from Asia and Africa,
              2) to determine the significance of any structural differences, and 3) to
              assess the utility of trabecular bone structure for the reconstruction of
              locomotor behavior in extinct primates.  These objectives will be addressed by
              quantifying the structure of trabecular bone in three-dimensions and by
              constructing finite element models to determine the stress distribution in the
              hip joint.  The determination of a relationship between trabecular bone
              structure and locomotor behavior will, in turn, provide insights into the
              anatomy, behavior, and locomotion of primates including humans.  This study
              will lead to a greater understanding of the importance of trabecular bone in
              the hip joint of primates, thereby increasing our knowledge of the relationship
              between behavior and bone morphology.  In addition, an understanding of bone
              structure will contribute to our understanding of bone development and bone
              loss in humans and other primates, leading to an increased awareness of the
              role of physical activity and behavior on the development and loss of bone in
              general.
