Title       : Third Party Warehousing: Making Logistics Management Effective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9908221

Award Number: 9908221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271614             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sila Cetinkaya sila@ie.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chung-Yee Lee  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding for an investigation of logistics efficiency
              improvements through coordinating transportation, inventory, and value-added
              operations scheduling decisions at a third party warehouse. For the purpose of
              third party logistics planning, inventory requirements and shipment release
              schedules are interrelated, value-added operations scheduling problems have
              unique characteristics, and analysis of time-window constraints is of practical
              importance. Thus, the research concentrates on developing analytical models and
              numerical tools for:  (1) Third Party Warehousing and Transportation for
              Distribution to Multiple Market Areas; (2) Scheduling Value-added Operations; 
              and, (3) Integrating Transportation, Inventory, and Value Added Scheduling
              Decisions under Demand Time-Windows.
     The objectives include introducing
              new avenues of theoretical research with practical implications, contributing
              to the theory of logistics coordination through analytical modeling and
              methodological development, and gaining insight for solving complex real-life
              problems.  The results will broaden the theory of logistics and provide a
              better understanding of the structure of  practical supply chain management
              problems. This research addresses a strong need for analytical and numerical
              decision making tools for effective supply-chain management practices, and thus
              plays an important role in bridging the gap between academia and industry.  If
              successful, the results will have a significant impact on the role of third
              party services for effective logistics management.
    
