Title       : SGER: Forecast-Robust Capacity Acquisition and Subcontracting Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9908705

Award Number: 9908705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99980              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorit S. Hochbaum dorit@hochbaum.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alper Atamturk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funding for the
              development of methodologies for making forecast-robust capacity acquisition
              and subcontracting decisions in production planning.  The strategic tradeoffs
              between acquiring capacity over a finite planning horizon, holding inventories
              and subcontracting orders to third party vendors will be examined for
              production planning problems.  The research project has three main objectives: 
              (1) investigating the structure of optimal solutions for capacity acquisition
              and subcontracting problems, (2) studying the robustness of the optimal and
              approximate solutions under demand forecast errors, (3) developing efficient
              methods that will produce solutions that are relatively insensitive to errors
              in the demand forecasts. Different types of cost structures that are
              appropriate for capacity acquisition, production, subcontracting and inventory
              holding decisions will be delineated.  The computational complexity of the
              developed methods will be investigated for various subclasses.  Extensive
              computational experiments will be conducted to test the effectiveness of the
              analytical results in improving the capacity acquisition and subcontracting
              decisions.
     With the insights gained from this research, the downstream
              impacts of  forecast-robust capacity acquisition and subcontracting decisions
              will be investigated in multi-echelon vendor-customer supply chains.  Since the
              capacity and subcontracting decisions of a firm delivering a final product have
              a trickling effect on the demand of its vendors, research in coordinated
              decision making throughout the supply chain of the product is essential in
              reducing the total manufacturing cost of the product. This research has the
              potential of providing analytical insights to the strategic tradeoffs in
              forecast-robust capacity acquisition andsubcontracting decisions, especially in
              service industry and high-tech industries with short product life span.
  
