Title       : Cooperative Research: Coastal Effects of Tsunamis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9908392

Award Number: 9908392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191584             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip L. Liu pll3@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1636,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This action is to support a group research project focusing on specific aspects
              of tsunami coastal hazards mitigation.  To mitigate tsunami coastal hazards,
              the first priority is to improve the identification of the tsunami-inundation
              zone.  Recently, NOAA (National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration)
              has launched a comprehensive program to estimate potential inundation zones
              along the coastal areas of the Pacific States (California, Oregon, Washington,
              Alaska and Hawaii; http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/tsunami/time/).  The next level of
              mitigation strategy is to reduce loss of life and property damage within the
              tsunami inundation zones by considering the runup process in detail: flow
              patterns, induced forces, the impact of debris and floating objects, and their
              implication for improved design of waterfront structures and decisions
              concerning land use.

The five primary objectives are to:
Understand the
              fundamental turbulence phenomena associated with tsunami runup and its effects
              on tsunami forces on structures and scouring;Improve the prediction capability
              of tsunami runup models, by more accurately including the effects of dispersion
              and wave breaking;Achieve a practical means of describing the complex runup
              flows within the context of their interactions with structures, trees and other
              typical complex coastal features (e.g. dunes, earthen dikes and river
              intlets);Develop benchmark problems and their solutions for validating
              numerical models and for determining the adequacy of different approximations
              for different applications in tsunami hazard reduction;Develop scenarios
              focusing on four interrelated issues: single and multiple structures
              (rectangular and cylindrical forms), porous media, missiles/debris impacts, and
              scouring.

The project involves researchers from Cornell University, Southern
              Methodist University, the University of Washington, Urban Regional Research,
              and a Professor Emeritus from Harvard University.  In addition, it includes
              collaboration on scouring during tsunami runup with researchers at Japan's
              Public Works Research Institute (PWRI), using PWRI's large and unique
              experimental facility.

