Title       : Factors Controlling the Structure and Distribution of Precipitation in
               Hurricanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  1999 
File        : a9908944

Award Number: 9908944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199235             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shuyi S. Chen schen@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the U.S. Weather Research Program, the Principal Investigators will
              investigate the physical controls of precipitation in hurricanes.  The main
              objective of this research is, through numerical simulations using a
              nested-grid, high-resolution atmospheric mesoscale model, to examine the
              physical  processes governing the structure and distribution of cumulus
              convection and precipitation associated with tropical cyclones.  Hurricane
              prediction models must accurately simulate these features in order to improve
              intensity and track forecasts as well as the rainfall forecast at landfall. 
              The research will address the following specific scientific questions:

What
              are the fundamental physical processes that determine the precipitation
              distribution and rain rate within a hurricane?

What are the sensitivities of
              simulated moist convective processes to model resolution, physical
              parameterization, and model initialization?

How are storm-scale
              variabilities in the precipitation and convective heating distributions related
              to various aspects of hurricane structure, storm-environmental interactions
              and, ultimately, hurricane track and intensity forecasts?

The project will
              produce comprehensive data sets of the three-dimensional precipitation
              structure and distribution of Hurricanes Bonnie and Georges.  It will also
              adapt a high-resolution nested-grid modeling system (the PSU/NCAR MM5 with an
              initialization specifically developed for hurricane simulations) that can be
              used to address issues related to both hurricane research and operational
              forecasting.

