Title       : Optimization of Jump Stochastic Systems: Undiscounted Criteria and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9908258

Award Number: 9908258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189942             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene A. Feinberg eugene.feinberg@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the research and development of a new approach
              to the analysis and optimization of jump stochastic systems.  This approach is
              based on combining the uniformization techniques
with the recently discovered
              relationship between control strategies that change actions between jumps in
              continuous time systems and randomized strategies in discrete time systems. 
              The utilization of this approach will lead to the development of new results
              for optimization of continuous time jump stochastic systems with multiple
              objectives.  These results will include the description of the structure of
              optimal strategies and the algorithms for their computation.  In addition to
              the results for problems with multiple objectives, it is  expected that this
              new approach will significantly simplify the analysis of one-criterion problems
              and will develop new computational algorithms for them.
Jump stochastic
              processes model broad classes of production, service, and telecommunication
              systems.  If successful, this project will improve the abilities to model and
              analyze broad classes of such system and to design efficient control algorithms
              for them.  It will significantly simplify and generalize the existing methods
              by reducing continuous time problems to much simpler discrete time problems. In
              addition to the development of fundamental methods, this project will apply
              these methods to several particular problems
including optimization of
              switching policies for manufacturing systems with stochastic demand, design of
              replacement and preventive maintenance procedures, and call admission to
              telecommunication systems with limited bandwidth.  

