Title       : GOALI: Modeling Drying of Polymer-Impregnated Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2001   
File        : a9908630

Award Number: 9908630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117053             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Cairncross cairncro@coe.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CTS-9908630
Cairncross, R.
Drexel University
 
 Drying is often one of the
              final steps in production of composites, polymer, and ceramic materials; hence,
              drying is among the last steps which can influence the quality of the product. 
              The primary goal of this project is to develop macroscopic-level and
              microscopic-level mathematical models of drying in polymer-impregnated
              composites.  An accurate drying model is necessary for predicting conditions
              which produce a specified residual solvent content.  In addition to predicting
              the residual solvent level, an accurate mathematical model of the drying
              process should also predict the onset or likelihood of defect formation within
              the material.

Many composites are porous matrices impregnated with polymer
              solutions or resins which contain volatile materials that must be removed by
              drying.  In Resin Transfer Molding (RTM), a resin penetrates into a fiber
              matrix in a mold.  RTM is used to produce composites of varying shapes
              including layered composites such as laminated circuit boards (Prepreg).  This
              project focuses on drying in layered porous structures, and the techniques used
              can be applied to more general geometries.

Drying of homogeneous
              (non-porous) layers of polymer-solvent mixtures is well studied, as is drying
              of pure solvents (normally water) from a porous body.  This project aims to
              combine theories of drying polymer-solvent coatings with theories of capillary
              drying of porous media.  The first phase of this project is to develop a
              macro-scale model of drying from a polymer-solvent film supported on, and
              penetrating into, a porous layer.  Penetration into the porous layer is treated
              by a generalization of Washburn's equations to include solvent evaporation and
              varying physical properties.  The solvent flux is a combination of Darcy flow
              into the porous substrate and diffusion (affected by turtuosity and volume
              exclusion).  A macro-sale model of drying can predict defects related to depth
              of polymer penetration into a porous substrate, excessive thinning of a polymer
              surface layer, bubble formation due to solvent boiling, and levels of retained
              solvent in the pores.

Many defects depend on pore structure and cannot be
              predicted from the macroscopic-level approach.  The second phase of this
              project is to develop a microscopic-level model of drying of polymer solutions
              from simple porous structures.  Predicting drying from pore surfaces involves
              coupled solvent transport and fluid mechanics in a deforming domain. 
              Non-uniform solvent diffusion to the surface and surface-tension-induced flow
              compete to determine the flatness of the surface.  Eventually, rising viscosity
              (due to falling solvent content) will effectively shut-off the flow and freeze
              the evolution of surface shape.  Micro-scale models of these effects can be
              developed using the finite element method and large-scael numerical
              computation.  Then the micro-scale models will be solved for a series of porous
              geometiries which approximate RTM, Prepreg, and coatings, on porous substrates.
               Micro-scale models of drying can predict defects related to pore-structure
              such as smoothness of a 

polymer surface layer, barespots where the
              substrate is exposed, pinholes, local pockets of high solvent retention in
              pores, and evolution of voids trapped during impregnation.

The predictions
              of the macro-scale and micro-scale models will be compared with experimental
              results from drying experiments at Drexel.  A predictive model of drying
              composites is a powerful tool for optimizing drying conditions, guiding design
              of drying systems, and accelerating the scale-up of industrial processes.

