Title       : Dissertation: Iconography and Group Formation During the Late Pit Structure and
               Classic periods of the Mimbres Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9908617

Award Number: 9908617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Gilman pgilman@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Patricia Gilman, MS Valli Powell will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. The focus of her study is the prehistoric
              Mimbres people of the Mogollon region of southwestern New Mexico. During the
              900s A.D. the inhabitants of the Mimbres valley were small scale farmers who
              supplemented agriculture with wild plants and hunted game. By the A.D. 1000s
              subsistence was based on full-time farming which included new agricultural
              technologies such as irrigation and check dams. Paleoclimaatic data indicate
              that the period from 1,000 to ca. 1089 A.D. was an unusually favorable time in
              both amount and consistency of precipitation and under these conditions
              population increased and all available arable land in the valley was
              cultivated. However in the following century rainfall fluctuated considerably
              in both amount and consistency and this led to increasing subsistence stress.
              Given this well established environmental record, MS Powell wishes to examine
              changing Mimbres social strategies. Preliminary work indicates that individual
              villages entered into alliances which changed in direction and extent over time
              in order to buffer environmental unpredictability. To accomplish this goal she
              will study the Mimbres produced black and white ceramics which have been
              recovered by carefully controlled excavation. Working on the assumption that
              shared design elements are both conscious and unconscious indicators of
              alliance, she is currently conducting an analysis of stylistic similarities
              among sites. The results however do not distinguish between similarities due to
              imitation and those which result from the actual movement of ceramics and this
              distinction is important because it is hypothesized that trade in food served
              to buffer differential agricultural productivity. With NSF funding the Texas
              A&M University Center for Chemical Characterization and Analysis will perform
              instrumental neutron activation analysis on a series of 150 black and white
              sherds. Based on the chemical composition data provided it will be possible to
              determine the source areas in which the pottery was produced.

This research
              is important for several reasons. It will provide insight into how
              agriculturalists at a simple level of technology adapted to an unpredictable
              fluctuating semi-arid environment. It will produce data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in training a promising young scientist.

