Title       : Learning to Work with the Public in the Context of Local Systemic Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a9908602

Award Number: 9908602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathryn B. Chval                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3410916            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Parker ruthp@mec-math.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa B. Adajian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janeane Golliher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic D. Peressini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Math Educ Coll
	      4439 Saltspring Drive
	      Ferndale, WA  98248    360/384-1749

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9908602
PARKER

"Learning to Work with the Public in the Context of Local
              Systemic Change" is a five-year Teacher Enhancement initiative to build a
              knowledge base and develop the necessary tools and resources for teachers and
              administrators to engage with their parents and public in pursuit of quality
              mathematics, and to prepare teacher leaders and administrators to successfully
              lead these efforts in their schools.  The project has three major components: 
              (1) focused and sustained work with teachers, administrators, school boards,
              parents and the public in strategically located current and potential
              NSF-supported Local Systemic Change communities; (2) the development and
              implementation of mathematics sessions and materials designed for
              parents/public and informed by the project's research/findings, and the
              preparation of teacher leaders and administrators to conduct these sessions
              within their own communities; and  (3) dissemination conferences and other
              outreach activities.

More specifically, the project will  (a) engage in
              studies that identify the elements critical for successful intervention with
              parents and the public,  (b) develop materials that can be used by lead
              teachers and other educational leaders to work with peer teachers and the
              broader public in their home communities, and  (c) provide the professional
              development necessary to support implementation.  The plan of work for the
              project is designed around the following questions:     

(1) What does it
              take to secure a public that is knowledgeable of issues in mathematics
              education and knowledgeable of what it means to teach important and relevant
              mathematics for understanding?
(2) Will a knowledgeable public support and/or
              actively advocate for mathematics reform?  If so, what is the nature of their
              advocacy?
(3) What impact will a knowledgeable and/or proactive public have on
              the efforts of current and potential Local Systemic Change (LSC) projects to
              improve the quality of mathematics instruction in schools?
(4) Are there
              critical times during mathematics restructuring efforts when parent engagement
              is essential?  If so, what are those times and what is the nature of support
              needed?
(5) What are the critical issues and caveats that need to be
              considered in designing and delivering successful mathematics education
              sessions for parents and the public?
(6) What kinds of public engagement can
              best be accomplished by teacher leaders working within their own communities? 
              What kinds of support do local leaders need in order to work successfully with
              parents and the public?
(7) What kinds of public engagement can best be
              accomplished by national mathematics education leaders who come into a
              community on a limited basis?

The work to be performed in the project is a
              carefully designed effort to develop a more practice-based understanding of the
              critical elements needed for productive public involvement in support of
              quality mathematics.  Sites participating in the plan of work are Portland
              (OR), St. Vrain (CO), and San Francisco (CA).  Resources and tools (e.g.,
              deliverables) planned include professional development materials that can be
              used by teacher leaders and administrators as they work with peer teachers, as
              well as with parents and the public; rough-cut video tapes that are potentially
              useful in these professional development sessions; and a website.  

Cost
              sharing is derived from participating school districts and the Exxon and Intel
              Foundations.       

			

