Title       : Manufacturing Shop-Floor Supercomputer for Distributed Simulation and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2001      
File        : a9908267

Award Number: 9908267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vittaldas V. Prabhu prabhu@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of low cost supercomputers that
              can be distributed throughout the manufacturing shop floor using reconfigurable
              computers.  A reconfigurable computer 
contains thousands (100,000) of logic
              gates on a chip whose interconnections can be instantaneously configured by
              writing to its internal memory to serve as massively parallel computers in
              which  algorithms can be 'hardwired'.  Therefore, a reconfigurable computer
              maintains the programmability of a conventional software-based computing
              system, yet enables phenomenal improvements in computing.   The shop-floor
              supercomputer will be used for:   (a) Distributed time-scaled simulation
              algorithms that eliminate complexity and overhead of discrete event
              simulations; and  (b) Continuous distributed control algorithms for scheduling
              discrete-events that eliminate the computational complexity of combinatorial
              approaches. An experimental shop-floor supercomputer prototype will be
              constructed and integrated with an industrial ERP system. Novel architectures
              using reconfigurable computing and gigabit networks for accelerating
              distributed time-scaled simulation will be investigated. If successful, in the
              short term, this will lead to the development of a manufacturing co-processor
              for industrial ERP systems that addresses computational challenges on the
              manufacturing shop-floor.  Such a chips to enterprise system would utilize the
              inherently massively parallel /distributed nature of simulation and control
              algorithms and take advantage of 'hardwiring' capability enabled by
              reconfigurable computing.

 The resulting real-time adaptive time-scaling
              algorithms would utilize the synergy resulting from combining continuous
              variable distributed control algorithms and time-scaled distributed simulation.
               Speed-up and accuracy of simulations would be optimized to effectively utilize
              raw computing power and raw communication network bandwidth.  The shop-floor
              supercomputer will enable ultra-fast distributed simulations (10,000 x
              real-time) for feedback control of discrete-event scheduling.  The potential
              long-term impact of this work will be reshaping the future of computing and
              decision making on the manufacturing shop floor.
   
