Title       : Dissertation: Eighteenth Century Seneca Iroquois Household Archaeology--
               Excavation and Analysis at the Townley-Read Site, ca. 1710-1754
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9908795

Award Number: 9908795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nan A. Rothschild roth@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Nan Rothschild, Mr. Kurt Jordan will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to understand the
              changes in social and community organization of the Iroquois people in the
              early 1700s after extensive contact with European colonists. Historical
              accounts, and limited archaeological data, indicate a change in settlement
              pattern. Prior to this time groups lived in large stockaded villages located in
              highly defensible positions. Afterwards primary settlements were much smaller
              and located in more open ground less suited to defensive purposes. While this
              general pattern is likely correct, there is much scientific disagreement over
              the timing, causes and character of household change. Many researchers assert
              that settlement dispersal was accompanied by the abandonment of traditional
              multi-family bark longhouses in favor of nuclear family sized European style
              log cabins. This argument asserts that larger settlements dispersed and
              longhouse construction was abandoned because of the disintegration of
              traditional matrilineal social organization, caused by years of European borne
              epidemics, warfare and adoption on non-Iroquois individuals and groups. The
              timing of the abandonment however in the Seneca New York region where Mr.
              Jordan works suggests an alternative explanation. There village relocations
              first occurred after an important series of peace treaties were enacted among
              the Iroquois, French, English and western Native American groups. Mr. Jordan
              believes that after several years of relative local peace, the Seneca Iroquois
              may have become convinced that the peace was going to be durable and thus
              dispersed to obtain better access to fields and water. If this hypothesis is
              correct, settlement shift does not imply a breakdown of traditional social
              organization but rather a reasoned and positive response to changed conditions.
              In an attempt to determine which answer is correct, Mr. Jordan will conduct
              archaeological research at the site of Townley-Read located near Geneva New
              York. He will conduct remote geophysical prospecting using a variety of
              techniques to locate buried house remains and then conduct partial excavation.
              Although he knows from surface materials that the settlement is both small and
              dispersed, it is uncertain what types of dwellings were built. Traditional
              matrilineal houses are distinct in size and shape from their colonial
              counterparts and the determination of social process at Townley-Read hinges on
              the type of house structures present.

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide insight into an important period of colonial history.
              It will shed new light on culture contact and change and assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

