Title       : High Risk Exploratory Research: Political Economy of Free State Iceland -
               Regional Archaeology in the Mosfell Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9908836

Award Number: 9908836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19970              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Steinberg Jmstein@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse Byock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. John Steinberg and his
              colleagues will conduct one season of archaeological testing in the Mosfell
              Valley in Southwestern Iceland. The proximate goal of the study is to test
              techniques for locating human habitations, burials, iron smelting and livestock
              penning areas. While the potential for significant archaeological research in
              Iceland is high, because of recent soil deposition sites are extremely
              difficult to locate and standard surface survey techniques do not work well.
              Phosphates from animal excrement often are well preserved in the soil and Dr.
              Steinberg and his colleagues will collect systematic samples and test for
              elevated levels. They will use these data to select promising areas and then
              conduct both remote conductivity (electromagnetic) survey and magnetic survey
              to locate anomalies characteristic of human behavior. Limited excavation will
              be carried out to determine whether relevant features are, in fact present.
              This high risk preliminary work, if successful, will provide a basis for
              designing a larger research project.

Iceland was first settled by Vikings
              between 870 and 930 AD. During this relatively warm period population expanded
              rapidly as inhabitants developed a lifestyle based largely on fishing and sheep
              herding. Particularly interesting is the existence of a rich locally produced
              literature which provides insight into the culture and social and political
              organization. While not all documents agree, the picture which emerges is one
              of a stratified society headed by chiefs to which individuals owed their
              allegiance. However "chiefdoms" were not geographically based and local level
              groups could choose whom to pledge their allegiance. It is an extremely rare
              situation in which chiefdoms lack a regional power base and do not control
              contiguous territories. If such were in fact the case it would increase
              understanding of how technological simple hierarchical societies were
              organized. Scholars however have noted that most historical documents are not
              eyewitness accounts which described contemporary institutions but rather were
              written hundreds of years after the fact. Archaeological data would prove very
              valuable to determine on the ground reality and this is the ultimate goal of
              Dr. Steinberg's research.

