Title       : SGER: Adapative Competition and Emergent Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1999       
File        : a9908706

Award Number: 9908706
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80385              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Savit savit@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9237,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Social and biological systems are subject to design and control at various
              levels.  In particular, systems may be subject to  centralized hierarchical
              control (top-down), or to control emanating inherently from the dynamics of
              agents whose actions in the aggregate constitute the system under consideration
              (bottom-up).   In many such systems, agents will seek to act in ways that place
              them in a minority position.  By doing so, agents can often optimize their
              ability to obtain resources.  Examples include traders in a financial market,
              firms bringing innovative products to market, and packets of information
              seeking the least congested route on the internet.   In such systems, good
              control of the system, as measured by a effective system-wide
utilization of
              resources, can be sometimes be effected by an emergent coordination of agents'
              actions,  without any top-down centralized control.  This Small Grant for
              Exploratory Research (SGER) provides funding to study a class of simple models
              that contain the crux of these dynamics, and in which the emergence of good
              system-wide control is evident.  The research will seek to elucidate the
              precise nature of the control, and the necessary and sufficient conditions for
              its appearance.
     The consequences of success in this research are
              far-ranging.  At the theoretical level, this work can elucidate some of the
              unifying fundamental dynamics that undelie a wide range of complex adaptive
              systems in the social and biological sciences.  In more practical terms,
              understanding the nature of the observed emegent control can lead to important
              advances in a number of areas.  Most immediately, there are strong implications
              for the control of internet traffic.  By exploiting more directly the
              distributed, heterogeneous nature of the internet, it may be possible to
              improve information flow considerably.  Similarly, there are implications for
              vehicular traffic control.  Another area of potential application is the
              financial markets.  The emegent control observed in simple models depends
              crucially on the amount of information presented to the agents.  Best control
              is obtained when the agents use a moderate amount of information to make their
              choices.  This suggests
that it may be possible to put in place regulations
              for financial markets so that the effective amount of information used by
              traders is near the optimal value for good emergent control.  These are only a
              few examples of the kinds of problems that can be illuminated by this
              research.

