Title       : PGE/SEP: S.E.G. - Carson City G.R.E.A.T.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9908730

Award Number: 9908730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie Dockery vdockery@carson.K12.nv.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anita Brooks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory A. Marangi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carson City School Distric
	      P.O. Box 603
	      Carson City, NV  897034554    775/885-6234

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Carson City School District is proposing the implementation of a small
              experimental project designed to recruit young Hispanic females into
              computer-aided design programs (CAD) that will lead to employment in high
              technology careers. We believe that, if successful, the program can be expanded
              to other high technology, science, and mathematics programs at the high school.
              This program, Carson City G.R.E.A.T.S., is design to begin implementation in
              September of 1999, coinciding with the opening of our new High Tech center on
              the campus of Carson High School. 
	The Carson City G.R.E.A.T.S. project will
              focus on recruiting young Hispanic women to participate in internship programs
              in the field of computer assisted drafting (CAD). These internships will be
              provided at local businesses. The internships will be 90 hours in length and
              must be completed within the period of one semester.  Students can earn
              $6.00/hr or .5 credit for participation in the project. Students participating
              in the internship program will also enroll in the AutoCAD course. In addition,
              they will also be provided with additional remedial instruction in
              English/Language Art and mathematics if necessary. Transportation to and from
              work sites will also be provided for those students who need this assistance.
              
	Because Carson High School has School-to-Careers program, we were able to
              collaborate with five local businesses to provide CAD internships for five
              students each semester, bringing the total number of students to be served to
              10 for the year. If this program is successful, we believe that we will be able
              to solicit additional internship slots, both within the CAD program and in
              other high technology fields as well.

