Title       : The Flow of Dense Suspensions in Manufacturing Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a9908332

Award Number: 9908332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary L. Lehmann lehmann@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Cotts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to improve the fundamental understanding of a
              capillary flow process, that is a key step in the manufacture of electronic
              systems, and the effective delivery of these process fundamentals through the
              development of software based flow process tool.  The flow process arises in
              the manufacture of direct-chip-attachment packaged electronics.  Here a solder
              bump array provides the I/O interconnection between a chip and substrate.
              

The process goal is to rapidly flow an "underfill" material, which is a
              mixture of silica particles suspended in an epoxy, into the passage formed by
              the chip, substrate and solder bump surfaces.   A laboratory study on the
              capillary flow of dense suspensions in small flow passages will be conducted.  
              Motion of the mixture-air interface will be tracked and correlated with a
              number of parameters including the chip-to-substrate standoff (10~100 microns);
              the mixture rheology; the wetting surfaces (both chemical inhomogeneity and
              patterned surface topology are typical of the electronics application); and,
              solder bump geometric pattern.  Rheological measurements will be conducted for
              both commercial underfill materials and model suspensions.  Flow modeling will
              be conducted at two distinct levels:  (1) to understand the underlying
              mechanisms; and, (2) to develop cost-effective calculation strategies for
              implementation in the flow process tool.


