Title       : Aggregation Methods for Large-Scale Location Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9908124

Award Number: 9908124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259263             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Francis Francis@ISE.UFL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Numerous problems in the area of distribution and in urban services require
              decisions about best choices of facility locations, including warehousing,
              service centers, and retailing decisions.  Computer models can be used to help
              with these decisions.  Such computer models usually require information on
              where the customers (referred to as demand points) are, how many of them there
              are, and what their demands are.  In many computer model applications, the
              demand points can number in the millions.  Even if all the demand point data is
              available, it is usually infeasible to include it all in the models.  Instead,
              demand points are usually aggregated; for example, all the demand points in one
              postal code area may be assumed to be at the center of the postal code area. 
              This aggregation reduces the size of the model, but also creates modeling
              error.  Aggregation schemes typically used in practice are usually ad-hoc, make
              little or no use of the problem structure, and generally show no concern for
              them aggregation error.  This proposal addresses means of doing demand point
              aggregation so as to keep the error to manageable limits.  For various classes
              of location problems, the development of aggregation methods that build on
              previous work is proposed.  Model parameters that affect the error will be
              studied, and computer testing of the aggregation methods will be performed.
  
                The research should contribute to a cumulative body of knowledge that will
              eventually result in demand point aggregation problems being better understood
              and solved.  Location analysts will be better able to balance the quality of
              the solutions needed from computer models with the error introduced by the
              aggregation. The results of the research should be helpful in allowing better
              decisions about facility
siting when such decisions are based on computer
              modeling.  The results should be useful to urban and regional planners,
              transportation/logistics specialists, and geographers, all of whom at times are
              involved in choosing aggregation methods for large-scale location problems.


