Title       : SGER: Effect of Radiolabeling on Cell Cycle Progression and Survival
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2001       
File        : a9908903

Award Number: 9908903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94023              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie W. Hu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Labeling of live cells with low energy beta-emitting radioisotopes such as
              35S-methionine and 3H-thymidine is often used to follow the biosynthesis and
              modification of proteins in cells or to monitor cell proliferation.  Such
              metabolic labeling is a widely used technique that has been generally assumed
              to be non-perturbing to cells.  However, other forms of radiation, such as
              gamma, ultraviolet, and x-irradiation, can have harmful effects on cells
              ranging from arrest of cell growth to cell death.  The overall goal of this
              project is to investigate more fully the effects of radiolabeling with low
              level beta-emitters on cell cycle progression and survival, focusing on the
              molecular targets and mechanisms of radioisotope-mediated radiation damage. 
              Preliminary studies from this laboratory have shown that even a brief two-hour
              labeling with 35S-methionine causes cell cycle arrest, inhibits cell
              proliferation, alters cell morphology, and induces cell death (apoptosis) over
              the course of several days.  Additional studies will test the following
              hypotheses:  (1) that low doses of beta-emitting radioisotopes inhibit the cell
              cycle and cause apoptosis in a manner that is cell type-specific and dependent
              in part on the energy of the beta-emitter, (2) that inhibition of the cell
              cycle involves direct or indirect inactivation of the control machinery for the
              cell cycle, and (3) that radiotoxicity involves DNA damage or oxidative stress.
               Cell cycle analyses will be performed on a variety of cell types labeled with
              3H-thymidine, 35S-methionine, or 32P-orthophosphate in time and dose-dependent
              studies.  The levels and phosphorylated states of cell cycle control
              components, including p53, p21, and cdc2, will be evaluated.  Other assays will
              be used to monitor cell viability, the induction of apoptosis, DNA damage,
              oxidative stress, and the long-term survival and mitotic potential of cells. 
              The widespread use of these radioisotopes to track protein synthesis and cell
              proliferation necessitates a thorough examination of their effects.  If it can
              be definitively shown that common metabolic labeling techniques induce cell
              cycle arrest, apoptosis, or DNA damage, the techniques themselves as well as
              information based on these techniques will need to be reevaluated.  Aside from
              the impact on experimental design, results might also suggest the need to
              reevaluate acceptable exposure levels to these radioisotopes in the laboratory,
              workplace and environment.


