Title       : Challenges for the Chemical Sciences in the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a9908440

Award Number: 9908440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Raber draber@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-9908440
Raber, D. J.

The Board on Chemical Sciences and
              Technology (BCST) will organize a series of five workshops to carry out a
              survey of the current status of the chemical sciences, including both chemistry
              and chemical engineering as well as the interfaces with other disciplines such
              physics, materials science, and the biological sciences.  The study will assess
              the trends across this board field and identify key opportunities and
              challenges.  Each workshop will focus on one of the areas defined in the BCST's
              1992 report, Critical Technologies:  Role of the Chemistry and Chemical
              Engineering:  materials and manufacturing; energy and transportation; public
              health; information and communications; and environment.  Each workshop will
              address common themes, including:  discovery, interfaces, challenges, and
              infrastructure.  As part of exploration of interfaces with other areas of
              science and technology, the workshops will evaluate ways that new developments
              at these frontiers will create challenges and opportunities in the core
              disciplinary areas of the chemical sciences.  In addition to separate reports
              from the five workshops, a brief overview report will be prepare to integrate
              the findings into a single, cohesive documents and ensure that a balanced
              perspective of the full range of the chemical sciences is provided.  These
              reports will help to develop a sound scientific basis for decision making by
              those who will determine the nature and magnitude of funding for chemical
              sciences and technology and will enable scientific investigators to focus their
              efforts and strategies in areas where they expect the greatest returns.  

