Title       : Feed Drives for High-Accuracy, High-Speed Milling Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a9908209

Award Number: 9908209
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329106             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Ziegert johnz@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jiri Tlusty  (Principal Investigator former)
              Paul A. Mason  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              High speed milling (HSM) is recognized as one of the most significant recent
              innovations in machining.  One of the main obstacles to further advancement of
              HSM is the challenge of designing feed drives capable of reaching the required
              high speeds and high accelerations while maintaining transient path following
              accuracy.  This is due to the heavy masses to be moved, and the vibration modes
              of the structure that are excited by the motion.  In order to fully utilize the
              current generation of high speed spindles, axis accelerations of 1g to 2g are
              required with speeds up to 1 meter per second.  In order to achieve this level
              of performance, it is desirable to have positional servo bandwidths of 100 Hz
              or more.  This project will focus on the feed drives and control strategies of
              high speed milling machines, to enable higher speeds and accelerations and also
              to enhance contouring accuracy during high speed motions.  Using the high speed
              milling machines developed at the  university, appropriate control strategies
              will be developed and verified for traditional ballscrew/rotary servomotor
              drives, direct linear servomotor drives, and hydrostatic leadscrew/rotary
              servomotor drives.  

This project is expected to significantly advance high
              speed machining technology. Practical implementation of this technology may
              include, for example, the production of aircraft, where structural parts with
              thin sections milled from solid blocks are replacing riveted sheet metal
              assemblies, and in the production of forging, die casting, and injection
              molding dies where high speed milling is replacing electrical discharge
              machining on a large scale.

