Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center Competitive Renewal: University
               of New Mexico-Rutgers Ceramic and Composite Materials Center (CCMC)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a9908206

Award Number: 9908206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale E. Niesz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9908206
Niesz

This award provides funding to support the Industry/University
              Cooperative Research Center on Ceramic and Composite Materials at the
              University of New Mexico with Rutgers University as the affiliate partner.  The
              mission of the center is to develop new, interdisciplinary technologies to make
              the United States more competitive in ceramic science and engineering and to
              transfer these technologies to its industrial members.  The center will combine
              the research on ceramic synthesis and highly loaded polymers at the University
              of New Mexico with the research on ceramic processing and
              microstructure-property relationships at Rutgers University.  The focus of the
              research is on the science and technology needed to synthesize and process
              advanced materials with the microstructures needed to fulfill the property
              requirements as well as cost, shape, and reliability requirements of emerging
              engineering applications.  The approach includes research aimed at
              understanding the relationships between starting materials, chemistry, and
              processing parameters to the structures and properties of the finished
              materials. Processing techniques used are sol-gel synthesis, vapor phase
              synthesis, and powder processing.  The Center will be led by an Executive
              Director at the University of New Mexico and a Director at Rutgers University. 
              The Center has an Industrial Advisory Board composed of representatives from
              the industry affiliates and partners.

