Title       : PGE/SEP: Inquiry-Based Science for Girls through Formulation of Personal Care
               Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9908729

Award Number: 9908729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Tan-Wilson annatan@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Ketcham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christine Gnad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia Schlagter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   In the geographical region encompassing Broome County and four surrounding
              counties in upstate New York, only 51.2% of high school students enroll in
              chemistry classes, and a meager 29.5% enroll in physics classes.  The rest of
              upstate New York does better, enrolling 69.8% of high school students in
              chemistry and 43.1% in physics.  Part of the reason for the low numbers is that
              all throughout the region, female students are not electing to take classes in
              the physical sciences.  In one rural school, only 36% of 11th grade female
              students are enrolled in chemistry and only 14% of 12th grade female students
              are in physics.  The challenge is to develop performance-based science lessons
              that teach concepts in the physical sciences that are so interesting to girls
              that the girls will be compelled to explore all the sciences, not just the
              biological sciences that they seem to prefer.  This project will approach the
              teaching of science from applications that students are very familiar with but
              most likely never associate with the sciences learned in school.  The program
              evolves around the science and technology of personal care products.  This
              topic was selected for several reasons:  (1) The Lander Co. with a major
              facility for manufacturing of personal care products in Binghamton has agreed
              to be a partner in this multi-collaborative effort.  (2) Girls use creams and
              shower gels, shampoos and hair conditioners, and will be attracted to a program
              where they can make their own.  (3) The possibility of variation in the
              formulation of personal care products lends itself naturally to the process of
              inquiry and testing of hypotheses, as well as the quantitative measurements of
              physical properties.  (4) These activities, in turn, can be turned to the study
              of concepts in the physical sciences.
     The Roberson Museum and Science
              Center, and the State University of  New York at Binghamton, with coordination
              provided by the university, will deliver a program with three main components. 
              These are:  	          (1) An informal science education program primarily for
              middle-school girls at the Roberson Museum 	 and Science Center.  There will be
              tours of the Lander Co., four Saturday morning sessions and one 	 four-day
              summer program, reaching a total of 120 female students.
          (2) A
              teacher's workshop for 24 teachers of Grades 5 to 8 from the Union-Endicott
              School District as 	 well as other school districts within a 100-mile radius of
              Binghamton.
          (3) Classroom kits and on-site assistance reaching a
              total of 2,000 students, assistance to be provided                  by a
              grant-coordinator, and two undergraduate assistants.
     After the grant
              period, the science center will continue to offer the girls' program at cost,
              to the public.  Assistance provided by undergraduate volunteers would lower
              those costs.  Students will also be tapped to give teachers assistance so that
              the latter can continue to offer the new lessons in their classrooms.

