Title       : Control of Plastic Shrinkage Cracking of Concrete with Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9908308

Award Number: 9908308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antoine E. Naaman naaman@engin.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
CONTROL OF PLASTIC SHRINKAGE CRACKING OF CONCRETE
WITH FIBERS

Antoine E.
              Naaman
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Project Summary:

The largest
              single application of synthetic fibers in concrete is in the~control of plastic
              shrinkage cracking which occurs during the first twenty four hours of age,
              mostly in slabs and similar restrained structures, while the concrete is still
              plastic or semi-plastic and before it has attained any significant strength.
              While numerous studies have dealt with prediction models for the tensile,
              bending, and fracture properties of fiber reinforced concrete, there is so far
              no "theoretical" explanation on why a small amount (0.1% to 0.3% by volume) of
              fine fibers helps control plastic shrinkage cracking in concrete. This study
              offers to provide a rational answer. An extensive experimental program is
              proposed and a limited analytical program suggested. The main objectives are:
              1) to evaluate the effect of a number of fibers, covering a wide range of
              properties, on the plastic shrinkage cracking characteristics of concrete; 2)
              to understand the basic mechanisms by which fibers control plastic shrinkage
              cracking; 3) to develop an analytical model accounting for such mechanisms; 4)
              to carry out a parametric evaluation of the effectiveness of various fibers and
              fiber parameters; 5) to provide some recommendations on the most desirable
              fiber properties; and, 6) to recommend, for a given fiber, the minimum volume
              fraction of fibers needed to effectively control plastic shrinkage cracking
              under most adverse conditions. The results will help compare fiber properties
              and parameters that are important for control of plastic shrinkage cracking
              with those properties that are important for improving the mechanical
              properties of the composite. This study is expected to have a significant
              economic impact on the future use of fibers, particularly synthetic types, in
              concrete.
 

