Title       : The Application of Grid-Based Tactile Pressure Technology to Discontinuous
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a9908612

Award Number: 9908612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206303             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel G. Paikowsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Mass Lowell
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  018543602    978/934-4705

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ***
9908612
Paikowsky
Large variation in stress distribution within granular
              materials is a result of
their unique characteristics.  The stress variations
              are of great importance
for basic science and many engineering applications.  
              The present research is
aimed at the investigation of the stresses developing
              in granular materials
utilizing grid-based tactile pressure technology.  A
              development of a
calibration and interpretation methodology for the tactile
              sensors is
proposed.  Experimental program investigating the state of stress
              in granular
materials under fundamental and engineering applications is
              planned.

The behavior of discontinuous (discrete, granular) materials is an
              important
factor in many disciplines. These materials display unique behavior
              in the form
of volume change during shear and arching. The fundamental
              mechanism of arching
relates to the ability of discrete units to transfer
              loads through interaction
in a preferable geometry and thus to bridge between
              the zone (or point) of load
application to the zone (or points) of reaction. 
              These features result in a
unique load transformation and stress distribution
              within discontinuous
materials and on the boundary between them and solid
              surfaces.  Accurate
measurements of stress distribution are cardinal therefore
              for the
understanding of the physical phenomena as well as the evaluation of
              design
criteria and monitoring performance.  

The existing methods of
              evaluating stress distribution in a granular mass rely
mostly on the use of
              buried load cells.  These measurements are difficult to
perform and are
              limited in their ability to capture the stress variation.

A new technology,
              which makes use of flexible, grid-based, tactile pressure
sensors, allows to
              measure stresses at a large number of points in proximity to
one another,
              hence providing a realistic normal stress distribution.  Their
flexibility
              overcomes the intruding effect introduced by rigid load cells and
thus allows
              for measurements that better represent the existing stress
conditions. The
              application of the tactile pressure technology to granular
materials requires
              adaptation and calibration due do its innovative principle
of operation.  A
              preliminary viability study was conducted at the Geotechnical
Engineering
              Research Laboratory at the University of Massachusetts Lowell,
which focused
              on evaluating the tactile sensor technology, overcoming the
difficulties
              associated with it and utilizing the method in exploratory
applications.  The
              results of this study have provided the basis for the
present research.

The
              proposed experimental program includes enhancement of the calibration
              and
testing of the system followed by basic and applicative research
              applications. 
The obtained results and analyses (numerical and analytical)
              are expected to
provide (a) Basis for the implementation of a new technology
              to granular
materials.  (b) Significant insight to evaluate current knowledge
              and (c)
Actual stress measurements and behavior of granular materials and
              structures
from a previously unobtained perspective.  The use of the
              technology in
education is promising, allowing for demonstrations elucidating
              the concept of
stresses.
***
