Title       : Measurement of Aerodynamic Performance of the Houston Ship Channel Bridge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9908171

Award Number: 9908171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135496             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas P. Jones npjones@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project conducts the analysis of wind load and structural performance data
              for the Houston Ship Channel (Baytown) Bridge.  The goal of the entire research
              is to perform a series of ambient vibration surveys on the bridge during
              construction.  Culminating in a final ambient vibration survey just before
              opening and then finally the installation of a long-term monitoring system to
              monitor wind loads and structural response over a two-year period, along with
              supporting studies.  

Cable-stayed bridges provide a viable alternative to
              the classical suspension bridge for medium-to-long spans within the U.S. and
              internationally.  Due to their slender and flexible characteristics, a
              significant issue in their design is consideration of wind effects.  It is
              important that as new structures are conceived and designed in the coming years
              that wind effects and their associated problems continue to be considered
              seriously in the bridge design stage.  Adequate basic tools and approaches new
              exist, but their development needs to be completed and unified by addressing a
              number of unresolved issues in an coherent manner with a central focus being on
              the full-scale corroboration of predicted response.  

The Baytown bridge
              will be instrummented with a self-triggering data acquisition system coupled to
              a suite of motion and meteorological instruments to monitor the performance of
              the Bridge under ambient wind conditions for a two-year (nominal) period.  Wind
              speed vectors and deck accelerations will be measured as well as cable motions
              and (at no cost to the current project) and attempt will be made to measure
              pressures at selected locations.  The recorded data will be analyzed
              statistically in some detail and observations compared to predicition made
              using wind tunnel section model data and analysis techniques developed under
              the original grant.  

