Title       : The Efficiency Gains from Probabilistic Weather Forecasts: A Case Study of Oil
               and Gas Producers in the Gulf of Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9908963

Award Number: 9908963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Considine cpw@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig H. Bishop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The U.S. Weather Research Program (USWRP) is an interagency activity designed to
              perform and implement the research necessary to improve the delivery of weather
              services to the nation.  Under this Program, the National Science Foundation,
              the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National
              Aeronautics and Space Administration and the Office of Naval Research are
              jointly evaluating and supporting research of high priority to the USWRP. 
              Research that is directed towards determining the value and use of weather
              information has been identified as one of these high priority areas.

The
              Principal Investigator proposes to investigate the value of hurricane forecasts
              to crude oil and natural gas producers in the Gulf of Mexico.  The threat of
              hurricanes often forces producers to temporarily halt production and to
              evacuate offshore drilling rigs.  The potential efficiency gains from improving
              hurricane forecasts may be substantial, perhaps approaching $50 million per
              year.  The National Hurricane Forecast Center has been issuing probabilistic
              hurricane forecasts for more than 10 years.  The Principal Investigator will
              estimate the value of these forecasts and the potential gains from improving
              them.  The proposed analysis will estimate the value of this information using
              a decision model that requires the costs from protective actions, the potential
              losses from inaction, and the joint density function of forecasts and weather
              conditions.  The Principal Investigator also will perform an econometric
              analysis that will measure the marginal effect that probabilistic forecasts
              have on production decisions.

Successful completion of this research will
              establish the value of improved forecasts for this sector of the economy. 
              Further, however, the evaluation techniques developed will have applicability
              to determining the value of other probabilistic forecasts.

