Title       : Urban Systemic Program in Science, Mathematics, and Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a9908234

Award Number: 9908234
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Celestine Pea                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15641380           (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth S. Burnley   (Principal Investigator current)
              David Adamany  (Principal Investigator former)
              Saundra Howard-McGee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juanita Clay-Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Detroit City School Dist
	      5057 Woodward Avenue
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/494-1282

NSF Program : 7347      URBAN SYSTEMIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Detroit Public School District (DPS) proposes to advance significantly the
              science, mathematics, and technology (SMT) education of all K-12 students
              through the Detroit Urban Systemic Program (DUSP).  The DUSP accomplishes this
              task by building on the existing infrastructure developed by reform effort that
              began in 1991 and was catalyzed by the Urban Systemic Initiative, beginning
              1994-present.  The foundational tenets include a strong K-12 leadership team, a
              standards-based curriculum for science and mathematics based on the Michigan
              Core Curriculum Framework that is directly linked to the Michigan Educational
              Assessment Program (MEAP).  The core structure is also characterized by a
              state-driven school accreditation plan coupled with high-stakes accountability
              measures for districts and schools, and a resolution that requires SMT teaching
              for grades K-12.  The infrastructure also features converged fiscal and
              intellectual resources, and significant external support for the implemented
              curriculum from multiple institutions of higher education (IHE), business
              partners and the at-large community.

The DUSP goals parallel those of the
              USP that seeks: (1) to improve the urban school district's implementation of a
              standards-based curriculum; (2) to increase the competency and diversity of the
              science and mathematics instructional workforce; (3) to promote collaborations
              with colleges and universities relative to teacher education; (4) to increase
              the number of skilled entrants to the technology-based workforce; and (5) to
              employ research as an effective tool in improving the teaching and learning of
              science and mathematics. 

The existence of an established infrastructure is
              validated by four Cornerstone Initiatives and implementation of the
              standards-based curriculum based on student-centered concepts.  An array of
              instructional materials supports the implemented curricula that are reviewed,
              adopted, and adapted for classroom use on an annual basis.  The implemented
              curriculum features embedded technology, integration of disciplines, community
              links, problem-based instruction, and writing across the disciplines. 

Key
              components of the implementation plan include scaling up the
              institutionalization of the
K-12 standards-based curriculum, research on
              practice, improvement in the quality of the science and mathematics
              instructional workforce, and collaborations with IHEs to improve teacher
              preparation.


