Title       : Neural Network Derivatives Pricing for Electricity Commodity Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9908086

Award Number: 9908086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Oluseyi O. Olurotimi seyi@erols.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Adaptive Data Engines, LLC
	      1790 Verbena Street N.W.
	      Washington, DC  20012    /   -

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908086
Olurotimi
This research project will test a recurrent neural network
              approach to pricing electricity commodity derivatives. The method is based is
              based on the ability of dynamic recurrent neural networks to approximate
              properly parameterized arbitrary functionals. The network explicitly estimates
              financial derivative valuations. The underlying asset spot price process is not
              explicitly replicated, but is implicit in the estimation. This approach
              therefore overcomes the problems in many other approaches that focus on
              modeling the underlying price process. Namely, derivative pricing equations
              explicitly based on the underlying process for exotic contracts such as
              electricity are rarely found in closed form. Virtually all known real time
              methods for valuing electricity derivatives are extremely computationally
              expensive. The approach here relegates the computational expense to offline
              design, and should be able to generate online derivative valuations in
              dramatically less time than is usually done. The approach is conceptually
              similar to recent transform based approaches that also avoid explicit
              estimation of the underlying price process, but compute the derivative prices
              implicitly through substitutions in the transform domain. However, the desired
              analytical expressions do not readily emerge in those transform approaches
              either, leading to very high computational expense in order to implement them.
              The design approach presented in this proposal is completely rigorous, while
              admitting a computational cost barely more than typical offline neural network
              training. Analytical measures of performance based on recent results in
              stochastic recurrent neural networks are used to iteratively optimize the
              design in this offline stage.
Descriptive statistics are extracted from
              electricity spot price data series, including parameters related to jumps,
              price spikes and process regime-switching. These quantities are used to
              parameterize the functional operator that generates the derivative asset
              prices. This approach is consistent with those few and limited cases where
              closed-form derivative pricing formulas have been obtained. The recurrent
              neural network is then trained to generate the derivative asset price
              functionals using an input vector that consists of a subvector of the recurrent
              neural network state feedback, and a subvector of the exogenous (to the
              recurrent neural network ) parameters. The dynamic neural network approach is
              suited for this application because the ideal computation of, for example,
              futures or forward derivative contracts at a given time requires some
              autonomous form of estimating quantities between the given date and the
              derivative maturation date.
The training data will be selected from actual
              electricity price series, and the trained recurrent neural network output will
              be compared with actual derivative (e.g. forward) prices.

