Title       : Global Climate Change and the Evolutionary Ecology of Antarctic Mollusks in the
               Late Eocene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9908828

Award Number: 9908828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Aronson raronson@disl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Envrnmtl Sci Conso
	      101 Bienville Blvd.
	      Dauphin Island, AL  36528    251/861-2141

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908828
Aronson

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a paleoecological and
              paleoenvironmental study of Seymour Island. Global climate change late in the
              Eocene epoch had an important influence in Antarctica. This was the beginning
              of the transition from a cool-temperate climate in Antarctica to the polar
              climate that exists there today. The cooling trend strongly influenced the
              structure of shallow-water, Antarctic marine communities, and these effects are
              still evident in the peculiar ecological relationships among species living in
              modern Antarctic communities. Cooling late in the Eocene reduced the abundance
              of fish and crabs, which in turn reduced skeleton-crushing predation on
              invertebrates. Reduced predation allowed dense populations of ophiuroids
              (brittlestars) and crinoids (sea lilies) to appear in shallow-water settings at
              the end of the Eocene. These low-predation communities appear as dense fossil
              echinoderm assemblages in the upper portion of the late Eocene La Meseta
              Formation on Seymour Island, off the Antarctic Peninsula. Today, dense
              ophiuroid and crinoid populations are common in shallow-water habitats in
              Antarctica but generally have been eliminated by predators from similar
              habitats at temperate and tropical latitudes; their persistence in Antarctica
              to this day is an important ecological legacy of climatic cooling in the
              Eocene. Although the influence of declining predation on Antarctic ophiuroids
              and crinoids is now well documented, the effects of cooling on the more
              abundant mollusks have not been investigated. This study will examine the
              evolutionary ecology of gastropods (snails) and bivalves (clams) in the late
              Eocene.

A series of hypotheses will be tested in the La Meseta Formation,
              based on the predicted responses of mollusks to declining temperature and
              changing levels of predation. The shapes of gastropod shells, the activities of
              gastropods that prey on other mollusks by drilling holes in their shells, and
              the effects of predation on the thickness of mollusk shells should have changed
              significantly through late Eocene time. First, defensive features of gastropod
              shells, such as spines and ribbing, should decline as temperature and,
              therefore, the activity of skeleton-crushing predators declined. Second,
              drilling of bivalve prey by predatory gastropods should increase with time
              since the drillers should themselves have been subject to lower predation
              pressure as temperature declined. Drilled shells, therefore, should become more
              common through time. Third, patterns in the thickness of shells through time
              will make it possible to separate the direct, physiological effects of
              declining temperature (shells are more difficult to produce at cooler
              temperatures, and so should be thinner) from the indirect effects of
              temperature on evolving biological interactions (increased drilling predation
              should result in thicker shells). 

Seymour Island contains the only fossil
              outcrops readily accessible in Antarctica from this crucial period in Earth
              history. The La Meseta Formation on Seymour Island thus provides a unique
              opportunity to learn how climate change affected Antarctic marine communities.
              In practical terms, global climate change will probably increase upwelling over
              the next few decades to centuries in some temperate coastal regions. Recent
              ecological evidence suggests that the resultant lowering of sea temperatures
              could lower predation in those areas. Understanding the response of the La
              Meseta faunas to global cooling in the late Eocene will provide direct insight
              into the rapidly changing structure of modern benthic communities.


