Title       : South Carolina Advanced Technological Education Center of Excellence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  2001     
File        : a9908409

Award Number: 9908409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elaine L. Craft   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn G. Mack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Wood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : S C St Brd Tech&Compr Edu
	      111 Executive Center Drive
	      Columbia, SC  29210    803/896-5410

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Center of
              Excellence is a statewide systemic initiative designed to increase the
              quantity, quality, and diversity of engineering technology graduates throughout
              the state's 16 technical colleges.  An integrated, problem-based curriculum,
              collaborative teaching strategies, and extensive active learning techniques
              together with faculty and student teamwork form the cornerstone of the SC ATE's
              strategy to recruit, retain, and graduate more students in engineering
              technology programs.

SC ATE has achieved critical milestones on the road to
              designing and implementing a model of faculty development, program improvement,
              and curriculum reform. The key to SC ATE success continues to be reform-ready
              faculty acting as change agents for development and delivery of innovative
              engineering technology curriculum and promoting program improvement.  SC ATE's
              critical lesson learned is the proven effectiveness of exemplary faculty
              leading grassroots reform.

The Center has identified four critical success
              factors (essential accomplishments) that is guiding its work:  

(a)
              continuing development of pre-engineering technology and first-year engineering
              technology curricula; 
(b)  faculty development that supports the most
              effective teaching methodologies and creates learning environments that model
              the workplace;
(c)  recruitment and retention of students, particularly women
              and minorities; and
(d)  development of a statewide model to create a seamless
              pipeline for educational opportunities for students to become well-qualified
              engineering technology graduates.


