Title       : A Nonlinear Dynamical Technique for Improving the Function of the Human Postural
               Control System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9908034

Award Number: 9908034
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248228             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Collins jcollins@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908034
Collins
Upright stance in humans is regulated by a complex control
              system that involves a number of different sensory modalities, including the
              somatosensory system.  The goal of this project is to develop a bioengineering
              technique that can be used to enhance somatosensation in the feet and ankles of
              human subjects and thereby improve the performance of the human postural
              control system. 

Recently, there has been considerable interest in
              stochastic resonance (SR) which is a phenomenon wherein the response of a
              nonlinear system to a subthreshold input signal is optimized by the presence of
              a particular level of noise.  SR-type dynamics have been demonstrated in
              neuronal models, rat cutaneous sensory neurons, human muscle spindles and the
              human touch-sensation system.  These studies indicate that it is possible to
              introduce noise artificially into a sensory system in order to improve its
              ability to detect subthreshold signals. To date, however, bioengineering
              applications of SR-type dynamics have been limited. 

This project will be
              directed towards developing a noise-based bioengineering technique for
              improving the function of the human postural control system.  Specifically, in
              this project, a non-invasive system for applying electrical noise to the feet
              and ankles of human subjects will be developed. This system will consist, in
              part of sock electrodes, which are made of conductive material. This system
              will be used in a series of psychophysical experiments that will be conducted
              on 25 healthy young subjects.  These experiments will be designed to test the
              hypothesis that dorsiflexion/plantarflexion detection thresholds in human
              subjects are changed with the addition of electrical noise. A series of
              quiet-standing experiments will also be conducted on the 25 subjects. These
              experiments will be designed to test the hypothesis that noise-induced changes
              to dorsiflexion/plantarflexion detection thresholds alter the quiet-standing
              dynamics of the postural control system. 

This project could lead to the
              development of a non-invasive, noise-based technique that could be used to
              enhance somatosensation in humans and thereby improve the performance of the
              human postural control system. This work could have important ramifications for
              individuals with elevated somatosensory thresholds, such as older adults and
              patients with peripheral neuropathies. Such changes to the somatosensory system
              may predispose individuals to falls. Accordingly, the results of this project
              could eventually serve to reduce the frequency, cost, and morbidity of
              falling.

