Title       : Anode Materials Development for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells Using Hydrogen Sulfide as
               the Fuel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9908460

Award Number: 9908460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Winnick jack.winnick@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Meilin Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Jack Winnick
Georgia Institute of Technology
9908460

A
              high-temperature solid oxide fuel cell, which utilizes waste hydrogen sulfide
              as the fuel and air as the oxidant, has been tested and shown to be feasible. 
              This cell has the ability to generate clean electrical energy and
              simultaneously convert a toxic gas into a useful raw material.  Many different
              electrolyte materials have been previously studied to determine suitable
              materials for use with hydrogen sulfide.  Proton-conducting electrolyte
              materials studied to date were all found to be unstable in the fuel cell, but
              success was found with oxy-anion conducting materials.  Yttria-stabilized
              zirconia and samaria-doped ceria have both been found to be good
              anion-conducting electrolytes in the presence of hydrogen sulfide.

The
              objective of this research is to carry out a fundamental investigation of the
              electrode-eletrolyte interface in the hydrogen sulfide-fueled solid oxide fuel
              cell.  In doing so, the PI would like to significantly improve the performance
              of this device, so that it can become both a non-greenhouse gas power
              generation source, as well as a supply of a needed commodity chemical. 
              Improvements in electrode materials, cell design, and in the processing of the
              cell components are all goals of this project.  By using better electrode
              materials, the potential losses observed in the present apparatus will be
              lowered.  In addition, a more advanced cell design will eliminate air leakage,
              thus improving cell performance.  Lowering the potential losses with better
              materials and a more advanced cell design is expected.  Yttria-stabilized
              zirconia, samaria-doped ceria, and newly developed proton conductors will be
              studies as possible electrolyte materials.

