Title       : Agent-Based Precision Manufacturing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2002       
File        : a9908174

Award Number: 9908174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Wright pwright@robocop.me.Berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Dornfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides additional funding for the development of an agent-based
              system for the design, process planning and manufacturing of precision milled
              parts.  The agents that will be developed consist of software packages
              containing information, databases, and instructions related to specialized
              knowledge on important aspects of the physics of manufacturing or specialized
              procedures.  In this work, the primary interest is on developing algorithms
              that embody the process physics and that will allow the minimization of
              residual stresses, enhancement of edge quality and improvement in tolerances in
              milling of precision mechanical components.  The result of the agent output
              will be minor adjustments to specific tool paths or operating conditions that
              will make a considerable improvement in part quality with acceptable sacrifice
              in "time to first part."  This research will measure this trade-off between
              production speed and part quality quantitatively.  Experiments will be
              performed in which parts will be fabricated with a high edge quality and
              tolerance, and with concern for other part quality issues such as minimizing
              subsurface deformations and residual stresses.  The agents will be integrated
              into a high-end CAD system for detailed design, macro and micro planners, a
              tool path planner, and manufacturability feedback.

If successful, the
              results of this research will lead to new software capability creating a
              broader Internet-based Agent Based Manufacturing System.  The system will
              specifically include agents for precision machining improvements and address
              issues of conflicting advice from competing agents.  The goal is to show that a
              considerable benefit in edge quality and tolerance can be achieved with only
              minimal sacrifice in production time compared to "normal" process planning. 
              Finally, a major focus will be on conflict resolution between agents and
              trade-offs between agent advice and cost-benefit analyses.  Specific
              methodologies, based in part on game theory, will be developed to address these
              conflicts.
