Title       : 3-D Shaking Table Investigation of Methodology for Analysis, Design and
               Implementation of Smart Dampers: Nonlinearity and Asymmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9908966

Award Number: 9908966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shahram Sarkani sarkani@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. F. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Loren D. Lutes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
9908966
Sarkani
Smart damping devices (SDDs) can be used for safety and
              performance of civil infrastructures.  Active control devices without requiring
              the associated large power sources offer the adaptability of the dynamic
              behavior that cannot inject mechanical energy into the structural system it
              controls, but it has properties that can be control of the system.

One of
              the most promising classes of SDDs is based on controllable magnetorheological
              (MR) fluids.  Small-scale devices of this type have been extensively tested,
              and are now commercially available for controlling dynamic response in some
              types of mechanical systems.  The technological problems for applications of
              large devices remain to be solved.

The primary objective of this project is
              to further extend the SDD technology by considering the behavior of a smart
              damping system (SDS) -a system consisting of multiple smart MR dampers
              controllers. And sensors -under realistic operating conditions.  The list of
              possible SDS applications includes essentially all infrastructure elements
              subjected to human-made vibrations or natural hazard: civil structures,
              mechanical and aerospace systems, and industrial facilities.

A central part
              of the proposed investigation focuses on experiments with a large-scale
              infrastructure model equipped with a smart damping system.  The experiments
              will be preceded and followed by substantial computer model-based simulation
              studies.  The computer simulations will be used in designing the experiments
              and, in turn, the results of the experiments will be used to identify and
              rectify any shortcomings inn the initial mathematical modeling of the system's
              behavior.  The project is a three-year collaborative effort designed to take
              maximum advantage of opportunities at each of the three universities:  The
              George Washington University (GWU), the University of Notre Dame (UND), and
              Texas A&M University (TAMU).  This study will make use of the now shake table
              at GWU.  The expertise at UND in MR damper technology, and the expertise in
              dynamics and control at TAMU.

