Title       : Paleogene Sedimentary Basin Development in the Bolivian Altiplano and
               Implications for Initial Mountain Building in the Central Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9908003

Award Number: 9908003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85011              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian K. Horton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
9908003
Brian K. Horton


The Altiplano plateau of the central Andes
              contains up to 10 km of Tertiary sedimentary rocks and is arguably the type
              example of a sedimentary basin in the center of a contractional orogenic belt. 
              Despite numerous hypotheses regarding the history of the Altiplano's surface,
              particularly the timing and mechanism(s) of surface uplift, there has been no
              systematic analysis of the exposed Tertiary sedimentary rocks which ultimately
              contain the most complete record of surface processes.  This project aims to
              evaluate the Paleogene succession of the north-central Altiplano in order to
              provide an understanding of the early-middle Tertiary tectonic-sedimentary
              evolution of the region and a detailed assessment of local stratigraphic
              geometries (including thickening trends, facies transitions, and
              unconfonnities) and regional correlations that will aid syntheses of the
              tectonic-sedimentary development of the central Andes.  The project will
              evaluate four hypotheses regarding Paleogene basin development in the
              Altiplano.  First, that it was a single integrated foreland basin receiving
              sediment from an early fold-thrust belt to the west.  Second, that it was
              composed of a number of sub-basins, probably related to strike-slip
              deformation, that received sediment from localized source areas.  Third, that
              it was a rift system flanked by sediment sources to the east and west.  Or
              fourth, that it represents simple ponding (or "trapping") of sediment in a
              closed topographic basin.  The hypotheses are distinguishable on the basis of
              the age of the deposits, sediment dispersal patterns, location and composition
              of sediment source areas, and subsidence histories-unknowns that will be
              determined by stratigraphic, sedimentologic, and 4OAr/39Ar geochronologic
              research.  This study will place constraints on the early-middle Tertiary
              history of the plateau, thus improving modeling efforts aimed at understanding
              Altiplano uplift, and would provide a conceptual basis (and possibly new
              hypotheses) for the origin of sedimentary basins in the cores of mountain
              belts.



