Title       : Intelligent Control Strategies for Coordination of Multi-Robot Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a9908177

Award Number: 9908177
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Devendra P. Garg dpgarg@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Sawyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              P.I.		Garg, Devendra P.
Institution:	Duke University
Proposal
              No.	99-08177
Title:		Intelligent Control Strategies for Coordination of
              Multi-Robot Systems

ABSTRACT

This GOALI Industry-University Collaborative
              Research Project is a joint research program between Duke University and
              Feedback Incorporated of Hillsborough, USA.  The Feedback Group represents a
              collection of several high-technology companies that together address
              international markets in the design and manufacture of electrical, electronic,
              and microprocessor based equipment for industry and education.  A major
              objective of this research partnership includes the analysis, design,
              development, and implementation of innovative control strategies, such as model
              reference adaptive and neural network control, for optimal load sharing,
              internal force control, and efficient coordination of two cooperating
              manipulators.  Analytical effort during this research includes a comprehensive
              closed-chain kinematic and dynamic modeling, stability and convergence
              investigation of neural networks, and adaptive control scheme formulation. 
              Experimental work involves the implementation of control configurations via
              high-speed digital signal processors on two IBM 7540 robots available in the
              Robotics and Manufacturing Automation Laboratory at Duke University and
              cooperating robots in the flexible manufacturing work cells marketed by
              Feedback, Inc. In addition, there is significant students' industry-university
              interaction via mutual technical visits, summer internships at Feedback, and
              collaborative research experiments.  The major outcome and impact of this
              research effort include human resource development; the design and
              implementation of innovative control concepts applicable to cooperating robots
              functioning in industrial as well as in educational flexible manufacturing
              systems; and the development of courseware modules related to the project.
              



