Title       : Global Optimization of Facilities Location and Stability of Turbomachines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9908216

Award Number: 9908216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Faiz A. Al-Khayyal faiz.alkhayyal@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports research for the development of computational methods
              for the solution of a number of engineering optimization applications,
              including facilities layout problems, facilities location problems, and a new
              model arising in jet-engine design.  The goal of this research is to develop
              implementable new methods
for finding approximate global solutions to these
              and related problems by utilizing specific problem properties.  This effort
              will include the development of new theory and methodology that exploits
              problem structures such as eigenstructure, monotonicity, quadratic forms with
              structured matrices, and difference of convex functions, and that deals with
              computational difficulties caused by problem symmetry.
     Facilities layout
              problems arise in manufacturing, production, warehousing, and logistic systems.
               This grant will develop computational tools for finding global solutions for
              instances of these problems that have 20 or more facilities, thus doubling the
              size of problems solvable today.  Models for continuous facilities
location
              problems are similar to models for locating components on integrated circuits
              and to models for the protein folding problem in computational biology.  The
              goal of this research is to develop methods to solve problems with 10
              facilities or more, which amounts to doubling the size of problems solvable
              today.  Turbomachines contain bladed-disks whose performance is susceptible to
              blade-to-blade imperfections.  This "mistuning" limits the achievable tradeoff
              between manufacturing tolerances (cost), damping performance), and blade
              vibration amplitudes (engine life and safety).  Unavoidable random mistuning
              due to manufacturing uncertainties limits engine manufacturers' ability to
              decrease cost AND increase performance and safety.  Intentional (optimal)
              mistuning mitigates this tradeoff by introducing damping (a safety margin) in a
              robust manner.  This means that there is more room to decrease cost, increase
              safety, and improve performance.  Currently, problems are being solved with up
              to 30 blades.  This research will develop solution techniques for handling up
              to 100 blades.

