Title       : GOALI: Behavioral Simulation and Performance Evaluation of Imaging System
               Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9908631

Award Number: 9908631
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10253              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timour Paltashev tpaltash@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Konstantine Iourcha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A growing number of applications for 3D graphics and imaging systems require the
              customized approach to the design of high performance 3D graphics and imaging
              systems. The progress in hardware support of graphics API functionality gives a
              real possibility to use a top-down approach in the design of custom systems
              based on the mixed hardware/software implementation of OpenGL API architecture.
              Software simulation is relatively cheap and fast way for initial architecture
              template development and evaluation to acquire the structure and key parameters
              that can be used later for elaboration in hardware description language
              level.
        The project includes the implementation of 3D graphics system
              architecture model based on OpenGL hardware support simulation. The
              object-oriented approach has been used for this development of analytic and
              software behavioral models simulating hardware units in different stages of
              graphics pipeline. Interactive Imaging System Architecture Composer has been
              developed for fast run-time architecture reconfiguration, simulation
              management, data acquisition and visual interpretation. The expandable set of
              architecture templates uses a reconfigurable shared library of "virtual
              hardware units" simulating various hardware structures for graphics and image
              processing.
        The project realization provides a set of simulation and
              performance evaluation tools for computer architects to cover the first steps
              in top-down design process. The graphics/imaging system design can be
              customized and this technology might be expanded from corporate level to public
              domain to make it available for engineers willing to build graphics/imaging
              systems for particular applications. 
      


