Title       : Determinants of Colobine Abundance: Implications for Theory and Conservation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a9908899

Award Number: 9908899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Colin A. Chapman cachapman@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental issue in ecology is determining what factors regulate the density
              of animal populations.  This issue has become increasingly important as
              ecologists are asked to apply their knowledge to assist conservation biologists
              to construct informed management plans for endangered species.  With respect to
              primates, the importance of these theoretical issues has become critical,
              because most primates are found in tropical forests that are increasingly
              impacted by humans.  Furthermore, primates constitute a major component of the
              vertebrate community in most tropical forests, and their ecological role is of
              considerable importance.  However, understanding and predicting factors that
              determine the abundance of primate species has proven extremely difficult. 
              Numerous studies of forest primates have revealed a high degree of variation
              among sites in density, but there have been few direct tests of general
              hypotheses proposed to account for this variation.  

The objective of this
              project is to build upon extensive long-term data on the red colobus
              (Procolobus badius) and black-and-white colobus monkeys (Colobus guereza) of
              Kibale National Park, Uganda to provide insight into the fundamental question
              of what determines primate abundance.  To address this question the researcher
              will take two approaches.  1) Behavioral Responses to Changing Food
              Availability and Quality - In areas where food is scarce and of low quality
              primates should behave differently than in areas where high quality foods are
              readily available.  These behavioral differences should provide insight as to
              how different components of food availability and quality influence primate
              density.  Chapman will take advantage of seasonal (24 months) and spatial
              (pristine forest, logged forest, forest fragments) variation in food
              availability and quality to examine behavioral  responses to changing
              environmental conditions.  2) Correlating Primate Abundance to Food Abundance
              and Quality for Populations at Equilibrium  - The most direct means of
              examining the relationship between population density and food
              availability/quality would be a correlational one.  However, this approach
              requires knowing that the populations are at equilibrium.  If some populations
              were not at the carrying capacity because a factor, such as a disease, has
              temporarily reduced their numbers, then food availability and quality would not
              correlate with primate density, when in fact it may typically regulate primate
              numbers.  Long-term research at Kibale offers a means to circumvent this
              limitation.  In the foothills of the Rwenzori Mountains adjacent to Kibale
              National Park, there are approximately 40 crater lakes.  These crater lakes
              represent a series of "experimental test-tubes" in that the forest in that each
              varies in extent and composition, and one can investigate how this variation in
              forest structure influences their primate  populations.  In 1995, the
              researcher  surveyed primate communities in 20 of these forest fragments to
              determine the abundance of black-and-white colobus and the presence or absence
              of red colobus.  He will repeat this survey with two goals: 1) For the
              black-and-white colobus populations that are found to be at equilibrium, they
              will directly test for relationships between indices of food
              availability/quality and black-and-white colobus density.  2) For red colobus
              populations they will see if indices of food availability and quality can
              predict their presence or absence in a patch.

