Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Impacts of El Nino Flooding on Sociopolitical
               Organization in the Moche Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1999      
File        : a9908663

Award Number: 9908663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59263              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Huckleberry ghuck@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation supports Drs. Brian Billman and Gary
              Huckleberry will conduct two seasons of geological fieldwork in the Moche
              Valley in coastal Northern Peru. A regional manifestation of the warm phase of
              the El Nino Southern Oscillation, El Nino (EN) affects climate over a broad
              part of the globe. In Northern costal Peru, strong EN events result in massive
              fish die-offs and catastophic floods in an otherwise hyperarid desert. It has
              been proposed that strong EN events in the past stressed prehistoric
              agricultural and maritime societies in the region and was thus a catalyst for
              cultural change, including changes in social organization. The exact nature of
              this relationship is debated in part because a solid chronology of prehistoric
              EN events that could be correlated to prehistoric cultural events does not
              exist. In 1997 a geoarchaeological reconnaisance of the middle Moche Valley
              resulted in the discovery of a 100+ meter long streamcut at the mouth of
              Quebrada de los Chinos. The 4 meter high exposure contains at least 11 discrete
              flood deposits intercalated with organic soils and cultural materials. This
              provides an opportunity to date at least 11 strong prehistoric events and to
              correlate these to the cultural chronology fo the Valley. Drs. Billman and
              Huckleberry will document and date the stratigraphy. This will include
              profiling, photography, and laboratory analysis of the sediments to accurately
              identify and discriminate depositional and pedogenetic processes. Age control
              will be provided by temporally diagnostic ceramics and radiocarbon dated
              charcoal. The objective is to construct an approximately 2,500 year proxy
              record. On this basis it will be possible to test the synchronicity between EN
              events and cultural change and to analyze the latitudinal variability of
              prehistoric EN flooding in coastal Peru by comparing the Quebrada de los Chinos
              stratigraphy with other paleoflood and archaeological sites.

This research
              will be relevant to both paleoclimatologists and archaeologists and increase
              our understanding of how cultural development is affected by severe
              environmental perturbation. It will shed new light in the processes which lead
              to the rise, and decline, of complex societies.
