Title       : A Multiscale Approach for Designing Solids Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2000    
File        : a9908667

Award Number: 9908667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179104             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ka M. Ng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Ng, Ka Ming
9908667

Solids processing, which involves unit
              operations such as dissolution, crystallization, filtration, washing,
              dewatering, drying, crushing, blending, and compaction, is prevalent throughout
              the chemical process industries (CPI).  Examples include the manufacture of
              salts, fertilizers, insecticides, herbicides, detergents, pigments,
              pharmaceuticals, and petrochemicals.

A four-component research program is
              planned to study the design of plants containing solids processing steps. 
              First, systematic design procedures for integrated
              crystallization-filtration-washing-bulk solids processing systems will be
              developed.  These building blocks will be used to synthesize preliminary
              flowsheet alternatives for further investigation and optimization.  Second, the
              existing framework based on discretized population balance equations, which
              tracks the changes in particle size distribution from unit to unit in a
              complete plant, will be extended to account for shape.  The relationship of
              particle size and shape will be linked to process configurations and operating
              conditions through material properties and interparticle forces.  Third, this
              framework will be accompanied by the formulation of compatible solids
              processing equipment models.  Fourth, a Visual-Basic based programming platform
              will be used to demonstrate the use of these models and methods.  This code
              will be built upon an existing program SOLIDS, which contains subroutines for
              solving discretized population balance equations.  Case studies will be used to
              illustrate this multiscale approach, to identify heuristics, and to evaluate
              the impact of uncertainty.  Model parameter values for solids processing are
              often estimate; hence sensitivity analysis will be used to quantify the impact
              of uncertainty on process performance.  Design issues related to product
              formulation and unit operations such as solids blending, compaction, and
              granulation will be considered.

