Title       : Axioms for Overcoming Resistance to Decision Based Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2000     
File        : a9908406

Award Number: 9908406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324469             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah L. Thurston thurston@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              	This grant provides funding for the development of a new procedure for design
              decision making. Currently, design engineers make tradeoff decisions using a
              wide variety of procedures. Many of these procedures are loosely structured,
              and rely heavily on one or two individual's expert opinion. These procedures
              have worked reasonably well in the past, but have become inadequate as the
              design process has become more complex. This project will develop a set of
              axioms or procedures that will address issues raised in team design projects,
              tradeoffs under uncertainty, and consideration of "externalities" such as
              environmental impacts. Specifically, procedures will be developed for fully
              employing the information contained in a utility function during two critical
              stages: synthesis to create alternatives, and analysis to develop each
              alternative to its fullest potential. Focus areas will be the independence
              conditions,  attribute definition, the  functional multi-attribute form, and
              biases in assessing uncertainties and preferences.
	If successful, this
              project will help transform design decision analysis from an art to a science.
              The benefits will be realized by a broad range of design engineers, rather than
              by only specialists in decision analysis. During the design process, effort
              will be focussed where the potential payoff is greatest. Product design and
              development will take less time, since effort will be directed at synthesis and
              analytic tasks which contribute most to overall product utility. Nonlinear
              preferences and willingness to make tradeoffs will be modeled precisely, and
              the effect of uncertainty will be included in a rational, consistent manner.
              Customers will then be presented with products that better meet their
              conflicting needs for high performance, high quality, low cost, and low
              environmental impact.

