Title       : GOALI: Reliability of Interfaces in Microelectronics Packaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a9908016

Award Number: 9908016
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cemal Basaran cjb@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terrance Dishongh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander N. Cartwright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1504,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9908016
Basaran
This project addresses the reliability of interfaces in
              microelectronics packaging.  The objective is to develop a unified interface
              constitutive model and a noncontact noninvasive optical laser measurement
              technique to study failure of the interface.  The particular assemblies that
              will be studied are the silicon-epoxy-kovar frame assembly and the silicon-
              solder- alumina assembly.  Thermal cycling and steady state vibration will be
              applied on the sample concurrently.  Interfacial delamination and microcracks
              as well as the interface shear and peeling strains will be measured.  The study
              will include experimental and numerical work with experimental/computational
              mechanics, laser-optics and microscopy components.  The mechanical testing will
              be done using a thermal chamber- shaker assembly for concurrent loading as well
              as a miniature material tester.  After a certain number of load cycles, the
              delamination (and microcrack) volume will be measured with innovative optical
              methods involving femtosecond laser spectroscopy and interferometry, and
              confocal microscopy.  This direct measurement of anisotropic damage and
              comparisons with the constitutive model will facilitate numerical simulation of
              interface behavior.  The constitutive model includes a new anisotropic damage
              criterion based on entropy from the second law of thermodynamics and
              statistical mechanics.  Relevant material properties will be obtained using a
              Minimat 2000 miniature material tester, which has an attached a thermal chamber
              and a microscope.     
 
Another important contribution of this
              interdisciplinary project will be to educate future engineers and researchers
              in an interdisciplinary field, which no single department presently can do. 
              Also, as a result of this interdisciplinary project several courses jointly
              taught by Civil, Mechanical, and Electrical Engineering Departments will be
              initiated.
***


