Title       : Interactive Tensor Field Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9908881

Award Number: 9908881
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alex Pang pang@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1595,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a well-recognized research challenge in scientific
              visualization - how to visualize tensor fields. Tensor fields are prevalent in
              a variety of scientific and engineering disciplines such as fluid dynamics,
              mechanics, material science, and earth sciences, where they quantify the
              opposing forces on various materials. Tensor fields are particularly hard to
              visualize because of (a) the large number of variables (e.g. 9 for 3D second
              order tensors) and their interplay, and (b) the large data sets involved,
              particularly for time varying tensor fields. Currently, there are a very
              limited number of visualization methods for understanding tensors. This project
              will provide a suite of novel and intuitive visualization methods, based on
              deformation and intelligent agents, to help scientists and engineers
              interactively explore and understand the nature and structure of tensor fields.
              Conceptually, tensors exert force on the space around them. This project's
              approach is to allow the tensor field to manifest itself by deforming idealized
              elements representing that space. The goal is to do these deformations
              interactively so users can examine different regions and properties of the data
              that may be of interest. The project will explore different implementations of
              the deformations, as well as the use of different methods of tensor
              decomposition to create more intuitively meaningful deformations. The project
              will also investigate intelligent agents that will seek out features of
              interest in the tensor field, so that they may be better displayed. Ideas and
              methods from this project will be enabling technologies towards understanding
              fundamental problems throughout science and engineering, and will be tested
              against real data sets.
