Title       : Accelerated Life Cycle Testing and Modeling of UHMWPE Bearings in Knee
               Prostheses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9908096

Award Number: 9908096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis E. Kennedy Francis.Kennedy@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Collier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              
9908096
Kennedy
Wear of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE)
              used as the bearing material in joint prostheses is a major problem in the
              long-term survival of replacement joints.  To counteract this wear, methods of
              crosslinking the polymer have been developed.  The new highly crosslinked
              materials are designed to have improved resistance to adhesive wear and they
              have shown nearly zero wear in recent hip simulator tests, in which the polymer
              bearings are subjected to oscillatory sliding contact conditions.  This
              research will address the effects of newly introduced fabrication processes and
              sterilization techniques on long-term durability of UHMWPE knee joint
              prosthesis bearings. The loading conditions in the knee are substantially
              different than in the hip;  they are primarily oscillatory rolling/sliding
              contact and contact fatigue can be a more important mode of knee bearing
              failure than is sliding wear as in the hip prostheses.
 
The work will apply
              novel accelerated testing techniques, which are now being developed to study
              the changes observed in conventional UHMWPE following gamma irradiation in air,
              to assess the time dependent chemical and mechanical property changes in these
              newly developed crosslinked materials.  Accelerated aging of bearing material
              will be done to simulate, within a few weeks, the long-term changes that
              previously have been documented in joint prosthesis bearings in use for 5 to 10
              years or more.  Numerical modeling of both the chemical oxidation process and
              the stress distribution in the bearings under cyclic rolling / sliding contact
              will be carried out to allow prediction of clinical impacts of material
              changes.  Cyclic wear and contact fatigue testing using a knee simulator and a
              rolling/sliding contact tester will test the performance of unaged and aged
              bearing material.  Correlation between the stress analyses and the test
              conditions will ensure accurate modeling of the complex geometry and stress
              states in joint prostheses.  A large, established archive of joint bearings
              explanted from patients will be used to confirm the clinical wear mechanisms
              that are being modeled for predictive capability.
*** 
