Title       : Dissertation Research: Competition Among Females of Mixed Ancestry in a Baboon
               Hybrid Zone, Awash National Park, Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9908465

Award Number: 9908465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11922              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. Phillips-Conroy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Awash National Park, situated in the Rift Valley of central Ethiopia, is
              home to a  unique population of  hybrid baboons.  This population is the
              outcome of a geographic overlap between the widespread olive baboon (Papio
              hamadryas anubis) and the semi-desert dwelling hamadryas baboon (Papio h.
              hamadryas).  Although these two baboon "forms" have very different
              morphological features, ecological preferences, and social structures, when
              contact allows it, they produce fertile hybrid offspring.   Such  hybrid zones 
              may be seen as natural laboratories in which to examine relative hybrid  
              fitness and to investigate whether barriers to gene flow exist . 

The
              researchers will evaluate the relative fitness of female hybrid baboons by 
              observing behavior and its hormonal consequences.  Behaviors will be
              systematically recorded to determine 1) the nature of female competition, 2)
              the costs incurred by such behavior, and 3) the extent to which each female's
              behavior resembles that of the parental forms. The target group is a highly
              hybridized group which, according to a recent survey of population specific
              genetic markers, exhibits approximately equal proportions of females with both
              anubis and hamadryas ancestry.  Close monitoring of ovarian hormones will be
              used to indicate instances of abnormal reproductive physiology otherwise hidden
              to an observer, such as failure to ovulate, failure to conceive, or pregnancy
              loss.  Cortisol and testosterone will also be monitored in the context of
              behavioral observations to examine the physiological costs associated with
              competition and aggression. The project thus addresses how  behavior  may be
              affected by heritage, in turn influencing physiology and reproductive outcome
              in the hybrid zone.

