Title       : SGER: Backscatter Enhanced Reflection Confocal Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a9908645

Award Number: 9908645
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66110              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Keith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Uwe Happek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Farmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

Advances in light microscopy have lead to a steadily
              improving ability to visualize the features of unstained biological specimens
              over the last fifty years. Most of this progress has represented techniques
              that are appropriate for transparent specimens. However, for some specimens,
              such as bacteria on agar, biofilms on metal surfaces, and eukaryotic cells on
              metallic substrates, such as silicon chips, it is desirable to have modalities
              of microscopy usable with living tissues that use reflected light. For such
              specimens the options available include epifluorescence microscopy of
              immunostained cell surface proteins, lipophilic dyes, or fluorescent analogues
              of cellular proteins, incident differential interference contrast microscopy,
              and reflection mode microscopy. All of these techniques have limitations in
              terms of tissue damage, generality, or contrast available with biological
              specimens.

The investigators in this project have found that thin biological
              specimens show substantially improved contrast in the reflection mode of the
              confocal microscope when grown on specularly reflective substrates, such as
              metal-shadowed glass. However, the contrast and resolution of images still
              remain sub-optimal. Based on the reasoning that a modification of the standard
              reflection confocal microscope, designed to illuminate the specimen with a
              plane-parallel beam of light, would give substantially improved image contrast,
              this project will design and construct a modified illumination system for a
              confocal laser scanning microscope to compensate for the convergence of the
              incident beam introduced by the microscope objective, and will test this
              modified reflection confocal microscope with a variety of biological specimens
              on reflective substrates. In addition, the project will investigate replacement
              of the reflective substrate with multilayer dichroic substrates, and test their
              effectiveness in backscatter-enhanced reflection confocal imaging of a variety
              of specimens, including cells and polytene
              chromosomes.















