Title       : Use of Immersive Virtual Environments As A Collaborative Tool For The Study of
               Architectural Building Components Subjected to Earthquake Excitations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9908719

Award Number: 9908719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mehdi Setareh setareh@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis B. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Krimgold  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The main objectives of this research are to:
Investigate different methods of
              implementing and linking a visualization application to existing computer
              software for the analysis of structures.  


 Study the behavior of the
              architectural components and their interaction with the structural elements of
              buildings during earthquakes.

This project focuses on the studies resulting
              in the development of a virtual environment computer software that can help
              provide better understanding in the area of the design of architectural
              components specially partitions and suspended ceiling systems.  This project
              consists of two phases.  During the first phase computer software (VIRTUAL-SAP)
              will be created to develop "Smart Building Models".  This is a virtual reality
              model of a building which is linked through intermediary software to a
              structural analysis program.  PC-SAP4 (Structural Analysis Program) originally
              developed at the Department of Civil Engineering of the University of
              California, Berkeley, has been tested and applied to various problems during
              the past 25 years.  This project will use PC-SAP4	for the structural analysis
              of building structures.  The CAVE (Cave Automated Virtual Environmental) will
              be used for the generation of the building structural model.  The system will
              allow the user to "immerse" him/herself in a virtual world that has all the
              tools required to build a complete structural model, including loading,
              suitable for analysis and design.     

As an example of the application of
              the developed computer program the second phase of the project involves the use
              of the software developed in the first phase (VIRTUAL-SAP) to study the
              behavior of different architectural components under simulated seismic loading
              and provide an understanding of the behavior of these elements for the
              architects and contractors.  The interaction of these elements with the
              structure and with each other subjected to low and moderate earthquake motions
              will be demonstrated and studied.  Different configurations of connecting
              elements and boundary conditions will be considered.  


