Title       : SGER: Analysis and Modeling of Albatross Foraging Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9908624

Award Number: 9908624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 15,  1999      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12477              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Veit   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/541-0434

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              R. Veit OPP99-08624
D. Grunbaum OPP99-08623
Antarctic seabirds such as
              Black-browed Albatrosses acquire essential resources on foraging trips that
              span many days and thousands of kilometers.  The success of these foraging
              excursions is primarily limited by sensory limitations that restrict detection
              of prey to relatively short ranges.  To overcome this sensory limitation,
              abatrosses use a combination of memory of previous foraging locations and
              short-term responses to the prey distributions they are presently encountering.
               We have already quantitatively characterized two of these short-term
              behaviors, area-restricted search and local enhancement, in Black-browed
              Albatrosses.  We hypothesize that these behaviors are fundamental determinants
              of long-term, large-scale patterns in the albatross' spatial foraging dynamics.
               If we are correct, then short-term, ship-board observations coupled with
              detailed spatially explicit models of foraging behaviors will have important
              predictive power for where albatrosses forage, how successful they are, and how
              that success is affected by short- and long-term changes in prey distribution. 
              We propose to test our hypothesis initially by constructing a spatially
              explicit model of foraging behavior, based on extensive reanalysis of existing
              behavioral data from our own cruises and from the literature.  The model will
              take advantage of newly developed mathematical techniques to relate these
              complex individual-level behaviors to the spatio-temporal distributions of
              seabird populations that result from them.  The primary goals of this work are
              to create and disseminate a flexible modeling structure, to use that structure
              to establish whether the behaviors we have observed are quantitatively
              important determinants of where seabirds forage, and to identify the most
              essential behavioral and environmental data to collect on future cruises.  If
              the model supports our hypothesis, this work will motivate future studies in
              which we explicitly test our predictions with satellite tracking, ship-board
              and colony-based observations.  If the hypothesis is not supported, our work
              will focus attention on alternative components of behavior and provide a
              theoretical structure to investigate them.  In either case, this theoretical
              analysis is an essential first step in attaining an empirically-based,
              quantitative understanding of spatial foraging dynamics in Antarctic
              seabirds.

