Title       : Vascular Cell Death and Proliferation: Role of Mechanical Stretch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2001      
File        : a9908591

Award Number: 9908591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288934             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu Q. Liu sliu@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew R. Glucksberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908591
Liu
Bypass vein grafts are commonly used to replace blocked arteries
              in the heart, brain, and other organs. Unfortunately, vein grafts often fail
              within months to years due to atherosclerosis. In spite of extensive
              investigations, it remains unclear why vein graft atherosclerosis occurs within
              such a short period. Recent research has demonstrated that a vein graft is
              exposed to a stretching force due to arterial blood pressure. This force is
              associated with early vascular cell death, followed by massive vascular cell
              growth, which contribute to vein graft atherosclerosis. This project is
              designed to investigate the mechanisms related to these events by using a
              cultured vein graft model.

To clarify how a stretching force induces
              vascular cell death and growth, rat jugular veins will be perfused with culture
              media to various pressure levels using a pulsatile cardiac pump to simulate
              vein grafts in a cell incubator. A relationship between the stretching force
              and the rate of cell death, as well as between the stretching force and the
              rate of cell growth, will be determined using a biomechanical approach; and the
              role of biochemical factors in the mediation of stretch-induced cell death and
              growth will be examined using biological approaches. The influence of the
              stretching force on cell death and growth will be distinguished from that of
              other factors, such as surgical trauma and altered blood flow. Attention will
              be also given to the relationship between vascular cell death and
              growth.

Data from these experiments will be analyzed and used to answer
              these questions: whether a stretching force plays a role in vascular cell death
              and growth; how cell death is related to cell growth; and what mechanisms are
              possibly involved. This project will provide fundamental information into the
              mechanisms of vein graft atherosclerosis and failure.

