Title       : On-Line Weld Quality Monitoring/Control Using Laser Ultrasound and Non-Contact
               Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a9908082

Award Number: 9908082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: I. Charles Ume   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research project is to  develop an online weld
              monitoring/control system consisting of a flexible fiber bundle linear phased
              array (FFBLPA) and a focusing lens to generate bulk waves, which will be used
              to monitor and control weld penetration in real-time.  A non-contact
              electromagnetic acoustic transducer (EMAT) will be used as the receiver.  The
              study will demonstrate the proof-of-principle as a first step toward developing
              an automatic closed loop welding system controlled by ultrasonic sensors.  The
              weld pool depth  will be measured with the transmitting and receiving sensors
              moving along with the welding torch.   By using a stationary laser phased array
              ultrasound generator and an EMAT receiver, the measured data will be used in
              real-time control of the welding process.  This system will be implemented in
              actual robotic gas metal arc welding process.  Specific project tasks will
              include:  (1) Develop an ultrasound generation unit where all the components of
              the laser generation unit will be integrated and optimized. (2) Develop a data
              acquisition and analysis sub-system. (3) Integrate the generation and receiving
              units with the welding and robot controllers and the data acquisition
              sub-system. (4) Demonstrate the proof-of-principle. 

The  technique will
              address the shortcomings of the traditional approaches to ultrasound generation
              in which the piezoelectric transducer is connected to the sample surface
              through a couplant.  Controlling heat input to the parts being welded through a
              real-time sensory feedback is expected to reduce the heat affected zone,
              material degradation, and thermal distortion, leading to the increase of
              throughput and weld quality and the reduction of production cost.

