Title       : Dissertation: Investigating Lineage Organization Among The Late Classic Maya of
               Northwestern Belize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a9908595

Award Number: 9908595
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don S. Rice drice@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Don Rice, Mr. Jon Hageman will collect data for his
              doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to understand the basic
              principles which underlay prehistoric Mayan social organization and to achieve
              this he working in a region of Northwestern Belize which was occupied during
              the Late Classic Period. This marks the height of the Mayan civilization and
              because this portion of Belize was only occupied during this interval,
              chronological control can be achieved. Mayan peoples successfully colonized
              lowland tropical regions at population densities considerably greater than
              their present day counterparts and with relatively simple technologies they
              created social/political/economic entities which bound  thousands of people
              over large areas into integrated functioning units. They created enough surplus
              labor, over and above that needed for subsistence, to build large pyramids and
              to produce non-utilitarian luxury goods. In this region of Belize they also
              created canal systems for irrigation and water management. Although it is clear
              that wealth differential existed within Mayan society, in many regions
              clear-cut class differences are hard to discern and "class", many
              archaeologists believe is not a primary organizing principle. Based on both
              ethnographic data and examples from many other parts of the world, Mr. Hageman
              argues that these northern Belize groups were organized along lineage
              principles and that individuals were assigned to essentially equivalent
              parallel groups based on birth. While relative status and wealth varied within
              individual lineages, each group was headed by a single individual, had shrines
              which reinforced group identity, shared visible material characteristics and
              occupied a spatially contiguous area. Mt. Hageman will continue his
              archaeological research in this northern Belize region to determine whether
              data in fact support such a model. To accomplish this he will complete an
              ongoing regional survey to search for boundary markers and examine the
              distribution of house mounds. He will also test and excavate at a series of
              sites to recover relevant information.

This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and
              shed new light on the basic Mayan principles of social organization. It will
              also contribute to training a promising young scientist.

