Title       : Competent and Efficient Genetic Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2002   
File        : a9908252

Award Number: 9908252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281743             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Goldberg deg@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This grant provides funding to develop competent and efficient genetic
              algorithms--search or optimization procedures based on the mechanics of natural
              selection and genetics.  In this context, the word "competent" is used to
              denote algorithms that solve a large class of hard problems, quickly, reliably,
              and accurately.  The word "efficient" is used to denote a variety of means by
              which such competent algorithms may be further speeded.  To achieve these
              goals, this project will:   (1) advance the state of building-block theory, (2)
              develop new methods of mixing and probabilistic model building, and (3) advance
              the state of generic algorithms efficiency theory and practice in the areas of
              parallelization, time utilization, evaluation relaxation, and algorithm
              hybridization.

      If successful, the results of this project will
              immediately lead to more cost-effective genetic and evolutionary algorithms. 
              The current generation of techniques is increasingly being used across
              the
spectrum of human endeavor in diverse areas such as electronic design and
              testing, manufacturing scheduling and facility layout, structural optimization
              and design, aircraft/spacecraft design and manufacture, drug and biomolecular
              design, and even in such disparate areas as the composition of music and
              poetry.  Despite this broad usage, the current generation of techniques has
              been shown to be limited in the range of problems that can be successfully
              tackled.  The next generation of techniques delivered by this research promises
              to vastly reduce the amount of computation required to reach a given quality of
              solution, and this computational leverage will greatly increase the incentive
              for using these techniques in the above-named and many other fields of inquiry.
               As a result, this technology could become a critical component in the
              development of many other fields.  Moreover, the techniques being investigated
              have been likened to the processes of human innovation and creativity, and this
              research may also shed scientific light on these important mechanisms.

