Title       : Dissertation: Social Change in the Ulua Valley of Honduras: A Scientific Study
               of the Marble Vases and Sources
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1999   
File        : a9908680

Award Number: 9908680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Henderson jsh6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. John Henderson, MS Christina Luke will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. Her goal is to understand the processes which
              led to the rise and maintenance of complex prehistoric societies in Middle
              America and she shall focus on Late Classic period peoples in the Ulua Valley
              of Honduras and adjacent Belize. Although the Mayans and Aztec are the best
              known civilizations in this general region, this same level of complexity was
              achieved by multiple other groups. Ulua Valley societies were unique in their
              production of highly standardized elaborately carved marble vessels and
              artisans mastered techniques of crafting this relatively soft rock. Produced
              for only several hundred years at the height of the civilization, these vessels
              appear in exclusively elite contexts and MS Luke hypothesizes that they served
              to reinforce ties between rulers in adjacent areas. By understanding how and
              where they were produced, MS Luke believes it will be possible to reconstruct
              interactions between sites within this exchange network. Examination of degree
              of standardization will also shed light on the degree of centralized control
              over their production and the extent to which full time craft specialists were
              present. MS Luke will conduct a stylistic study of excavated specimens housed
              in many museums. She will also collect marble samples from multiple geological
              outcrops in the Ulua Valley and determine their trace element and isotopic
              signatures. These together with petrographic analysis will, hopefully, permit
              her to match finished product to geological source. Preliminary results
              indicate that within source chemical and petrographic variation is small enough
              and between source variation significantly large to allow success. 

This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide the first chemical
              characterization of Middle American marble and provide a data base of great
              potential value. It will shed new light on the development of civilization in
              Middle America and the role which the production and distribution of elite
              items played in its creation and maintenance. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

(9908680)

