Title       : HBCU: Active Chemical Education Through Research (ACER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a9908993

Award Number: 9908993
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2137346            (Estimated)
Investigator: Delbert W. Baker presidentsoffice@oakwood.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakwood College
	      7000 Adventist Boulevard
	      Huntsville, AL  358960001    256/726-7000

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Oakwood College	

The objective of the Oakwood College (OC) Active Chemical
              Education. Through Research (ACER) Program is to attract undergraduate students
              to chemistry, chemical engineering, and biosciences; nurture and enhance
              educational achievements of undergraduate students; provide a firm foundation
              of research experience; and encourage outstanding undergraduates to pursue
              related graduate degrees. ACER's three main elements are: (1) Student
              Recruiting/Research Assistant Program, (2) Enhancing Infrastructure and
              Updating Teaching Methods, and (3) a Visiting Scientist Teaching Program. The
              program's objective is to ensure that 75% of ACER graduates win admission to
              good Ph.D. program in biological and chemical sciences.

ACER will recruit
              and support at least 60 students over the five years, beginning recruitment in
              the freshman year. Students will be individually mentored, provided research
              experience (including support for summer research), and opportunities to
              publish and attend national conferences. Top international research scientists
              will provide one-month courses in mathematics for life scientists,
              thermodynamics, biophysics, bioelectrochemistry, chemical engineering,
              nanochemistry and nanotechnology, biosensors, environmental chemistry, and
              surface chemistry. This will also introduce outside institutions and scientists
              to OC's capabilities and faculty, building a network of future collaboration
              and partnering opportunities.

High quality of education requires a strong
              scientific research program. Through ACER, students will have access to
              research capabilities, equipment and techniques that are being used in the best
              universities.

