Title       : Collaborative Research: Formation of Modified Biochemicals and their
               Contribution to Dissolved Organic Nitrogen in Marine Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2001   
File        : a9908808

Award Number: 9908808
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281614             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Kirchman kirchman@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
OCE-9908808


Although dissolved organic nitrogen is known to be
              the largest reservoir of reduced nitrogen in the world ocean, little is known
              about its origin, reactivity, and long-term fate.  Recent research indicates
              that high-molecular-weight dissolved organic nitrogen is dominated by compounds
              with amide linkages - like those found in biogenic protein molecules.  The
              sources of these amides are unknown, but proteins and chitins (reaction
              products between amino acid and sugar monomers) are considered prime
              candidates.  In this study, an organic geochemist at the University of Maryland
              Center for Environmental Studies and a microbial ecologist at the University of
              Delaware will combine talents to investigate the mechanisms by which this DON
              is formed.  There are three major research questions:  (1)  Is protein or
              chitin modified to forms unrecognizable as amino acid or amino sugar-containing
              polymers?; (2) Does the physical matrix surrounding these compounds enhance or
              inhibit chemical/microbiological processes?; and (3) What is the contribution
              of these modified byproducts to the high molecular weight dissolved and
              particulate organic matter in the Delaware estuary and coastal ocean?  A
              variety of state-of-the art techniques of organic analysis and microbial
              biochemistry will be employed to address these questions.  The investigators
              anticipate that this study will significantly expand our understanding of the
              processes responsible for the presence and persistence of these nitrogenous
              substances in marine waters.

