Title       : Behavior and Control of Molten Cladding - Modeling of Joint Formation in
               Aluminum Brazing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a9908319

Award Number: 9908319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dusan P. Sekulic sekulicd@engr.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan T. Male  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Morris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research project will investigate joint formation and material behavior
              during the liquid metal phase of controlled atmosphere brazing of aluminum
              alloys.  The investigation will be experimental, analytical and numerical.  It
              will seek to:  (1) model the topology of the joint shape; (2) quantify the
              influence of micro grooves and surface roughness on the cladding flow under
              actual brazing conditions; and (3) establish a new method for control of molten
              cladding flow which will be sufficiently robust to be applied in
              industry.

The extensive experimental study will include the complex
              plate-fin heat exchanger samples used in the automotive, aircraft, cryogenics
              and air-conditioning/refrigeration industries.  In this study, in-situ
              monitoring of the molten metal phase of the process will be achieved using
              high-speed digital camera imaging during the computer guided thermal regimes in
              a special transparent vacuum furnace with controlled atmosphere capabilities. 
              The experimental conditions will be identical to the conditions in an actual
              brazing process.  The objective of the experimental study is to clearly
              visualize and understand the molten metal flow and joint shape formation. 
              Theoretical analysis will utilize surface tension theory to define an
              equilibrium molten metal membrane profile at the onset of solidification. 
              Numerical analysis will be performed using a parametric finite element
              method.

