Title       : Development of Advanced Abrasive Electrodischarge Grinding (EDG) System for
               Machining Difficult-to-Cut Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a9908219

Award Number: 9908219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198589             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Riley IEIDRILE@ENGUNX.UNL.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              ZUYUAN YU  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abrasive Electrodischarge Grinding (AEDG), or rotary electrodischarge machining
              (EDM) with a metal bonded diamond wheel, will be studied in this project.  
              AEDG combines the benefits of electric erosion, which is independent of
              material hardness, and diamond grinding, which provides precision and better
              surface integrity.  The preliminary results indicate that AEDG offers higher
              productivity with better surface quality than EDG.  However, the existing AEDG
              system lacks the capacity to:  (1) easily and economically generate complex
              surface shapes; (2) avoid arcing and unstable machining; (3) machine materials
              of low electrical conductivity;  and  (4) select optimal performance parameters
              and control the process.  The project will develop an accurate on-line gap
              monitoring and control system, an enhanced power generator, a 2-axis NC wheel
              dressing unit for complex surface generation, and machine operation software
              with Internet capabilities. An experimental testing of the completed AEDG
              system will be conducted for high productivity, ease of operation, economy,
              capability, accuracy, and environmental compatibility. 

The AEDG system, if
              successfully developed, is expected to make a major leap forward in the
              scientific and technological levels of EDG and EDM tools.  Such an advance will
              likely provide much needed assistance to the United States producers and users
              of EDM and EDG technologies for the machining of advanced materials such as
              superalloys, engineering ceramics, and metal matrix composites.

