Title       : Improvement of Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts Using a New Microphysical
               Parameterization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a9908995

Award Number: 9908995
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vanda Grubisic grubisic@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arlen W. Huggins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marcin Szumowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Accurate forecasts of precipitation associated with disruptive, high-impact
              weather events can save lives and money. Current forecast accuracy suffers from
              poor representation of microphysical processes in numerical weather prediction
              (NWP) models. The goal of this  research is to improve quantitative
              precipitation forecasts (QPF) in regional scale models through better
              formulation of microphysical processes. The central hypothesis of this project
              is that significant improvement in QPF in complex terrain can be reached
              through a consistent representation of warm, cold, and mixed-phase clouds.
              Explicit treatment of all growth processes will generate more accurate mass
              distributions and fall trajectories, leading to more accurate spatial
              distribution of rain and snowfall.  

To test the central hypothesis, the
              investigators will implement an improved microphysical scheme in two advanced,
              research numerical models, perform rigorous sensitivity studies in idealized
              simulations, validate forecasts of heavy rain and snowfall events using
              analyzed data sets, evaluate improvement in QPF and rain-snow line forecasts
              using statistically meaningful methods, test model performance and investigate
              the interaction of the dynamics and microphysics of cloud systems in real-time
              winter storm simulations, and determine the ratio of increase in computational
              time to forecast improvement.

Rain and snowfall totals, Doppler and profiler
              radar data, as well as in situ dynamic and microphysical aircraft measurements
              from two already completed field projects will be used in model validation. 
              The new version of the microphysics parameterization will be made available to
              the scientific community and the local NWS office in Reno, where its
              performance will be tested in an operational environment.

