Title       : Berkeley-Stanford CE&M Workshop: Defining a Research Agenda for AEC
               Process/Product Development in 2000 and Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1999       
File        : a9908195

Award Number: 9908195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Fischer fischer@ce.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0510203   Model Validation                        
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigators (PIs) propose to organize a workshop for
              participants to identify a research agenda that will serve the National Science
              Foundation in its effort to guide the enineering research community involved in
              design and construction of capital facilties.  The architecture engineering
              construction (AEC) industry has been changing at an ever increasin pace, due to
              specialization, fragmentation, litigation, and globalization.  These have led
              to the high complexity and uncertainity so characteristic of most projects
              being developed today.  Despite the challenges ahead, oppurtunities abound
              thanks to a shift in thinking regarding the engineering and construction
              process combined with the availability of new information technologies,
              organiational and contractual restructing, and means and methods.  This shift
              makes it conceivable to achieve true integration among all AEC players so as to
              result in increased value delivered to owners.  The workshop will bring
              together researchers and practitioners who are active in the field so they can
              discuss the advancement of theory for construction engineering and management
              and research efforts to support its development.  The workshop will be oranized
              jointly by a PI at Berkeley and a PI at Stanford as follows.  First, potential
              participants will be solicited by electronically issuing a request for
              submission of "whitepapers" or "position papers."  Second, the submissions will
              be posted on the web and submitted to public a vote (each author will be able
              to vote for his or her five favorite papers).  Third, taking the outcome of the
              vote as the basis for decision making, the PIs, together with a steering
              committee, will select participants to the workshop.  Additional considerations
              for selection of workshop participants are:  representation of sectors
              (industry and academia), ability to lead discussion sections, and academic
              rank, and research experience.  Fourth, the workshop will be held in late
              August at Stanford University.  Finally, all preparatory whitepapers, summaries
              of the discussions, and the conclusions of the workshop will be posted on the
              web, hosted at a site at the University of California, Berkeley, so as to reach
              the widest audience possible.   
