Title       : Industrial/University Collaboration for Research in Control of Sound and Wave
               Vibration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9908271

Award Number: 9908271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156187             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Clark rclark@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel G. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steve C. Southward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1504,9146,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Robert L. Clark, Duke University
CMS-9908271
Industrial / University
              Collaboration for Research in Control of Sound and Vibration
The Adaptive
              Systems and Structures Laboratory of Duke University and the Millennium
              Technologies Group of the Lord Corporation have jointly identified critical
              technical research objectives regarding advancements in the control of sound
              and vibration.  The programmatic objective is aimed at the successful
              integration of research efforts at the Lord Corporation and Duke University
              with regards to the control of sound and vibration.  The program aims to
              facilitate the transfer of technology and ideas between the academic and
              industrial setting through an integrated and collaborative research program. 
              The technical objective of the proposed program is focused on the advancement
              of transducer technologies and controller design methodologies required for
              structural control of sound and vibration.
The proposed program will have a
              significant impact within the field of applied control of sound and vibration. 
              New methods will be developed for determining optimal positions of transducers
              based upon experimental system identification techniques.  The method proposed
              will lead to a design methodology of value to the general community. 
              Additionally, practical issues facing the integration of self-sensing
              transducers will be addressed to facilitate technology transfer and determine
              limits of performance for applications requiring induced strain transducers. 
              For practical realization of multivariable control, self-tuning or adaptation
              is a necessity due to the variation in transducer dynamics, structural
              dynamics, and system parameters with each application.  Thus, to provide
              practical design guidelines, adaptive control methodologies will also be
              explored with an emphasis on determining limits of performance and robust
              stability given a basic knowledge of the time-varying parameters of the
              system.


