Title       : HBCU: Preparing for the Future: Strengthening Basic Science, Mathematics, and
               Biochemistry at Tuskegee University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a9908994

Award Number: 9908994
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Victor A. Santiago                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2998908            (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Lester   (Principal Investigator current)
              Adriane G. Ludwick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tuskegee University
	      
	      Tuskegee Institute, AL  36088    334/727-8501

NSF Program : 1594      HIST BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIV
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1594,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              TUSKEGEE UNIVERSITY

Through this initiative, entitled "Preparing for the
              Future: Strengthening Basic Science, Mathematics and Biochemistry at Tuskegee
              University," a broad range of activities will occur to enhance the success of
              students in, science mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET).
              Specifically, this central goal will be addressed through

1. - establishing
              a summer program for rising college sophomores who are highly motivated but
              have weak backgrounds in science and mathematics;

2 - strengthening of the
              first year college chemistry and mathematics courses, through tutorials and
              establishing a Math Lab;

3 - expanding and enhancing the biochemistry
              curriculum, 300- and 500-level, including an interdepartmental lecture lab on
              the "Biochemistry of Cell Regulation";

4 - developing partnerships with
              academic institutions having strong and multidisciplinary programs in
              Biochemistry, especially Georgia State University, Iowa State University, and
              Michigan State University;

5 - strengthening industrial partnerships through
              an external advisory board, with the goal to develop a source of scholarships
              for promising undergraduate students;

6 - establishing a resource
              center/classroom available for mentoring. activities, contacting Tuskegee
              graduates and others who are currently in graduate school, and generally
              solving problems which are not directly academic but are part of the student's
              future; and

7 - supporting a Ph.D. candidate in the life sciences area who
              will become among the first to graduate from Tuskegee University with the
              doctorate degree.

All these activities will be carefully monitored by
              working closely and often with the office at Tuskegee University designed for
              this purpose.

The summer program for college sophomores, CReATE (Chemistry
              and Research for the Advancement of Tuskegee-Educated Scientists), will
              involve, each.-summer, 20 science majors from the various SMET disciplines in a
              research-oriented approach to the teaching of General Chemistry and the
              opportunity to be involved in research on the Tuskegee campus.

The Math Lab
              will be designed to assist students in the basic college math courses as well
              as the three semesters of calculus offered at Tuskegee University. The Math Lab
              will be networked throughout campus and will maintain an interactive WEB
              site.

The 300-level biochemistry course will link students to the more
              advanced courses, while building on the chemistry and math backgrounds of the
              students.

The partnerships, academic and industrial, are essential to the
              development of the students and faculty. Additionally, the strong connections
              existing between Tuskegee University and the Alabama Alliance for Minority
              Participation (AAMP) will be integral to this effort. The NSF/CREST grant on
              the Tuskegee campus, which supports an initiative to assist in the development
              of the Ph.D. in Materials Science and Engineering, provides a setting for the
              involvement of CReATE students in research, as does the NSF supported
              initiative in high performance computing at Tuskegee University. Other non-NSF
              programs provide similar opportunities. The infusion of motivated, qualified
              students to these programs will provide a synergistic enhancement of the
              students and the programs.

