Title       : Dissertation Research: Prehispanic Urbanism and Community Expression in the
               Chicama Valley, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1999   
File        : a9908396

Award Number: 9908396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish stanish@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Stanish, Mr. Christopher Attarian will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. Archaeologists identify Peru as one
              of the hearths of civilization and although the Inca, because they were
              observed and conquered by the Spanish, are the best known example from this
              region, they were the last in a succession of complex Andean societies. The
              Moche first appear as a recognizable group ca. 2,000 years ago on the arid
              northern coast of Peru and archaeologists can trace their development into a
              complex urban society over the span of almost 1,000 years. The Moche peoples
              were associated with the construction of pyramids and other monumental
              architecture and developed a highly centralized form of government. The origins
              of Moche civilization however are poorly understood and this process forms the
              basis for Mr. Attarian's research. Prior work both by Mr. Attarian and other
              investigators indicates that in immediate pre-Moche times small groups lived in
              defensible positions on the edge of the Moche Valley. Their subsequent
              aggregation on the valley floor itself marks the start of the Moche tradition.
              The particular question which Mr. Attarian wishes to answer concerns the
              mechanisms which developed to integrate previously independent groups into a
              single cohesive urban unit. To address this question he will study ceramics and
              other remains from 6 pre-Moche villages and then compare these with materials
              recovered from Mocollope, an early Moche center. His preliminary work has shown
              that while ceramics styles from each of the precursor villages are similar and
              constitute part of a single tradition, individual villages had specific design
              elements which made their pottery unique. Mr. Attarian will conduct additional
              excavation at each of these villages to define individual styles more
              precisely. He will then collect surface ceramics from Mocollope and excavate in
              selected areas. With these data he should be able to determine whether these
              styles continue at Mocollope and are spatially segregated within the site - an
              indication of "barrios" and continued multi-ethnic groups - or whether they are
              replaced by a pan-city style. Through the use of ceramics and other material
              remains he will also examine the rise of social/wealth differentiation and how
              this interacts with ethnicity.

This research is important for several
              reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will
              increase understanding of the rise of complex societies and assist in training
              a promising young scientist.

