Title       : Nonlinear Stochastic Extreme MDOF Motions Analysis for Design of Ships and
               Floating Offshore Platforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9908241

Award Number: 9908241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Falzarano jmfna@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/280-7154

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              PI's Name, Institution Dr. Jeffrey M. Falzarano, University of New Orleans
              
Proposal Number (# 9908241)
Proposal Title Nonlinear Stochastic Extreme
              Multiple-Degrees of Freedom Motions Analysis for Design of Ships and Floating
              Offshore Platforms
Project Abstract 
This research project deals with the
              development of a dynamics based methodology to analyze very large amplitude
              ship/floating platform extreme motions in a realistic seaway. This technique
              focuses on determining the stable invariant manifolds which form the basin
              boundaries between the bounded (safe/non-capsize) and unbounded
              (unsafe/capsize) behavior of a given vessel in a realistic wave environment.
              The key to this methodology is a new dynamical perturbation technique which is
              currently being developed. This technique determines the time-varying solutions
              lying in the stable manifolds for general single degree of freedom
              ship/floating platform equations of motion which may include pseudo-random wave
              excitation. Another aspect of this project is the development of various
              decoupling which utilize nonlinear normal modes. These decoupling schemes yield
              the single degree of freedom equations of motion. Finally this approach will
              utilize the results of physical model tests or numerical time domain
              simulations in order to determine nonlinear and time-varying coefficients  in
              the Integro-differential equations of motion. The general frequency
              dependent/time-varying nonlinear coefficients are determined using a technique
              which being developed under a related project.  The proposed project builds
              upon the results of current, and previous deterministic investigations of
              vessel roll motion and platform tilt to consider realistic random environmental
              excitation, coupled dynamics and accurate physical modeling. This proposal will
              apply and refine recently developed techniques to analyze the global nonlinear
              dynamics of randomly forced systems, with nonlinear normal modes and reverse
              MI/SO nonlinear system identification. Random excitation, coupling and accurate
              physical modeling are areas which have not received adequate attention in
              previous transient global nonlinear dynamics studies. In this project, a number
              of techniques which are currently being developed, refined, extended and
              applied in order to improve the analysis methodology and evaluate the
              importance of various exact modeling and the possibility of simplified modeling
              schemes.


