Title       : Workshop: 1999 SIGART/AAAI Doctoral Consortium, Orlando, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9908433

Award Number: 9908433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janyce M. Wiebe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The 4th AAAI Doctoral Consortium, to be held as a workshop on July 18-19, 1999,
              immediately preceding the AAAI-99 conference in Orlando, Florida, will provide
              a unique opportunity for a group of PhD students to discuss and explore their
              research interests and career objectives together with a panel of established
              researchers.  The consortium has the following objectives:

               *
              To provide a setting for mutual feedback on participants' current research,
              and
		guidance on future research directions
               * To develop a
              supportive community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative
		research
   
                         * To support a new generation of researchers with information and
              advice on
		academic, research, industrial, and non-traditional career paths

                            * To contribute to the conference goals through interaction with
              other researchers
		and participation in conference events.

The Doctoral
              Consortium will be held concurrently with other workshops preceding the AAAI'99
              conference.   It is expected that it will attract a diverse group of student
              participants who reflect a wide range of topic areas and methodologies within
              artificial intelligence, and who have settled on their thesis directions but
              who still have significant research left to do.  Selection will be based on
              clarity and completeness of the submission packet, stage of research, advisor's
              letter, and other evidence of promise such as published papers or technical
              reports. Participants' thesis summaries will be published in the AAAI-99
              conference proceedings.  NSF funds will be used to provide student participants
              with a travel reimbursement of $750.  Participants will also receive
              complimentary conference registration.   The organizing committee for the
              workshop consists of: Janyce M. Wiebe, Chair, New Mexico State University; Mary
              P. Harper, Purdue University; Evangelos E. Milios, Dalhousie University; Vibhu
              O. Mittal, Just Research and Carnegie Mellon University; Leora Morgenstern, IBM
              T.J. Watson Research; and Loren Terveen, AT&T Labs.   Panelists will include:
              Bonnie Holte Bennett , University of St. Thomas;  Claire Cardie, Cornell
              University;  Russell Greiner, University of Alberta,  Mary P. Harper, Purdue
              University;  Evangelos E. Milios, Dalhousie University; Raymond J. Mooney,
              University of Texas at Austin;  Leora Morgenstern, IBM T.J. Watson Research;
              and Nils J. Nilsson, Stanford University.

