Title       : Directions and Priorities in Low Temperature Geochemistry for Year 2000 and the
               Decade Beyond
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9908454

Award Number: 9908454
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23408              (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Crawford Elliott wcelliott@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ga State U Res Fdn, Inc.
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  30303    404/651-4350

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Financial support is requested from the National Science Foundation (NSF) to
              convene a workshop for researchers in the area of low-temperature geochemistry,
              and the goal of this workshop will be to develop, prioritize, and recommend
              research directions and opportunities in the area of low temperature
              geochemistry to be funded by NSF in the coming decade. The directions and
              priorities derived from this workshop will be reported to the Board of Earth
              Science Resources (BESR), National Resource Council of the National Academy of
              Sciences.  As detailed in Letter to Colleagues from NSF (NSF Geosciences Beyond
              2000:  A Window on the First Decade), the maintenance of a habitable Earth in
              context to increasing demand for Earth'' resources (air, water, soil, metals
              and non-metals) is a pressing societal concern.  The improved understanding of
              the lithosphere, hydrosphere, atmosphere and interconnection of the
              lithosphere, hydrosphere and atmosphere (the Earth System) by geochemical
              cycles are first-order scientific problems.  Research addressing the
              interconnections within the Earth System and Man's impact on Earth may also
              require a fresh approach(es) in terms of new research directions to be pursued
              compared to the present ongoing research directions.  The anticipated outcomes
              from this workshop will be a report documenting research directions and
              priorities submitted to BESR and, in addition to research directions and
              priorities, this report will also comment on the need for the development (or
              on the development itself) of useful and appropriate geochemically based topics
              to be included in undergraduate and graduate geoscience curricula.
