Title       : Scalable Supply Chain Infrastructures: Models and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9908137

Award Number: 9908137
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $945239             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael O. Ball mball@rhsmith.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandor Boyson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louiqa Raschid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vallabhajosyu Sambamurthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,9148,9216,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This research addresses a number of challenges related to the full
              realization of the potential of supply chain infrastructures(SCIs), which
              include those software systems used to support enterprise requirements planning
              (ERP) and supply chain management (SCM).  A software testbed, which initially
              will include an SCM component, an ERP component and a middleware component,
              will be constructed.  The research will employ techniques from operations
              research, computer science and empirical information systems.   Integer
              programming based resource allocation models will be developed and embedded
              within a simulation.  The simulation will be used in conjunction with two
              empirical studies of organizational decision making to explore the
              relationships between SCIs and organization structure.  Research on the
              development of mechanisms for effective query processing in web-like settings
              will be pursued with the goal of improving efficient SCI implementation in
              large organizations.  ERP and SCM systems are achieving significant levels of
              deployment throughout the world.  The research undertaken here is aimed at
              improving the efficiency of
these systems and their effectiveness in enhancing
              organizational performance.
     Practical contributions are anticipated in
              the following areas:  improvements in the understanding
of how information
              technology impacts organizations and the how organizations should adapt to take
              advantage of new SCI technology;  the development of decision models that both
              explain how supply chain decision making should take place in organizations and
              provide new techniques for supply chain decision support; new methods for
              efficiently implementing scalable web-based applications.


