Title       : PGE/SEP: MASTER IT: Mathematics And Science To Explore caReers - Investigating
               Together
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a9908757

Award Number: 9908757
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97687              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin Harrell harrellm@emporia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth G. Yanik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emporia State University
	      1200 Commercial Street
	      Emporia, KS  668015087    620/343-1200

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   MASTER IT is a collaboratively-planned program targeted at rural young
              women in the state of Kansas who have completed grades 7 and 8.  Each year 48
              young women, 24 rising eighth and 24 rising ninth graders, are selected to
              participate in MASTER IT.  The objectives of this program are to:   1) make
              rural young women aware of applications of science and mathematics used in
              everyday functions, as well as in a variety of work places; 2) provide them
              with professional female role models in careers that are nontraditional to
              females; 3) strengthen their self esteem and confidence in doing mathematics
              and science; 4) show them the importance of continuing to take advanced
              mathematics and science classes in high school; and 5) set up a support network
              among peers and professionals.
     These efforts have been collaboratively
              designed by Emporia State University faculty and representatives from private
              and public institutions that serve Kansas residents.  MASTER IT is a year-long
              program that consists of a one-week summer residential program followed by four
              Saturday activities throughout the school year.  Activities during the summer
              component and at the Saturday meetings include hands-on investigations of
              mathematical and scientific concepts led by university women faculty and women
              professionals in industry, career discussions, field trips to corporate
              partners, and assertiveness and self esteem training.  Furthermore, a listserv
              is used to maintain ongoing dialogue among the project staff, women
              professionals in industry, and the young women participants.
     An
              anticipated outcome of the project is the increased participation of young
              rural women in advanced science and mathematics high school courses.  As a
              result of increased mathematical and scientific knowledge, the networking with
              successful professional women, and an increase in self-confidence, a second
              projected outcome is that these young women will seek careers that are
              traditionally held by males, such as engineering, computer science, and
              physics.
     Not only does MASTER IT provide a resource to keep young women
              in the mathematics and science pipeline, it provides other comprehensive
              universities or community organizations in rural settings, where corporate
              partners may not be in their immediate vicinity, with a framework to develop
              programs for young women.

