Title       : Thin-Film Femtosecond Thermoreflectance Analysis for Sensor Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a9908372

Award Number: 9908372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161161             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela M. Norris pmn3d@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This award is to support the further development of non-contact methods for
              the thermal characterization of thin films and the exploration of the utility
              of this information in sensing critical microstructural properties such as:
              thermal diffusivity, grain boundary impedance of electron mobility, thermal
              boundary resistance, electron phonon energy coupling, acoustic velocity, and
              thickness.  This will be done utilizing a femtosecond pump/probe
              thermoreflectance technique.  This thin film characterization method relies on
              the fact that the reflectivity of certain materials is a function of both
              temperature and strain, and by monitoring the reflective response to the
              deposition of radiation by an ultrashort laser pulse, the thermal and
              mechanical properties can be extrapolated simultaneously.  To compliment the
              empirical approach, several advancements have been made toward a strong
              theoretical understanding of nonequilibrium heating and the effects on the
              optical properties of metals and semiconductors and further goals have been set
              towards making computational processes more efficient.

This research
              promises to impact the manufacturing of high-tech materials and devices of
              national importance, such as opto-electronics, photo-voltaics, and
              micro-electronics.  The theories and techniques developed with this program
              will form the basis for the development of new nondestructive sensor
              technologies for process monitoring and control.  The proposed work provides an
              excellent educational environment, by setting goals based in fundamental
              science with a strong potential impact on industry and by fostering
              interdisciplinary research teams.  The lab will continue its tradition of
              uniting students from different backgrounds and experiences into a supportive
              group research environment.

