Title       : PGE/SEP: Pilot Development and Testing of an Anthropomorphic Multimedia Theater
               for Fundamental Engineering Problem Solving for Pre-College Female Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1999 
File        : a9908753

Award Number: 9908753
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99966              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xueshu Song song@ceet.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kristin Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This project will develop and test pilot instructional software on CD-ROM
              and the Internet for female precollege students to foster the comprehension and
              appreciation of the intrinsic beauty and excitement of engineering as a human
              endeavor.  Six pilot modules will be developed, each covering a typical problem
              in engineering economy, fluid mechanics' system, rigid-body mechanics, circuit
              analysis, mechanics of materials, and thermodynamics.  Anthropomorphized
              machine parts and engineering formulas will interact with each other, guided by
              some of the world's greatest scientists.  Without advanced math and science
              prerequisites, students will learn about the recursive nature and the
              methodological uniformities in system identification, pattern analysis and
              synthesis, simultaneous conditions, engineering approximation, and the
              "teamwork" of these general methods in pursuing a high learning efficiency in
              fundamental engineering problem-solving.  Precollege teachers and counselors,
              recruited from northern Illinois, southern Wisconsin, eastern Iowa, and
              northern Indiana, will be trained to use the pilot modules and to develop
              similar modules in two teacher and counselor workshops.  Sixty female and sixty
              male precollege students will participate in a field test that will focus on
              the pedagogical effects of the multimedia series, recruited through the
              Rockford Public School District.  Pre- and post-tests will evaluate students'
              learning about fundamental engineering problem-solving and their general
              attitudes toward math, science, and engineering.  A comprehensive, independent
              evaluation will be conducted prior to national dissemination by an external
              evaluator.
