Title       : Comprehensive Redesign of Industrial Facilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a9908322

Award Number: 9908322
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan A. Norman banorman@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice E. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   Facility design has a profound effect on the efficiency, flexibility and
              economic success of an organization over a long time period.  The problem of
              facility design is well known, however it has almost always been studied as the
              "greenfield" design problem, that is, the design of a wholly new facility. This
              project, however, focuses on redesign of existing facilities.  Redesign is
              important because facilities typically have long
lifetimes and operational
              requirements change over time.  In redesign there are constraints to be
              considered that were not relevant, or were less important, in the initial
              design.  This research will develop a
comprehensive, integrated framework that
              explicitly focuses on redesign and while considering production uncertainty. 
              Block design of the location of departments or work centers is integrated with
              the detailed design of aisle structure, material handling system, machine
              placement and input/output locations.   Another objective is to improve the
              design optimization objective function by matching the choice of flowpath
              distance metric with the type of material handling system and explicitly
              considering uncertainty of product forecasts and production methods.  The
              notions of robustness to uncertainty and flexibility for future changes will be
              incorporated into the usual cost objectives.
     The results this research
              will lead to improved facilities designs for both manufacturing and service
              operations. Direct benefits will include higher productivity, reduced costs,
              and enhanced customer service. To ensure industrial relevance and to enhance
              technology transfer, this research will involve working with a  manufacturer
              with very diverse production environments to provide actual redesign problem
              data, to evaluate the methodologies and software developed, and to provide an
              industrial experience for students.  Dissemination of this research will be
              conducted through the College Industry Council on Material Handling Education
              (CIC-MHE) of the Material Handling Industry of America, along with the usual
              channels of conferences, web sites and refereed publications.  By using the
              CIC-MHE conduit, results should reach a wide audience of practitioners,
              educators and researchers in a timely manner.

