Title       : The Solar Radiation Environment of Sites at High Southern Latitudes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a9908872

Award Number: 9908872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213464             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Frederick frederic@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Biological processes at high latitudes of the Southern Hemisphere are closely
              coupled to the availability of sunlight. Solar radiation in the visible
              wavelengths provides the energy for photosynthesis while the ultraviolet (UV)
              radiation can act as an inhibitor, although the magnitude of the effects are
              subject to debate. Over the past decade, attention has focused on high southern
              latitudes due to the large decline in springtime atmospheric ozone levels and
              the accompanying increases in solar UV irradiance. This research project will
              address the major factors which lead to variability in the UV and visible
              radiation environment at high southern latitudes using a combination of data
              analysis and numerical modeling. The project will utilize long-term,
              ground-based measurements of solar UV radiation and visible irradiance from the
              NSF Polar UV Radiation network, with sites located at McMurdo, Palmer and South
              Pole Stations, Antarctica and Ushuaia, Argentina. The earliest of these data
              sets began in 1988 and data collection has continued without major interruption
              since. The compilation will include monthly-integrated irradiances, information
              of short-term variability within a month, and trends over the duration of the
              data sets. The reported irradiances will be based on several biological
              weighting functions as well as selected discrete wavelengths in the ultraviolet
              and visible. Scientific topics to be addressed include the frequency of
              occurrence of unusually large UV irradiances and the change in this frequency
              over the duration of the data sets, the relative contributions of changes in
              ozone and changes in cloudiness to interannual variability in the UV radiation
              environment and the wavelength dependence of the attenuation associated with
              cloudy skies. Not only will the analyses have value to those in the atmospheric
              sciences community, the data will be summarized in a form valuable to
              biologists and ecologists studying the effects of UV radiation on biological
              processes.


