Title       : CAREER: Development of Bio-MEMS for determining cell structure using
               microfluidics and bio impedance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0239262

Award Number: 0239262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shekhar Bhansali Bhansali@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research objectives of this proposal are: (a) Development of novel MEMS
              sensors and techniques to reliably and repeatedly image individual
              cells/organisms using bio-impedance measurements, (b) Integration of
              microfluidic sensors into flow-through system to develop a generic
              identification technique and (c) Understand and analyze the challenges in
              signal processing enabling differential detection. Research outcomes of this
              proposal would facilitate the fundamental understanding and optimizing of the
              science and technology of bio-impedance at a micro scale. The research will
              establish the fundamental science required to enable the development of a
              single generic sensor that would be capable to identify cells based on their
              bio-impedance maps.

Intellectual Merit: Proposed research integrates
              developments in two research areas (bio-impedance and microfluidics) in a novel
              approach that will advance the knowledge and understanding in diverse fields,
              from instrumentation to detection. The research will provide a basis for
              quantitative diagnosis in diverse environments. This is a major advance across
              fields. The research team comprises of experts in different areas
              (microfabrication, microfluidics and systems development -PI, tissue
              engineering and clinical testing-collaborators) and is uniquely positioned to
              accomplish the task.

Broader Impact: This research will train students in
              emerging cross-disciplinary areas (microfabrication, electronics, biology and
              tissue engineering). The research has participation of underrepresented groups
              (minority, women) and fosters partnerships at a global scale through
              collaboration and exchange. The results of the research will be widely
              disseminated through inclusion in courses and modules developed by PI,
              demonstrations and outreach.

