Title       : CAREER: Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Unconventional Phase Transitions
               in Materials with Strong Interactions or Fluctuations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0239377

Award Number: 0239377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Young S. Lee younglee@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project at the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology is to investigate the unconventional
              electronic and magnetic phases found in strongly correlated electron materials.
               Quantum effects play a central role in the many-body states, and
              unconventional phases may result (such as high-Tc superconductivity and
              disordered spin-liquids).  This project will involve the synthesis of important
              materials, including copper-oxide superconductors and geometrically frustrated
              magnets, in clean, single-crystalline form.  Neutron and x-ray scattering
              experiments will be performed at the national scattering facilities to provide
              unique information regarding nanoscale inhomogeneities and fluctuations of the
              charge, spin, and lattice degrees of freedom of the low-temperature phases.
              These measurements should help identify the relevant competing order parameters
              in these highly correlated systems, a topic of much current debate.  The
              ultimate goal is to understand the basic structure of the many-body ground
              states, as well as create new materials that exhibit new phenomena.  This
              project will naturally train future scientists to fully utilize the nation's
              investment in neutron and synchrotron x-ray scattering facilities.  At MIT, a
              course will be taught to materials researchers on cutting-edge scattering
              techniques.  Also, new visualization tools will be created to aid the teaching
              of quantum mechanics to undergraduates, and these will be used in outreach
              programs to local high-school students.

Our understanding of the electronic
              behavior of materials is deficient.  Current theory cannot describe the
              properties of systems composed of many quantum particles (such as electrons)
              that strongly interact with each other.  Technologically useful properties may
              emerge within these systems, such as high temperature superconductivity and
              colossal magnetoresistance; however, the mechanisms that lead to these
              properties are not understood.  The goal of this Faculty Early Career
              Development (CAREER) project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is to
              investigate the unconventional electronic and magnetic phases found in strongly
              interacting electron materials.  This project will involve the synthesis of new
              materials, as well as studying them with scattering techniques.  Neutrons and
              x-rays can scatter from the spin and charge of an electron, and thus can
              provide unique information regarding the collective behavior of the electrons
              in these systems.  The ultimate goal is to understand the basic physics behind
              the emergent many-body phenomena, as well as discover new phenomena.  This
              project will naturally train future scientists to fully utilize the nation's
              investment in large scattering facilities.  At MIT, a course will be taught to
              materials researchers on cutting-edge scattering techniques.  Also, new
              visualization tools will be created to aid the teaching of quantum mechanics to
              undergraduates, and these will be used in outreach programs to local
              high-school students.

