Title       : CAREER: Systems of Conservation Laws and Related Models in Applied Sciences -
               Math Awareness and Outreach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0239063

Award Number: 0239063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482132             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantina Trivisa trivisa@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0239063
Mathematical Sciences: CAREER: Systems of
              Conservation Laws and Related
Models in Applied Sciences - Math Awareness and
              Outreach

Abstract

0239063 Trivisa


The research program of the
              investigator lies on the interface between continuum physics and applied
              partial differential equations, with emphasis on nonlinear systems of
              conservation laws. These quasilinear systems in divergence form govern a broad
              spectrum of physical phenomena in compressible fluid dynamics, nonlinear
              materials science, particle physics, semiconductors, combustion, multi-phase
              flows, astrophysics, and other applied areas.

In recent years, major
              progress has been made in both the theoretical and the numerical aspects of
              this field. The main objective of this investigation is to build a bridge
              between the most recent developments in the general mathematical theory and
              significant areas of application that have developed in the last few years. The
              main focus of this program will be given to significant and, until recently,
              unexplored areas of research, including: hyperbolic systems of conservation
              laws with large initial data; multi-dimensional systems in nonlinear
              elasticity, fluid dynamics, and combustion theory; vanishing viscosity
              solutions to models of compressible flows; stability of boundary layers for
              realistic models of compressible fluids; and analysis of numerical schemes for
              hyperbolic conservation laws.

Advances in this interdisciplinary research
              will rely substantially on the development of new analytical techniques in
              nonlinear partial differential equations. Analytical and numerical methods in
              this field have developed together; analytical understanding contributes to the
              construction of accurate and efficient numerical schemes, while numerical
              experiments often lead the theoretical analysis. Progress in this research
              program will contribute (a) to the successful investigation of a wide variety
              of important physical systems modeled by conservation laws and (b) to the
              design of high performance computational algorithms.

The investigator
              integrates into her work educational activities that demonstrate the importance
              of applied mathematics in a broad spectrum of sciences. Special emphasis is
              given to applications in materials sciences, biology, finance, and cutting edge
              technologies. The planned educational activities include programs for high
              school students, undergraduates, and graduate students. The investigator works
              to increase the diversity in the mathematical sciences by encouraging
              under-represented groups to study applied mathematics and choose it as a
              career.

