Title       : CAREER: Neutron, Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction and Instrumented Indentation
               Studies of Deformation in Shape-Memory Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  2002  
File        : a0239512

Award Number: 0239512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rajan Vaidyanathan raj@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Shape-memory alloys are of theoretical and commercial interest for the
              deformation phenomena they exhibit - twinning and stress-induced or
              temperature-induced phase transformations. The proposed program uses neutron
              diffraction, synchrotron X-ray diffraction and instrumented indentation to
              investigate deformation in shape-memory alloys. The emphasis is on in situ
              diffraction measurements, i.e., simultaneously recording diffraction spectra
              from samples that are subjected to external stresses or temperature changes, or
              a combination thereof. Such measurements provide quantitative information of
              the evolving internal strains, texture and phase volume fractions during
              twinning and stress-induced or temperature-induced phase transformations. The
              experiments will utilize the neutron beam at Los Alamos National Laboratory and
              the synchrotron X-ray beam at Argonne National Laboratory. Consistent with the
              theme of investigating deformation in shape-memory alloys and with the
              objective of obtaining mechanical properties from small sampling volumes of
              shape-memory alloys, instrumented indentation experiments will be performed on
              shape-memory alloys to correlate load-depth data from indentation experiments
              with macroscopic stress-strain data from conventional tests.

The program is
              expected to further the understanding of (a) shape-memory alloys for actuator
              applications and for biomedical applications, as shape-memory alloys continue
              to make inroads as the material of choice for stents, and (b) neutron
              diffraction, synchrotron X-ray diffraction and instrumented micro- and
              nanoindentation as valuable tools for mechanical characterization of internal
              stresses in emerging materials, bulk, coatings, thin-films, line and dot forms.
              The educational activities include curriculum development, instruction and
              laboratory development providing experience and training for students using
              facilities at National Laboratories. Outreach and mentoring activities include
              collaboration with a local science center and the Minority Engineering and
              Computer Science Office at UCF, engineering education in the work place through
              distance education in the Florida Engineering Education Delivery System (FEEDS)
              and the development of industry short-courses.

