Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Sensory Ecology of an Animal Communication Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0239164

Award Number: 0239164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342971             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Uetz GEORGE.UETZ@UC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jefferson Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              "COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Sensory Ecology of an Animal Communication Network"
              (IBN 0239164/0238854)

George W. Uetz, J. Andrew Roberts, University of
              Cincinnati  
David L. Clark, Alma College


Animal communication is often
              multi-modal, as production and detection of signals may involve several sensory
              modes.   Conspicuous, multi-modal signals may be intercepted by receivers that
              are intended (potential mates) or unintended (eavesdropping competitors and
              predators) and the evolution of signaling behavior is subject to trade-offs
              between conflicting selection pressures.  This research will use field
              observation, environmental measurement and laboratory experimentation to
              examine how eavesdropping competitors and predators intercept and exploit the
              courtship signals of spiders.  Studies will examine how visual and vibratory
              signals of male wolf spiders are influenced by the complex forest floor
              environment and transmitted within a "communication network" of potential
              receivers.  The "active space", or transmission range of multi-modal signals
              will be measured in the field with computer-assisted illuminance
              spectrophotometry and laser doppler vibration recording. Sensory cue isolation
              and video/audio playback experiments will determine how multiple modes of
              communication influence signal detection by other spiders, as well as
              vertebrate and invertebrate predators.  Taken together, results of field and
              laboratory studies will allow a better understanding of animal communication in
              a complex environment. Collaboration between researchers from a university and
              a liberal arts college will promote teaching, training and learning through
              post-doctoral training, involvement of undergraduate students from both
              institutions in the research, and a research and education partnership with the
              environmental education center where field research is done.



