Title       : CAREER: Understanding Sunlight-mediated Inactivation of Pathogens in Water - An
               Integrated Resarch and Education Career Development Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0239144

Award Number: 0239144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kara L. Nelson nelson@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0239144   Nelson   The research described in this proposal aims to measure the
              rates of inactivation of a range of bacterial and viral waterborne pathogens
              and indicator organisms due to each of these sunlight-mediated mechanisms under
              laboratory and field conditions, and to use the information to develop models
              of pathogen inactivation in surface waters. A series of controlled laboratory
              experiments is proposed in which a rigorous scientific approach is applied to
              identify, characterize, and quantify the individual and combined inactivation
              caused by the three inactivation mechanisms.  In particular, a focus of the
              research is to quantify damage to organisms by exogenous photo-oxidation, and
              to define the conditions under which this mechanism is important in aquatic
              environments.  Ultimately, the goal of this research is to improve our ability
              to protect public health in the industrialized and developing world. A
              quantitative understanding of the persistence of pathogens in surface waters,
              such as drinking water sources and recreational waters, will be useful for
              reevaluating water quality standards, optimizing monitoring programs, and
              interpreting microbiological water quality data. In particular, pathogens
              resistant to sunlight inactivation and appropriate indicator organisms for a
              range of aquatic environments will be identified. The results will also allow
              the design of better treatment processes to reduce the discharge of pathogens
              to the environment, as many engineered processes rely on natural mechanisms for
              pathogen inactivation (e.g., wastewater stabilization ponds, constructed
              wetlands). Finally, the results will be useful for understanding the
              epidemiology of waterborne disease; in particular, the inactivation rates can
              be used as input to quantitative risk analysis models.
The proposed research
              and educational plan will encourage and support the participation of young
              scientists and engineers in international research and education, especially in
              developing countries, through developing long-term research and educational
              opportunities and collaborations with universities in developing countries,
              networking with public and private organizations that employ environmental
              engineers to work in developing countries, and incorporating topics relevant to
              engineering in developing countries into existing undergraduate and graduate
              courses.

