Title       : CAREER: Selective Patterning and Transport of Functionalized Inorganic
               Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0239702

Award Number: 0239702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2012    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Williams mbw@chem.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,7202,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Professor Mary Beth Williams of the Pennsylvania State
              University, supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program, focuses
              on the selective patterning of surfaces with nanoparticles by controlled
              transport and deposition.  At the smallest scales, functionalized magnetic
              nanoparticles and semiconductor nanocrystals will be prepared and attached to
              surfaces using ligand exchange strategies.  The particles will have
              synthetically adjustable magnetic and luminescent properties.  The magnetic
              nanoparticles will be used to produce ultrahigh density magnetic arrays and
              enable the interrogation of the magnetic properties of individual nanoparticles
              via magnetic force microscopy imaging.  The transport of freely diffusing,
              chemically functional magnetic nanoparticles in solution will be controlled by
              applied magnetic field gradients, making possible the directed transport of
              nanoparticles for the delivery of recovery of target analytes.  Also,
              nanoparticles will be selectively attached to biomolecular motor proteins that,
              upon hydrolysis of ATP and alignment with magnetic field gradients, will
              further enable selective and rapid particle motion.  The long-term applications
              include drug delivery, environmental remediation, and electronic devices.  The
              range of applications is broadened with the independent control of particle
              magnetism and particle surface chemistry.  
 
Outreach activities include
              mentoring at the undergraduate and high school level.  The laboratory research
              activities are wide-ranging, encompassing a range of laboratory techniques and
              including oral and written presentations and attendance at meetings.  For the
              young scientist, a gap in the accessible scientific literature is noted; as
              yet, there is only a single publication on nanoparticles in the Journal of
              Chemical Education.  Thus, a subproject on nanoparticle synthesis and
              characterization will be undertaken, leading to a literature appropriate for
              the young science student.

