Title       : CAREER: Statics and Dynamics of Singularities In Some Models From Material
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0239121

Award Number: 0239121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvia Serfaty serfaty@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Sylvia Serfaty, New York University
DMS-0239121

This project, in the
              field of analysis and PDEs, is concerned with the analysis of statics and
              dynamics of singularities in some models from physics/material science. We have
              been and will continue to be particularly interested in two specific models:
              the Ginzburg-Landau model of superconductivity, and micromagnetics. In the area
              of micromagnetics, we studied previously some simplified two-dimensional model
              in the asymptotic regime corresponding to sharp "domain-wall" transitions. We
              established some optimal energy estimates, and exhibited optimal patterns for
              the transition profile, which fit very well with the "cross-tie wall"
              observations, and gave a first example of a non one-dimensional optimal profile
              in a vector-valued phase-transition problem. We intend to pursue this analysis
              towards more physically relevant models. In the area of the Ginzburg-Landau
              model, we previously focused on understanding the apparition, structure, and
              location, of vortices. We established a Gamma-convergence result deriving a
              limiting free-boundary problem, and proved convergence to some limiting
              vortex-densities, which we characterized, for minimizers as well as critical
              points. The project is to pursue further the analysis in the regime of
              high-applied fields, and turn towards the study of the associated dynamical
              models. We hope to establish the limiting dynamical laws obeyed by the
              vortices, first for a finite number of them, then for an infinite number of
              them, via some new estimates and an energetic approach to gradient-flow. Beyond
              that, we will be interested in understanding better the convergence of gradient
              flows for general Gamma-converging energies.

This project, in the field of
              analysis and PDEs, is concerned with the analysis of statics and dynamics in
              some models from physics, in particular the Ginzburg-Landau model of
              superconductivity and microagnetics. In both cases the focus is on
              understanding, via rigorous mathematical proofs, the qualitative behavior of
              solutions to such models, and in particular explain the structure and the
              dynamics of singularities arising in some asymptotic regimes.

The purpose of
              such research is thus two-fold. First to shed light on the understanding of the
              specific physical problems themselves: by obtaining asymptotic expansions and
              explicit formulas, one can explain physical experiments, confirm or disprove
              the validity of models, and by rigorous
analysis one can one also derive
              reduced simplified models (for example reducing the dimension) that are easier
              to work and compute/simulate with. The second purpose is more mathematical. As
              mentioned, the underlying philosophy is to manage to reduce the original
              asymptotic problems to simpler limiting problems (of lower dimension) on which
              the core phenomena (here singularities) can be tracked down. This is the main
              philosophy of ``Gamma-convergence''. In order to perform such analysis, one
              needs to develop appropriate mathematical tools and provide the right settings
              to understand the phenomena. One also wishes to understand how much of the
              behavior is particular, and how much can be extended and understood as a more
              general mathematical phenomenon, with the hope that what is understood for one
              specific model may in turn help to understand others. 

