Title       : CAREER: Fabrication and Optical Properties of Novel Self-Assembled Photonic
               Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0239273

Award Number: 0239273
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $576540             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam Deutsch miriamd@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project combines interdisciplinary research and education in optical
              and materials science focusing on photonic crystals. Research emphasis is on
              the fabrication of new functional materials--self-assembled photonic crystals
              (PCs), and exploration of their optical response with emphasis on
              metallo-dielectric photonic crystals (MDPCs) and polymeric PCs. New methods are
              proposed for the fabrication of three-dimensional MDPCs exploiting
              self-assembly of metallo-dielectric colloidal spheres. The primary goal of the
              research is to achieve a better understanding of light-matter interactions in
              photonic crystals, and to harness these effects to a variety of chal-lenging
              applications. In the linear regime, enhanced light transmission is predicted in
              MDPCs, compared to bulk metals, due to efficient coupling of the
              electromagnetic field into surface plas-mon-polaritons. While nonlinear
              properties of most bulk materials in the optical region are well understood,
              detailed studies of their manifestations in highly patterned structures are
              only begin-ning to emerge. Nonlinear PCs are predicted to exhibit enhanced
              nonlinear response, making them candidates for all-optical switching and
              frequency conversion applications. In addition to comparison with theoretical
              predictions and exploring new physical systems, these materials of-fer
              prospects for developing novel photonic devices. The approach includes three
              main objec-tives: 1) Adapting colloidal self-assembly and chemical synthesis
              techniques to fabricate novel three-dimensional PCs. 2) Detailed study of the
              optical properties - both linear and nonlinear of the composite materials. 3)
              Implementation of PCs in nonlinear optical devices, as a basis for fu-ture
              photonics technologies. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental materials
              science research issues having technological rele-vance. An important feature
              of the project is the strong emphasis on education, and the integra-tion of
              research and education. The education plan addresses four main objectives that
              mesh with the research, and are aimed at enhancing learning experiences in
              physics at the undergraduate and high school level. At the undergraduate level
              the aim is to expand avenues for learning, both by integrating key scientific
              journal publications in classroom teaching, and by offering undergraduate
              students working opportunities in the research group. At the graduate level the
              program ad-dresses the development of an Applied Physics program with emphasis
              in photonics. The research program offers graduate students opportunities for
              comprehensive research, to expand their skills as students and scientists while
              working towards their doctoral degree. Through mentoring of younger students,
              graduate students will also develop valuable leadership, teaching and
              collaborative skills. An educational outreach program includes a hands-on
              summer program in physics, aimed at able and eager high school students. The
              main emphasis of the educational program is on exposing students of all levels
              to research and scientific disciplines with a  central goal to actively involve
              an increasing number of students in physical sciences.
*** 

