Title       : CAREER: Microbial-Based Engineering Approaches for Prevention and Treatment of
               Acid Mine Drainage: An Integrated Research and Education Plan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0239314

Award Number: 0239314
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Marchand marchand@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    775/784-4805

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1440,9150,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0239314   Marchand   The research described in this proposal aims to study
              methods for minimizing acid formation in situ by stimulating heterotrophic
              microbial growth.  It is hypothesized that if given the appropriate conditions
              (namely, a degradable organic carbon source), heterotrophic bacteria will be
              able to out-compete the iron-oxidizing microbes responsible for catalyzing
              acid-forming reactions at acid mine drainage (AMD) sites.
This is an area that
              has not achieved much attention and has the potential to be utilized as both a
              remediation and prevention technique. The proposed research will provide
              fundamental understanding of microbial community structure in a model extreme
              environment; however, results may be transferable to community dynamics in
              other extreme environments that are subject to similar constraints.
This
              investigation will experimentally evaluate the influence of supplemental
              organic carbon substrate addition on mineral oxidation in fractured or
              biofilm-based systems. The specific objectives of the research are:
1.
              Identify the influence of enhanced heterotrophic microbial growth on mineral
              oxidation by acidophilic microbes in laboratory systems with a high surface
              area to volume ratio.
2. Establish the mechanism(s) involved in
              heterotroph-induced prevention of acid generation and determine the appropriate
              conditions to enhance heterotroph-induced prevention of acid generation in
              biofilm-dominated systems.
3. Identify the relative influence of microbial
              iron and sulfate reduction in acidic environments for bioremediation of acid
              mine drainage.
4. Assess the influence of organic carbon substrate addition on
              acid generation at a well-characterized AMD site.
The long term and broader
              scientific and engineering impacts of the proposed research involves the
              development of new methods for both prevention and mitigation of acidic
              drainage. While current applications focus on treatment of acidic,
              metal-containing water streams - typically utilizing chemical precipitation -
              the proposed research will attempt to prevent acid formation in situ before
              treatment is required. While a primary goal of the proposed research is to
              prevent acid generation from occurring in the first place efforts will also be
              made to identify the efficacy of achieving in situ iron and sulfate reduction,
              particularly in low temperature environments.
Scientific outreach activities
              associated with this project will include participation of the PI in regional
              public meetings aimed at educating the public about issues associated with acid
              mine drainage.  The PI has already developed a working relationship with
              regulators and water quality scientists at the California Regional Water
              Quality Control Board - Lahonton Region and will work with these individuals to
              disseminate experimental results.
The broader education-based implications of
              this research involve the development of interactive experiments for
              incorporation into the Mobile Engineering Education Laboratory (ME 2 L). Funds
              are requested to support undergraduate students while they design and build
              interactive displays for the mobile lab. In addition to their utility for the
              ME 2 L program, these demonstrations will also be incorporated into Engineering
              Day and the Science Day programs at UNR, two programs aimed at getting High
              School students to think seriously about careers in science and engineering. In
              addition to these outreach-based education goals, the PI has also proposed to
              develop an undergraduate and graduate coursework series in environmental
              engineering that introduces fundamental and applied aspects of environmental
              microbiology in an engineering curriculum.

