Title       : CAREER: Integrated All-Optical WDM Devices Using Photonic Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0239355

Award Number: 0239355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Adibi adibi@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239355
Adibi

The  ever-increasing  need  for  reliable  high-speed 
              information  access  is  a  global  need  in  today's  world.  Many people's
              lives would be improved by easy and fast access of information through the
              internet. Providing low-cost and fast information access for more people all
              over the world has great global impact on education and quality of life 
              through  programs  like  distant  learning. The most  promising  technology 
              for  achieving  this goal  is wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) in optical
              communications. Most fiber optic systems deployed today are constructed from 
              rather  large  discrete  components,  requiring many  fiber-coupling 
              connections  that  are  inherently  expensive, large and introduce losses. So
              far, it has been difficult to miniaturize devices for coupling, sorting, and
              multiplexing of light. It is expected that integrated chip-scale WDM devices
              can provide lower weight, more reliability, smaller size and less sensitivity
              to electromagnetic interference. It further eliminates the need for
              labor-intensive alignment of discrete optical devices. To implement integrated
              chip-scale WDM modules, there is an urgent need to integrate discrete devices
              into a unified platform. In this research the PI seeks to use photonic crystals
              (PCs) as such a platform. The  possibility  of  completely  designing 
              electromagnetic  modes  in  photonic  crystals  devices  makes  them  the
              excellent  candidates  for  designing  integrated WDM devices.  Furthermore, 
              the  existence  of  the  photonic  bandgap eliminates  long  tails  of 
              evanescent  fields  that  usually  cause  crosstalk  between  WDM  channels  in
               normal  slab waveguides. 
 
In this proposal he uses PC waveguides, PC
              cavities, and PC superprisms  to perform the three major functionalities
              requires  in  WDM,  i.e.,  guiding,  filtering,  and 
              multiplexing/demultiplexing.  Currently  these  PC  devices  are  not
              optimized. There is no systematic method for designing these devices. He will
              develop these systematic methods in PC devices by optimally designing and
              controlling their electromagnetic modes. Furthermore, I will develop techniques
              required for optimal coupling of these devices to integrate them in the form of
              WDM devices. His research includes both theoretical and experimental
              investigation of PC structures. The major research tasks are summarized below. 
              Although  aimed  at  a  single  target,  each  component  of  the  effort 
              provides  considerable  understanding  of  photonic crystal structures that are
              valuable in a variety of other applications.  
 
1) The development of fast
              and efficient three-dimensional analysis tools which will allow us to design
              and optimize specific linear and nonlinear optical properties of the photonic
              crystals.  
2)  The  development  of  a  systematic  method  for  dispersion 
              engineering  in  photonic  crystal  devices,  especially superprisms,
              waveguides, and cavities using the simulation tool developed in 
part 1. 
3)
              Optimization of coupling between discrete photonic crystal devices in order to
              integrate them to perform WDM functionalities  
 
The  proposed  research 
              has  considerable  impact  both  at  the  basic  science  level  and  at  the 
              application  level.  It provides a complete understanding of PC waveguides,
              cavities, and superprisms as well as a systematic method to design these
              devices. At the application level, it can have a global impact by realizing
              chip-scale integrated WDM. The type of devices developed in this research can
              be used in other information processing applications, especially in biosensors.
              Combined with the small size and perforated structure of photonic crystals,
              these devices can be used in very small biosensors that and will enable in vivo
              sensors, nanosensors to swallow, spectrometers on a needle, etc. 
 
On  the 
              education  side,  this  CAREER  plan  provides  an  excellent  educational 
              benefit  for  students.  The  ability  to analyze, model and optimize PC
              structures as well as hands-on lab work in fabrication and characterization of
              actual WDM  devices  allow  students  to  obtain  experience  in modeling, 
              fabrication,  and measurement  techniques.  Three graduate  and  several 
              undergraduate  students will  be  trained  this way  to  help  accommodate  the
               huge  demand  in industry  for  experts  in  nanotechnology  and  optical 
              engineering.  Providing  K-12  and  minority  students  with  the opportunity 
              of  learning  some  basics  of  optical  systems  as well  as  involving 
              teachers  (with  help  from NSF's RET program) are other aspects of this CAREER
              plan.  He also plan to develop a graduate level course entitled Introduction to
              photonic crystal devices, and to add some material on state-of-the-art WDM to
              the existing graduate level course, Fiber  Optics  networks,  that  has  not 
              been  taught  for  a  few  years.   He will  also  improve  the  undergraduate 
              course, Lasers and Applications. The PI will also write one book on Photonic
              Crystal Optical Waveguides. 
 


