Title       : CAREER: Utilizing Nonlinearity - Leverage to Global Synthesis of Inherently
               Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0239105

Award Number: 0239105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chunjiang Qian cqian@utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, we propose an intensive program to develop new controller
              design
methodologies for a variety of inherently nonlinear systems, and to
              apply the findings to
the control problems of underactuated mechanical
              systems, mobile robots with flex link,
and other practical systems with
              various uncertainties. The systems under consideration do
not have a
              controllable linearization that is a common requirement of existing
              control
schemes. Therefore, most of the control problems for these systems are
              still open and
indeed bring new challenges to the control engineering. In this
              project, we concentrate on
the development of both theoretically sound and
              practically useful controller design
schemes, which enable us to solve the
              difficult problems of global stabilization, adaptive
regulation, and output
              feedback control, for inherently nonlinear systems that cannot be
adequately
              controlled using the existing methods.
Our primary approach relies on the
              adding a power integrator technique developed by the
proposer and
              collaborators, which fully utilizes the nonlinearity of the systems
              to
effectively control the inherently nonlinear systems. The recent research
              work based on
this tool has led to new solutions to a number of control
              problems for systems with
uncontrollable linearization, and suggests that very
              promising advances can be achieved by
this research program.
The educational
              component of this CAREER development plan aims at developing and
              reshaping
courses, introducing innovative teaching techniques, mentoring
              undergraduate and graduate
students, setting up new laboratories, and creating
              research-oriented projects and
hands-on experiments. With all these efforts,
              we believe that the research program can be
effectively integrated into the
              academic curriculum of the University of Texas at San
Antonio. Moreover, while
              exposing the students to state-of-the-art techniques, the
education plan will
              also help bridge the gap between theoretical research and
              engineering
practice, and therefore stimulate students' interest in control
              engineering.
