Title       : CAREER: Development of Novel Ternary Copolymer Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0239697

Award Number: 0239697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Grubbs robert.b.grubbs@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research activities will focus upon the preparation and analysis of
              ternary copolymers designed to self-assemble into two classes of novel
              structures.  In one class of materials, phase-segregation of ABC triblock
              copolymers in the bulk will be used to arrange different sets of metal
              compounds for preparation of interworked arrays of gold and cobalt
              nanoparticles within a polymer matrix.  In the second class of materials,
              solution-phase assembly of ternary block and graft copolymers containing
              thermomorphic components will lead to formation of micellar structures with
              temperature-dependent shapes and sizes.  Established techniques for the
              cross-linking of micelles will be used to prepare robust collapsible nanometer
              scale materials and devices from these materials.  Living free radical
              polymerization techniques will play a major role in preparation of these
              ternary copolymers.  The intellectual merit of the proposed activities lies in
              their extension of current synthetic techniques for the preparation of new
              triblock and ternary copolymers, their likely expansion of current
              understanding of block copolymer self-assembly phenomena, and their enablement
              of the connection of theory concerning these topics to potential applications. 
              Study of these assemblies will complement and build upon the current state of
              research in not only polymeric materials, but also in more broadly defined
              nanomaterials research fields.

In terms of broader impact, the proposed
              research activities will contribute greatly to current understanding of
              nanoscale devices and lead to the development of nanometer scale materials with
              potential for elaboration into larger functional materials.  These activities
              will also involve the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
              materials and polymer research.  As inclusion of polymer chemistry in a general
              education in chemistry is becoming increasingly desirable and the current
              chemistry curriculum at Dartmouth College offers only a single one-term course
              in polymer chemistry, the PI will also develop an elective course in the
              synthetic aspects of polymer chemistry for graduates and upper-level
              undergraduates.  This new course will complement the more physical bent of the
              existing polymer chemistry course.  As part of a greater effort toward polymer
              education in the community, an exhibit on important and interesting aspects of
              modern polymer science at a local science museum is being developed.  The
              proposed educational activities will bring an awareness of polymer science to
              several groups of people:  the students directly involved in research, the
              students participating in the new polymer chemistry curriculum, and to
              community members who visit the proposed museum exhibit.

