Title       : CAREER: Heat Capacity Study on Low Dimensional Electronic Systems at Low
               Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0239450

Award Number: 0239450
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jongsoo Yoon jy2b@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses simultaneous heat capacity and transport
              measurements on Kosterlitz-Thouless (KT) type superconducting transitions and
              Superconductor-Insulator Transi-tions (SIT) at temperatures down to ~10mK. The
              project includes design and fabrication of a state-of-the-art low temperature
              nano-calorimeter. With a SQUID readout, the expected sensitiv-ity of the
              calorimeter is expected to be sufficient to detect the electronic heat capacity
              contribu-tion from a metal (copper, for example) of ~1 nanogram at 10mK,
              corresponding to a monolayer film covering an area of ~1mm in diameter.
              Superconducting transitions of ultrathin AuIn, Ta, and Bi films will be
              investigated in a continuous flow He cryostat, and a dilution refrigerator.
              Experimental techniques to be developed are expected to also impact the study
              of thermody-namic properties of other 2D systems such as Fermi liquids, Kondo
              systems, and electrons in semiconductor interfaces, providing a foundation for
              a lifetime of contribution and education in this field. 

The project
              involves education and training of undergraduate and graduate students in
              industry-standard microfabrication techniques and a variety of condensed matter
              techniques. Computer-based acquisition and analysis of large data sets requires
              training at the frontier of information technology. These opportunities will
              help students develop future-oriented perspectives on sci-ence and technology. 
              The PI will develop a new course to teach principles and applications of
              various state-of-the-art devices to science majors and graduate students from
              various disciplines of science. The course will offer students active
              participation in the class activity in the form of case study, literature
              search, and poster presentations. An outreach effort includes creating a
              comprehensive website containing educational materials related with research
              and educational activities, K12 and community college lectures, demonstration,
              and laboratory tours. 
***  

