Title       : CAREER: Spin Polarization Spectroscopy of Complex Magnetic Materials and Spin
               Electronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0239058

Award Number: 0239058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boris E. Nadgorny nadgorny@physics.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The possibility of exploiting the spin of electrons (or holes) in electronic
              devices has led to the emergence of the new field of spintronics. The
              efficiency of spintronics devices is strongly dependent on the degree of the
              spin polarization in a ferromagnet. In particular, half-metals, which are 100%
              spin-polarized, are of fundamental importance for the next-generation of
              electronic devices. The experimental confirmation of the existence of such
              highly spin-polarized materials systems is vital to spintronics. The proposed
              research focuses on developing a fundamental understanding of the basics of
              spin transport in highly spin-polarized materials and on the ongoing search for
              novel highly spin-polarized materials.

We propose a cohesive research
              program to further develop and expand Point Contact Andreev Reflection (PCAR)
              Spectroscopy and to apply it to the spin polarization measurements in dilute
              magnetic semiconductors and metal alloys. In addition, we propose to explore
              the viability of a new nonvolatile ferromagnet-superconductor device based on
              Andreev reflection. The proposal also includes an initial exploratory study of
              spatially resolved spin polarization measurements (Spin Mapping) with potential
              in situ capabilities.

The PI has recently observed for the first time
              Andreev reflection in the point contact geometry in a non-magnetic
              semiconductor, and has obtained some preliminary results in magnetic
              semiconductors. These results strongly indicate that the PCAR technique can
              become a viable measurement technique for dilute magnetic semiconductors, which
              is crucial for the future development of this field. In addition to the spin
              polarization measurements, transport, magnetic, chemical, and structural
              analysis will be performed to study in detail the following materials systems:
              

1) Dilute magnetic and non-magnetic semiconductors: Non-magnetic
              semiconductors (e.g., BeGaAs). Magnetic semiconductors: GaMnSb, GaMnAs, InMnSb,
              and MnAs.
2)Other theoretically predicted half-metals: double perovskites
              (Sr2FeMoO6,) and CoxFe1-xS2.

As part of the broader impact of his research
              proposal the PI is planning to promote collaboration with the local industry
              (especially Delphi Automotive) and with HYPRES (on ferromagnet/superconductor
              nonvolatile device). He is also collaborating with Oak Ridge National
              Laboratory, where the PI is one of the "University Champions" of the new
              Nanophase Materials Science Center. The spatially resolved spin polarization
              measurements (Spin Mapping) and will be investigated in partnership with the
              Center.

The PI is actively involved in a comprehensive program to broaden
              participation of minorities in physics. He gives public lectures to high school
              students to explain what is involved in being a physicist and to try to
              eliminate a psychological barrier that often prevents many minority students
              and women from becoming a scientist. He is advising the Detroit Science Center
              on the content and scientific quality of their physics-related exhibits.
              

The PI's two major educational goals, integrated with his research,
              are:

1)Develop a pilot program aimed at introducing a Senior Research
              Project at WSU as a required part of the curriculum.
2)Develop a new graduate
              level course "Magnetism, Magnetic Devices and Nanotechnology". This course will
              introduce the basic concepts in magnetism, GMR and TMR devices and sensors,
              novel magnetic materials, spin transport and spin polarization measurements,
              and modern nanofabrication techniques.

