Title       : CAREER: Nature of Pure and Dirty Liquid 3He-Fundamental Investigations and
               Educational Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0239483

Award Number: 0239483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yoonseok Lee yoonslee@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This low temperature physics CAREER project will investigate the fundamental
              nature of pure and dirty superfluid 3He using ultrasound spectroscopic
              techniques.  The effect of strong magnetic fields (up to 15 T) on the dirty
              p-wave superfluid in the presence of magnetic and non-magnetic impurities will
              be investigated.  This work will provide important information on the phase
              diagram of this relatively new system and has the potential to reveal new
              phenomena near the critical pressure.  The critical pressure is related to
              quantum phase transitions, which are of great current interest in a range of
              condensed matter systems.  Using a transverse sound spectroscopic technique,
              direct evidence of a sub-dominant f-wave pairing interaction in the B-phase
              will be investigated.  This novel spectroscopic technique is believed to be
              superior to the conventional technique in searching for the new collective
              modes whose existence is guaranteed only by the f-wave pairing interaction. 
              The observation of the new mode would be the first experimental confirmation of
              the collective modes generated by the subdominant pairing interaction in a more
              general class of superfluids.  Fluctuation effects above the transition will be
              studied using zero sound.  The known background contribution and an extremely
              high resolution in the zero sound velocity measurements will facilitate the
              direct measurement of the coherence length.     

This low temperature
              physics CAREER project will investigate fundamental properties of pure and
              so-called dirty superfluid 3He using ultrasound spectroscopic techniques. Dirty
              superfluid refers to superfluid samples in the presence of very low-density
              porous solids, such as an aerogel.  The research, near the absolute zero of
              temperature, is relevant not only to the quantum fluids community, scientists
              who investigate the properties of 3He and 4He, but to many other areas of
              condensed matter physics.  Recently, many interesting phenomena related to
              quantum phase transitions have been discovered and studied extensively in
              various condensed matter systems.  Unlike conventional (classical) transitions,
              which occur at finite temperatures such as melting of solids, quantum phase
              transitions are triggered from purely quantum mechanical origins and
              accordingly can occur at absolute zero temperature.  The dirty superfluid
              system is an excellent system to study this quantum phase transitions
              especially near the critical pressure.  The effect of strong magnetic fields on
              the phase diagram of disordered superfluid 3He will be investigated.  In other
              work, the detailed microscopic origin of superfluidity in pure superfluid 3He
              will be investigated via a search for a new excited state of the Cooper pairs
              (of 3He atoms) using a novel transverse sound spectroscopic technique. The
              incipient superfluidity above, but near, the transition temperature will be
              studied by conducting high resolution sound velocity measurements.  The
              incipient superfluidity is caused by the thermally driven fluctuations of
              Cooper pairs with a short lifetime.  The research involves extensive
              participation of both graduate and undergraduate students, who will be provided
              a wide range of rigorous laboratory experience and training for later career
              opportunities in academe, industry or government. The research project includes
              an important integral component directed toward improving local high school
              science education. 
