Title       : CAREER: New Ferromagnetic Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0239837

Award Number: 0239837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465039             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dong-Kyun Seo dseo@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project is focused on giant and colossal magnetoresistance (GMR and
              CMR) materials, and in particular on the discovery and characterization of new
              bulk half metals and GMR materials with increased structural and chemical
              complexities in a broad range of compounds, including chalcogenides, the Zintl
              compounds and intermetallics.  For example, the half-metallic state in the
              thiochromates, such as ACrS3, A2CrS4, A2/3Cr2S4, A4CrS7 and A6Cr2S11 (A =
              rare-earth and/or alkaline-earth metals), will be obtained by chemically
              controlling the mixed-valence states and double exchange interactions between
              chromium ions.  It is also proposed to induce the GMR effect in LnMn1-xSb2 and
              LnMnSi2 (Ln = rare-earth metals, Mn=manganese, Sb=antimony, Si=silicon), whose
              structures are formed by alternate stacking of magnetic and nonmagnetic layers.
               Finally, by strategically reducing the covalent bond strength around the
              transition metals and/or changing the electron concentrations, we will explore
              new magnetic intermetallics.  By carrying out these projects, students will
              acquire an excellent understanding of chemical and electronic structures of
              materials, and of experimental skills required for the preparation and
              characterization of solid sate compounds.  More importantly, the students will
              learn where various materials properties come from in chemical terms, so that
              they will be capable of rational design of new functional materials in their
              synthetic research.  Overall, success in our research will provide new
              functional ferromagnetic materials that can be utilized in fabrication of novel
              electronic devices, and also will produce young materials researchers that will
              eagerly tackle interdisciplinary problems in materials sciences.   

In our
              modern society, advances in technology depend more than ever on the discovery
              and development of useful new materials, and solid-state chemistry has played
              an important role in the areas of catalytic, electronic, magnetic and optical
              materials research. This project in experimental solid-state chemistry will
              provide new magnetic materials with great promise for new devices with
              unprecedented functionalities, collectively under the name of
              "spin-electronics."  Spin-electronic devices not only control the electrical
              signals (conventional electronic devices), but also manipulate the electron
              spins, a fundamental quantum mechanical property of electrons, which can
              immensely increase the capacity of data processing and storage even with
              current semiconductor manufacturing technology.  Novel magnetic materials such
              as giant magnetoresistance (GMR) materials and half-metals which have much
              desired characteristics for spin-electronics applications will be discovered.
              By carrying out this research, students will acquire a good understanding of
              structure-property relationships of materials, as well as experimental skills
              for preparation and characterization of solid sate materials.  More
              importantly, the students will learn where various useful materials properties
              come from in a "chemical" language, so that they will be capable of designing 
              and synthesizing new functional materials in their future synthetic research. 
              Overall, success in our research will provide new functional ferromagnetic
              materials that can be utilized in fabrication of novel electronic devices, and
              also will produce young materials researchers that will eagerly tackle
              interdisciplinary problems in materials sciences.  

