Title       : CAREER: Proteins Containing Non-natural Amino Acids as Building Blocks for Novel
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0239744

Award Number: 0239744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristi Kiick kiick@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the engineering of biopolymeric materials for
              application in materials science and biology.  Nature regularly uses precise
              control of macromolecular structure to impart function; the exquisite
              information storage, hierarchical assembly, and catalytic properties of natural
              molecules such as nucleic acids and proteins have long been admired by the
              polymer chemist.  Despite the many advances in the chemical synthesis of
              polymers, no synthetic method offers the sequence and structural control
              afforded by protein polymer production by in vivo methods.  Additionally,
              important advances in protein engineering have made possible the multisite
              incorporation of non-natural amino acids into proteins in vivo, which markedly
              expands the chemical versatility of genetically directed methods.  This
              research program capitalizes on the structural and sequence control of
              biosynthesis, combined with the novel chemical function of non-natural amino
              acids, to create new polymeric materials with exceptional architectural
              control.  Specific targets include the controlled presentation of groups such
              as saccharides, peptides, or electroactive moieties for applications in
              sensors, biomaterials, and nanotechnology. 

The highly interdisciplinary
              nature of this research program will provide diverse opportunities for training
              in the research environment, and research concepts in this program will also be
              integrated into the materials science and engineering curriculum in courses
              such as polymer synthesis and advanced biomaterials.  Integration into
              undergraduate programs will include the implementation of biotechnology
              research and special topics discussion groups. In addition to these educational
              contributions at the university level, a novel outreach program, The Science of
              Art, will be implemented at a regional high school.  The combination of these
              scientific and instructional programs will be the basis of innovative
              contributions to materials research and education.

