Title       : CAREER: A Design/Test Environment with Integrated Experimental and Computational
               Simulation of Unsteady Wind Loads for Mitigation of Wind-Related Natural
               Hazards
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0239070

Award Number: 0239070
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Mccabe                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $490956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick L. Haan haan@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Research and education activities in this project pursue the mitigation of
              wind-related natural hazards-the most costly natural hazards faced by the
              United States. The first objective is to establish a design and testing
              environment (DTE) in which a diverse collection of participants can learn,
              design, and test new concepts in wind-resistant design. Second, computational
              simulation tools will be developed based on discrete vortex methods (DVM).
              Third, experimental and computational tools will be integrated in such a way
              that as designs are tested, the models and tools are continuously being
              validated and improved. 
From a research standpoint, the DTE will facilitate
              interaction among researchers, students, and industry for conceiving novel
              concepts in wind-resistant design. These concepts will be tested using both
              experimental and computational tools. Research is therefore conducted to search
              for improved aerodynamic designs and to improve computational techniques. As an
              educational tool, the DTE will accommodate research and design participants
              from a wide range of backgrounds working at an appropriate level. All the
              activity of the DTE-submission of designs to be tested and reporting test
              results-will be accessible via the Internet.
The project's intellectual merit
              derives from the integrated experimental and computational nature of the
              simulations and the foundation of discrete vortex methods. The project's
              broader impacts include new wind resistant design development, new
              computational tools for design, a database of aerodynamic loads accessible to
              anyone designing a structure, and a framework that fosters participation by
              people from a broad range of backgrounds.


