Title       : CAREER:Integrated Research and Education in Multi-scale Chemical-Mechanical
               Manipulation and Nanofabrication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0239136

Award Number: 0239136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hong Liang ffhl@uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9146,9150,MANU,
Abstract    :
              CAREER Abstract

In this research program, Professor Hong Liang at the
              University of Alaska Fairbanks will develop innovative processes to generate
              nano-coatings. She will further investigate mechanisms of tribochemical
              interactions on surfaces of metals and oxides. Experimental approaches include
              using an atomic force microscope (AFM) and a table-top tribometer to polish,
              manipulate, and test materials at different length scales. The primary methods
              of surface characterization include Anomic Force Microscope, Transmision
              Electron Microscope, X-ray Phonon Spectrometer, Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion
              Mass Spectra, and other high-resolution spectroscopic techniques. Materials
              studied are strategically selected to reveal principles in effects of
              electronic, chemical, and crystal structures on friction and wear. Fundamental
              investigation will focus on new phenomena and non-equilibrium surfaces,
              including surface forces and wear at atomic-to-centimeter scales, new surface
              bonds, non-equilibrium crystal structures, non-stoichiometric products, and
              kinetics of growth. This research is at the interface of several scientific and
              technological areas involving physical, chemical, mechanical, and tribological
              properties of advanced materials. This research will result in development of
              novel nanostructured materials and nanofabrication processes. It will open
              opportunities for developing advanced manufacturing technologies for industries
              such as semiconductors and optics.

The impact of this research will be
              realized by establishing long-term international collaborations and integrating
              research and education activities. Students will be trained in the
              multidisciplinary fields of materials science and mechanical engineering.
              Students involved in this research will have opportunities to conduct surface
              analysis at the Washington State University and the Ecole Centrale de Lyon.
              Professor Liang will use on-line education to deliver new knowledge and
              technology to rural area students in Alaska and as an alternative for students
              who take traditional classes. Extensive outreach activities include recruiting
              female students and Alaska natives as well as involving k-12 students and
              schoolteachers. 



