Title       : Enhancing Opportunities for Undergraduate Learning in Immunology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0239419

Award Number: 0239419
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carolyn L. Piper                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn G. Hannum lghannum@colby.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colby College
	      4000 Mayflower Hill
	      Waterville, ME  04901    207/872-3000

NSF Program : 7174      POSTDOC FELLOW IN SCI, MATH EN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to provide opportunities for undergraduates to
              participate in research in cellular immunology at a small liberal arts college.
              Students will be mentored by the Principal Investigator, a faculty member with
              dual training in immunology and science education, through the NSF Postdoctoral
              Fellowship in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Education
              Program (PFSMETE).
Independent research is a powerful learning experience for
              undergraduates. Students are motivated to think creatively. They are given the
              chance to develop skills in experimental design, data analysis and
              interpretation, communication of findings and ideas with others, and to feel
              the sheer excitement of discovery. Undergraduate research can inspire students
              to pursue careers in science, and those who have the chance to work closely
              with a dedicated teacher and mentor may be more likely to include education as
              part of their future paths. Thus, the benefit of such experience goes well
              beyond the individuals involved.
The research proposed will focus on the
              immune system of fish, a model well?suited for study in a small college
              setting. The adaptive immune system of fish is particularly interesting because
              it has many of the same cell types and functions as the mouse and human immune
              systems, yet is simpler and largely unexplored. Support will allow up to four
              students (during the academic year as well as summers) to work on
              characterizing the kinetics of zebrafish B cell (antibody?producing white blood
              cells) responses to immunization with innocuous proteins. For example, at
              various times after immunization with different proteins, students will
              determine the number and location of antibody producing cells in the main
              lymphoid organs, spleen and head kidney. This work has the distinct advantage
              of being easily divided into well?defined projects that will accommodate
              students of different levels of experience and knowledge. Students will
              communicate their findings the yearly college?wide research symposiums, as well
              as regional and/or national scientific meetings.
Information on where and when
              B cell activation occurs during the primary immune response will provide a
              basis on which to begin to study secondary, memory cell mediated responses,
              those which are responsible for providing long?term immunity to pathogens.
              Learning how immune memory is developed and maintained in fish will be
              beneficial both to understanding the evolution of higher vertebrate immune
              systems, and to efforts in developing more effective vaccines for aquaculture.
              Having undergraduates be empowered contributors to this field of knowledge will
              be invaluable.

