Title       : CAREER: The Importance of Iron in the Remineralization of Organic Matter in
               Estuarine and Continental Shelf Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0239376

Award Number: 0239376
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martial Taillefert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0239376

The fate and transformation of organic carbon in
              coastal and marine sediments is intrinsic to understanding the carbon cycle and
              its influences on global climate change.  The objective of the proposed
              research by the PI was to examine the mechanisms of natural organic matter
              (NOM) transformation in estuarine and continental shelf sediments through
              in-situ technology and mathematical modeling.   The research is based on the
              following two hypotheses:  1) microbial Fe(III) reduction accounts for a
              significant portion of NOM remineralization in the target regions, and 2)
              sufficient oxygen is supplied through bioturbation to recycle Fe(OH)3
              efficiently for NOM remineralization.  The PI proposed to construct a lander
              system with a benthic chamber, a micromanipulator and voltammetric
              microelectrodes to obtain in situ benthic flux data and microprofiles.  This in
              situ data combined with sulfate reduction rates, solid phase and porewater data
              from sediment cores, and results from reactor experiments would be used to
              calculate NOM remineralization rates.  The PI then proposed to develop a 3-D
              diagenetic model to predict NOM remineralization in continental shelf and
              estuarine sediments.

Incorporating chemists and engineers into the chemical
              oceanography field was one of four objectives of the educational component. 
              The PI proposed to involve students in these fields in the development of the
              lander system and the modeling effort.  Additionally,  a high school teacher
              would conduct a research project in the PI's laboratory during the summer as
              part of an existing program at GIT.  The third component entailed development
              of a laboratory component of an existing Geochemistry course.  This laboratory
              component would include cruises on the R/V Savannah to deploy the lander system
              and involve the students in the field and laboratory efforts of the proposed
              research.  The fourth component consisted of a student exchange program
              involving GIT, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, and European partners.  


