Title       : RUI: A Marriage of Equals, the Scientific Lives of Joseph and Maria Goeppert
               Mayer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0239876

Award Number: 0239876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44065              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Johnson kjohnson@stlawu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Lawrence University
	      
	      Canton, NY  13617    315/229-5571

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nobel Prize winner and physicist Maria Goeppert Mayer and her husband, chemist
              Joseph Mayer, worked in different disciplines, pursued different fields of
              research, and rarely published collaborative work. A close scrutiny of their
              scientific careers reveals, however, that over time Joseph Mayer began to
              approach the study of chemistry from the perspective of a physicist in his
              attempts to incorporate statistical mechanics into physical chemistry, and
              Maria Goeppert Mayer began to approach physics from the perspective of a
              chemist in her development of the nuclear shell model. This intellectual
              interaction illustrates a form of collaboration in science that has not been
              adequately explored in the historical literature. Historians of science have
              tended to focus on the evolution of scientific theories in two different ways:
              either as intellectual history, emphasizing the intellectual paths followed by
              individual scientists, or as a social phenomenon transcending the intellectual
              life of any individual. Neither of these approaches can adequately describe the
              multi-dimensional matrix of informal interactions among scientists that shapes
              the distinctive work of individual scientists, and results in the kind of
              synergy found in the work of the Mayers. The principal investigator requests
              RUI support during her sabbatical year 2002-2003 to write a dual scientific
              biography of Joseph and Maria Goeppert Mayer. This biography will constitute a
              comprehensive examination and analysis of the lives, careers, and choices of
              two of the preeminent scientists of the twentieth century. It will also
              contribute significantly to current investigations into the ways in which
              individual scientists are influenced by informal interactions with their
              colleagues, will present an example of a successful woman in physical science
              and provide a rare example of cross-gender interdisciplinary collaboration in
              science, and will serve as a case study of the intersection of the public and
              private spheres in the lives and careers of a married couple. The RUI award
              will enable the PI to deepen her scholarly activity, while enriching and
              informing her teaching and curriculum development, and will serve as a model
              for undergraduate students in history of science.
