Title       : CAREER: Local Probing of Electron-electron Interactions in Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0239748

Award Number: 0239748
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gleb Finkelstein gleb@phy.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,7203,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               This CAREER project focuses on studying the local mechanisms that  govern the
              behavior of several nanoscale systems under intensive  scientific
              investigation. The project will provide training in the  novel scanned probe
              methods, low temperature instrumentation and  nanofabrication methods to the
              graduate,  undergraduate and high  school students involved.   In particular,
              scanned probe techniques will be actively implemented, including the novel
              "scanning gate" microscopy and the scanning capacitance microscopy that are 
              especially suited to study nanostructures. The main directions include: imaging
              the electron wave functions in quantum dots and a two- dimensional insulator,
              and studies of electron distribution in
 carbon nanotubes. The project will
              enhance understanding of electron-electron interaction phenomena in the
              nanostructures of active current interest and will significantly develop the
              novel scanning gate and scanning capacitive microscopy.
 

 This CAREER
              project focuses on studying the local mechanisms that govern the
              electron-electron interactions in several nanoscale systems under intensive
              scientific investigation. Scanned probe
 techniques will be actively
              implemented, in particular the novel "scanning gate" microscopy and the
              scanning capacitance microscopy that are especially suited to study
              nanostructures. The main directions include imaging the electron distribution
              in quantum dots and a two- dimensional insulator, and studies of electron
              energy distribution in carbon nanotubes. 1) The electron distribution in a
              lateral quantum dot will be probed by measuring the electric conductivity
              through the dot as a biased tip is scanned above the sample surface (scanning
              gate microscopy). 2) A vertical quantum dot will be induced by the biased tip
              and scanned
 inside the heterostucture. 3) Localized electrons in the
              insulating two-dimensional electron gas will be imaged by the scanning
              capacitance microscopy. 4) Electron distribution in a carbon nanotube will be
              locally probed. This project will provide training in the novel scanned probe
              methods, low temperature instrumentation and microfabrication methods to the
              graduate, undergraduate and high school students involved.
