Title       : SBIR Phase II: Electrochemical Disinfectant Generator for Multiple In-Situ
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0239197

Award Number: 0239197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rosemarie D. Wesson                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles L. Tennakoon charles.tennakoon@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1403,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Research (SBIR) Phase II project is concerned with the
              development and commercialization of electrochemically operated devices that
              will revolutionize the disinfectant industry by providing on-site, on-demand
              generation of extremely potent dual disinfectants. Peroxyacids are well known
              disinfectants that remove even resistant microorganisms (i.e. spores) by
              attacking S-S and S-H bonds on cell walls. The conventional method of
              manufacturing peroxy acids involves mixing concentrated hydrogen peroxide, an
              organic acid, and a catalyst (usually concentrated sulfuric acid), and involves
              the transportation and storage of hazardous chemicals. During the Phase I, the
              feasibility of a novel approach for the generation of the dual disinfectant was
              amply demonstrated. In this process, reactants for converting organic acids to
              dual disinfectants are generated within the device, avoiding problems
              associated with storage. All the criteria of success specified have been
              successfully accomplished and a well-known industrial partner has shown a keen
              interest in commercializing the novel devices. In Phase II, further
              optimization of the electrochemical devices will be followed by fabrication of
              prototypes of three devices for demonstrating their efficacy for a variety of
              disinfection applications. 

There is a considerable need for devices that
              produce potent disinfectants that are biocidal against a broad spectrum of
              microbes including spores and viruses. These devices that produce potent
              disinfectants on-demand have commercial potential in domestic health care and
              food service establishments as well as in infection control applications in
              hospitals and nursing homes. It is estimated that revenues of the entire
              cleaning/sanitizing industry will be $31 billion in 2007. 

