Title       : CAREER: Magnetic Resonance - From Materials Research to Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0239481

Award Number: 0239481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen O. Hill hill@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will focus on microwave
              spectroscopies of novel molecule based materials. Specific projects include:
              magnetic resonance studies of interlayer coherence in quasi-two-dimensional
              organic metals; Josephson plasma resonance investigations of interlayer phase
              coherence in nodal superconductors; spectroscopy of the
              field-induced-superconducting state in lamda-(BETS)(2)Fe(1-x)Ga(x)Cl(4); and
              electron paramagnetic resonance investigations of exchange coupled systems of
              single molecule magnets. Instrument development will continue to play a major
              role in the growth of the PI's research activities, extending various novel
              "magnetic resonance" spectroscopic techniques well into the sub-millimeter-wave
              regime. Unique high-frequency instrumentation can be expected to have important
              uses beyond the scope of the investigations described in this proposal, e.g.
              for high-resolution high-frequency EPR, with applications in chemistry and
              biology. The educational component of the project is aimed at addressing the
              disconnection between the general public and their appreciation of forefront
              materials research. Activities include: research experiences and outreach
              activities involving undergraduates, high school students and teachers; courses
              in the communication of science; the development of an interdisciplinary
              graduate level materials research seminar; and efforts to convey the excitement
              of materials research into freshman physics courses.

Research into molecule
              based materials has made enormous strides in recent years, with the discoveries
              of all organic magnets and superconductors, synthetic electronic materials, and
              single-molecule nano-devices. While there is huge promise in terms of potential
              applications, much remains to be learned about the fundamental characteristics
              of these materials. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims
              to explore many of these novel material characteristics using electron magnetic
              resonance (EMR) spectroscopy. EMR enables us to probe the dynamics of electrons
              in solids, as well as the nature of their interactions with the environment in
              which they exist. In doing so, we hope to address several key questions such
              as: why do some newly discovered materials display superconductivity only at
              high magnetic fields, while the superconductivity in almost all other known
              superconductors is destroyed by a magnetic field; and what happens to magnetic
              memories when they are reduced to the (nanometer) dimensions at which quantum
              effects begin to play a role? Answers to these questions will impact society in
              terms of future technologies. In parallel with these investigations, outreach
              and instruction will address the obvious disconnection between the general
              public and their appreciation of forefront materials research. Efforts will
              focus on students at all levels, as well as high school teachers. Strategies
              include participation in interdisciplinary research projects, and courses aimed
              at developing effective scientific communicative skills.

