Title       : CAREER: Cellular control through the development of engineered gene circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0239165

Award Number: 0239165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff M. Hasty hasty@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239165
Hasty
Many fundamental cellular processes are governed by a genetic
              circuitry that employs protein-DNA interactions in regulating function. The
              biochemistry of the feedback loops associated with protein-DNA interactions
              leads to nonlinear effects, and the tools of nonlinear analysis become
              invaluable. In this project synthetic gene oscillator is being modeled and
              constructed in bacterial cells. The PI intends to couple the oscillator to an
              intrinsic periodic cellular process, which could lead to possible strategies
              for entraining or inducing network oscillations in cellular protein levels, and
              prove useful in the design of networks that interact with cellular processes
              that require amplification or precise timing.  A multi-gene memory-based
              synthetic network that can function as a sensor of multiple transient signals,
              and thus form the basis for general control schemes requiring an "if/then"
              structure, will also be designed and constructed. 

The proposed engineered
              gene circuits will lead to testable predictions regarding the current
              understanding of complex biological networks. This ability to design synthetic
              gene networks offers the exciting prospect of extracting carefully chosen
              subsystems from natural organisms, and focusing both modeling and experimental
              effort on determination of the behavior of the subsystems in isolation. The
              long-range goal of such work would be to assemble increasingly complete models
              of the behavior of natural systems, while maintaining at each stage the ability
              to test models in a tractable experimental system. The power of this approach
              is that it can be used to study simplified systems in order to gain insight
              into the general "modules" of gene regulation. These modules include
              sub-networks that act as switches or oscillators, as well as networks that act
              to communicate across a population of cells. 

Work stemming from this
              proposal will impact education through the following projects: (i) Development
              of systems biology curricula for the Bioinformatics Program. To this end,
              research from engineered gene circuits will be used to form the basis for the
              systems biology curricula for undergraduate and graduate students. (ii)
              Development of an elementary school science program.  This program will be
              developed in a school with a large minority component within the San Diego
              Unified School District. (iii) Recruitment of REU students. The PI will
              actively recruit two students per summer from the NSF Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates (REU) Program. 

