Title       : CAREER: Control of Acoustic Instabilities in Large Combustors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0239267

Award Number: 0239267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Masayoshi Tomizuka                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406220             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph C. Majdalani maji@marquette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marquette University
	      P.O. Box 1881
	      Milwaukee, WI  532011881    414/224-7200

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract: For reasons not entirely understood, combustion chambers that favor
              high efficiencies and low emissions often exhibit combustion instabilities.
              These instabilities arise due to a regenerative coupling between chamber
              acoustics and thermal fluctuations. Some instabilities appear as limit cycle
              oscillations in the flow variables of basic propulsion and power generation
              systems. Examples include rocket motors, ramjet engines, gas turbines,
              afterburners, and large industrial combustors.  The research phase of this
              project aims at developing a comprehensive stability algorithm that can be used
              as a diagnostic tool in the developmental stages of large combustors. The newly
              developed algorithm will be based on the latest technological advances that
              suggest incorporating the effects of acoustical, thermal and vortical waves
              from the ground up. 

The new representation of chamber acoustics will permit
              estimating the growth or decay of the system energy with most rotational flow
              effects accounted for.  In the process, a generalized mean-flow description
              that mimics realistic chamber conditions will be employed. This representation
              is expected to enhance the accuracy of both linear and nonlinear stability
              equations used in the literature. The anticipated improvements in acoustic
              energy gains are also hoped to explain experimental findings that elude the
              present stability assessment methodology. As a windfall, it is projected that
              the origins of several injection-driven instabilities observed in solid, liquid
              and hybrid rocket motors will be illuminated. 

The educational phase of this
              career development plan describes a sequence of activities to be undertaken
              during the funding period.  These include incentives for undergraduate
              curriculum development, initiatives for promoting research opportunities for
              both graduates and undergraduates, initiatives for encouraging
              interdisciplinary interactions, course enhancement methodologies, and
              recruitment of underrepresented groups. 

