Title       : CAREER: Advancing Nearshore Circulation Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0239642

Award Number: 0239642
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Theresa Paluszkiewicz                   
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald N. Slinn slinn@coastal.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

PI/Institution:	  Slinn/UF-G				Proposal No:  OCE-0239642	
              




This integrated plan for research and education in Coastal
              Engineering will emphasize nearshore circulation modeling. Two new
              (three-dimensional (3-D), time-dependent, non-hydrostatic, large-eddy
              simulation (LES) surf zone models will be used to gain improved understanding
              of effects of three important nearshore processes: 1) Mean undertow; 2)
              Along-shore current instabilities; and 3) Partitioning of offshore mass
              transport between rip currents and undertow. Calibration of the models will be
              achieved by comparison with laboratory measurements collected at the Army Corps
              of Engineers, Long-Shore Sediment Transport Facility (LSTF) and with data from
              recent and ongoing field experiments at Duck, North Carolina, Daytona Beach,
              Florida, and from planned experiments such as NCEX. Six specific hypotheses
              will be tested with the models, lab, and field data. The first new model is a
              phase-averaged model and examines the depth-dependent, low-frequency, nearshore
              current response to breaking waves in the surf zone. This model is faster
              computationally than other similar codes and can be used to study shear
              instabilities of the mean current and time-averaged effects of the undertow in
              unsteady flows. The second new model is based on the Volume of Fluid (VOF)
              algorithm and simulates the individual wave breaking events in the surf zone
              within the LES approximations. This model can be used to examine individual
              wave-breaking effects but it is slower computationally, because of the more
              complex methodology for solving the Poisson equation and because smaller time
              steps are required to capture higher frequency fluctuations associated with
              turbulent flow caused by breaking waves. It is anticipated these new models
              will help the field converge towards improved predictive capabilities for near
              shore flow. Five specific educational integration activities are described.
              These include: 1) guiding graduate students on their thesis projects; 2)
              supervising senior projects for Civil Engineering students, 3) developing a new
              under-graduate course introducing Coastal Engineering to Civil Engineering
              majors; 4) collaborating with students from outside of engineering on nearshore
              science and public information projects, and 5) enhancing my own continuing
              education by taking (and then teaching) advanced courses in Coastal
              Engineering.

