Title       : CAREER: Creating Nanostructured Gratings on Microstructures for Residual
               Strain/Stress Measurement in NEMS/MEMS and Traction Force Measurement in Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0239163

Award Number: 0239163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Charalabos C. Doumanidis                
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xin Zhang xinz@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1788      Nanomanufacturing
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project is intended to
              create nanostructured gratings (e.g., 1D nanograting lines and 2D nanograting
              dots) on micromachined devices for residual strain/stress measurements in MEMS
              (Microelectromechanical Systems) and NEMS (Nanoelectromechanical Systems); and,
              bio traction force measurements in real time and in live cells. This research
              project is a unique combination of MEMS, NEMS, nano-optics, biomechanics, and
              nanomanufacturing.  This project involves several broad but highly
              interconnected areas of micro/nanomanufacturing research, all related to
              translating morphological recognition into micro/nanomechanics directly in thin
              films, in real time, and/or in live cells. This project aims at developing
              several novel nanostructured gratings and the corresponding measurement
              techniques based on the current emerging nanofabrication/nanomanufacturing
              technologies.  Preliminary results show that the sensitivity of the methodology
              is at least three orders of magnitude higher than other techniques commonly
              used in residual strain/traction force measurements. The impact of the
              theoretical and experimental efforts would be significant. Through a careful
              leverage from current core competencies in MEMS/NEMS fabrication and biomedical
              processes, completion of this project will ensure that residual strain/stress
              in MEMS/NEMS structures and materials be directly imaged, and its magnitude
              quickly estimated, and more importantly, both direction and magnitude of small
              traction forces generated by different regions of a live cell be measured
              accurately and the maximum traction force generated under each of different
              regions of the cell be quantified in real time.

The investigator has chosen
              to focus the work on the domain of micro/nanomanufacturing science and
              technology for four reasons: (1) wide scope of the MEMS/NEMS and
              nanomanufacturing enterprise naturally fosters interdisciplinary research; (2)
              the investigator has a long track record of expertise and direct involvement
              with such systems and technologies, giving the project the benefit of a
              thorough understanding of the real issues, as well as invaluable insights; (3)
              unquestionable economic and technological importance of MEMS/NEMS and
              micro/nanomanufacturing is compelling, (4) the investigator's connections with
              MEMS/NEMS and micro/nanomanufacturing organizations will afford  opportunities
              to transform the research findings to concrete tools. The research project's
              educational program will encompass both curriculum development and development
              of innovation teaching techniques.  The investigator is involved in a Distance
              Learning Program that plays an important role promoting the manufacturing
              engineering department in the classroom and online, providing important
              industrial connections, international recognition, and important technological
              initiatives. Students can benefit greatly from opportunities to design,
              implement and operate complete micro/nanosystems. The investigator has recently
              created one and will further develop one more micro/nanomanufacturing new
              courses that give students these opportunities. Collaborative work is planned
              and broader two-way interaction between the university and industry is highly
              anticipate
