Title       : CAREER: Mixed Reality Science and Technology for Architecture Engineering and
               Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0239091

Award Number: 0239091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426353             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip S. Dunston dunston@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1045,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract: 
This research aims to establish scientific principles and
              extend technologies for using Mixed Reality (MR) ? visualization blending real
              and virtual elements ? to support decision-making and control through the life
              cycle phases of constructed facility projects.  Challenges in establishing MR
              as a viable technology in the architecture, engineering, and construction
              (A/E/C) industry will be addressed through real-time virtual model generation,
              measurement of spatial cognition benefits, information visualization, and the
              definition of functionalities for individual and collaborative human-computer
              interactions. This research is guided by the promise of Mixed Reality to
              provide intuitive and liberal interactions with design models and related
              project data in a more ubiquitous computing environment for the construction
              enterprise.
Two particular research foci are 1. the creation of efficient and
              intuitive design and planning environments that utilize MR technology for
              enhancing design comprehension and supporting collaborations; and 2. the
              creation of interface systems and interaction techniques that support the
              acquisition and communication of job site planning, execution, and inspection
              knowledge through direct access to graphically displayed, spatially referenced
              digital design data.  
The core research is complemented by education
              activities encompassing both the creation of virtual visualization course
              modules and outreach and mentoring activities to expand the pipeline of African
              American students pursuing graduate degrees in civil engineering.  Recruiting
              and mentoring of students will be aided by a network of linkages with existing
              university outreach programs, an existing industry-university consortium, and
              parallel department-level initiatives to increase the numbers of women and
              students from Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions in engineering.
The
              research plan aims to advance knowledge in the A/E/C industry with regard to
              human-machine interfaces and computer-mediated human-to-human interactions,
              particularly by addressing human factors.  This research will advance discovery
              in the construction discipline by applying a greater range of interdisciplinary
              expertise to meet challenges in creating, modifying, communicating, and
              comprehending constructed facility designs.  By further broadening the
              application of computing, the research serves to transform what is generally
              regarded as the predominantly "low-tech" nature of the A/E/C industry. 
              Enhancements can be achieved for both construction work processes and
              construction education.  The integrated education plan will develop a model for
              improving the network of relationships between minority and majority
              institutions.


