Title       : CAREER: Transport and Stability in Biocatalytic Fuel Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0239013

Award Number: 0239013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Calabrese Barton scb2001@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	The mission of this CAREER program is (1) the creation of 
electrode
              structures that enhance the reactivity and stability of 
enzyme
              bioelectrocatalysts as implemented in high power-density 
biofuel cells, and
              (2) the integration of these and other fuel-cell 
devices into a broad
              spectrum of education and outreach to promote 
concepts of engineering product
              design and new energy systems in 
communities, schools, and
              universities.
	Biocatalytic fuel cell technology has the potential to
              
provide electrical power in conditions where conventional fuel cell 
and
              battery technologies fail.  While key characteristics of redox 
enzymes,
              including selectivity and room temperature activity can be 
exploited in, for
              example, physiologically implantable fuel cells, 
implementation of current
              biofuel cells is hindered by low catalytic 
activity and low stability of
              biocatalytic electrodes.  This program 
addresses both of these issues. 
	The
              model system to be studied is an oxygen-reducing 
electrode comprised of
              porous carbon coated with a crosslinked 
electrostatic adduct of laccase, an
              oxygen-reducing enzyme, and an 
electron-conducting redox polymer hydrogel. 
              Engineering the porous 
support and its interface with the mediator/enzyme
              hydrogel to 
maximize gel distribution will improve enzyme utilization and
              
increase current density.  Support structures with porosities near 
95% and
              fiber diameter of order 1 micron or less, consisting of 
carbon nanotubes or
              electrospun carbon nanofibers, will be evaluated 
for impact on catalytic
              activity of the enzyme-hydrogel adduct. 
Gas-diffusion electrodes will be
              developed which take advantage of 
high-rate oxygen mass transfer in the gas
              phase to further increase 
electrode catalytic activity.  The issue of
              stability will be 
addressed by encapsulation of the biocatalysts in porous
              silica or 
other metal oxide by means of sol-gel, aerogel, and wet gel
              
processing.  Through-film electron mediation will be enabled using 
carbon
              nanotubes and redox polymer mediators.
	Successful introduction of fuel cells
              to the marketplace 
depends on an available workforce of qualified scientists
              and 
engineers, and the acceptance of fuel cells by energy consumers.
              
Moreover, the chemical engineering discipline as a whole is currently
              
undergoing a transition from process-oriented design to design of 
chemical
              products, of which fuel cells are an excellent example. 
This CAREER program
              addresses these needs through educational 
activities emphasizing new energy
              systems and engineering product 
design.  Educational programs will include
              (a) A community-based, 
hands-on after school program in Energy Systems for
              disadvantaged 
high-school students; (b) An enhanced introductory Chemical
              
Engineering course for first-year engineering students presenting the
              
concepts of product design through reverse-engineering and team-based
              
design projects; (c) An advanced Electrochemical Energy Systems 
course for
              graduates and senior undergraduates; (d) Immersive 
research training for
              secondary, undergraduate, and graduate 
students. 
	This program advances the
              knowledge and understanding of 
biofuel cell design while promoting training
              and learning of chemical 
product engineering in the context of energy
              systems.
