Title       : CAREER: Reactive Etching of Silicon Surfaces by Halogens with Novel
               Electrostatic Bond-Order Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0239448

Award Number: 0239448
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Stuart ss@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,9179,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Steven J. Stuart of Clemson University is supported through a CAREER
              award by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop
              classical potentials, which allow for the investigation of halogen-based
              etching of silicon surfaces. He will follow a framework, which has been
              successfully used for the development and application of hydrogen/carbon
              bond-order potentials. An additional complication, absent in the previously
              developed potentials, is to include electrostatic interactions which arise due
              to differing halogen/silicon electronegativities.  Temperature-accelerated
              dynamical methods will be used to simulate multimonolayer etching processes.
              Direct one-to-one mentoring of undergraduate and high school students is
              coupled to the research.

Plasma etching of silicon wafers is the primary
              means for fabrication of microelectronic devices and chips and is accomplished
              by spraying the wafer surface with a hot gas containing a significant amount of
              chlorine of fluorine.  The atomic scale chemistry, which leads to wafer
              etching, is currently only understood empirically and computer simulation of
              these processes is necessary for a complete understanding.  A more complete
              understanding may allow lower concentrations of chlorine and fluorine, which
              would lead to cleaner and cheaper processing. Also, enhanced understanding
              could allow for finer-scale etching processes that could further reduce the
              size of devices or fabrication costs.   Parts of the computational methodology
              developed and applied here is useful to other simulation efforts in the areas
              of physical chemistry.  The research is carried out with a very strong
              connection to the training of future scientists and addresses outreach to high
              schools as well as undergraduate, graduate and postgraduate 

