Title       : CAREER: Design and Implementation of a Virtual Product Development Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0239276

Award Number: 0239276
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tong (Teresa) Wu teresa.wu@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (Career) award focuses on Collaborative
              Product Development, combining research and education to (1) explore the
              information foundation in which globally distributed, collaborating engineers
              can design and develop world-class products and (2) develop a framework in
              which global engineers can participate and develop products in a real time
              basis. The information foundation will investigate an Internet based
              engineering information model that will share public and private information to
              achieve an integrated multi-partnership environment with focus on how to
              securely share collaborator's private information in a consistent way. Once the
              information foundation is established, a distributed decision support framework
              will be developed that will integrate partner pre-qualification, dynamic
              analysis of partner's conflict and negotiation for partners' conflicts
              resolution. Based on the model and the framework developed, a Virtual Product
              Development Environment (VPDE), a prototype system will be implemented.
              

VPDE will illustrate the procedure for enterprises to realize product
              development in a collaborative environment. The VPDE prototype system will
              include an Internet based information system, Internet based partner
              pre-qualification, Internet based Conflict Analysis and Internet based Partner
              negotiation modules. The education plan focuses on translating the VPDE into an
              instructional version that will integrate the outcomes of the proposed research
              with undergraduate and graduate education. This will also be a vehicle for
              minority outreach education programs, both at the undergraduate level and for
              workforce training. Various "designing active learning methodologies" will be
              explored to generate Internet-based exercises to demonstrate the role of
              engineering information systems and distributed decision support systems in
              collaborative product development. An online graduate course on Distributed
              Information System will also be developed.  

