Title       : CAREER: The Organization and Reputation of Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0239844

Award Number: 0239844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  3007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Tadelis stadelis@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modern economies exhibit a broad diversity of organizational forms: from small
              owner-operated firms to employee-owned partnerships, cooperatives, non-profits,
              and finally investor-owned corporations. Two important assets that a firm has
              are its organizational form and function, and its market reputation. A
              fundamental problem in economics is to understand both the forces that lead to
              these different forms of organization and what determines the value of these
              two intangible assets. This project proposes an economic framework for studying
              the economics of organizations, with focus on organizational form and firm
              reputation. The first part of the proposal studies partnerships and their role
              in the professional services. The approach highlights three ingredients that
              favor the formation of partnerships: (1) the importance of human capital in
              production; (2) a lack of information on the part of clients that leads them
              potentially to be concerned about the quality of the service they will obtain;
              and (3) the differing incentives of partnerships and corporations in the hiring
              and selection of senior employees. The theoretical model developed will explain
              why partnerships are typical in the professional services, where human capital
              is primary input to production and the nature of the service provided may be
              quite difficult for consumers to accurately assess, but rarely observed in
              manufacturing, technology, or lower-skill service industries.  Associated with
              this project is a rich set of policy questions concerning which forms of
              organization the law and regulatory policy should accommodate. There is no
              single coherent framework for understanding the differences between
              partnerships and corporations, or for understanding the specific economics of
              professional services that have led to this particular form of organization.
              This project will offer a starting point for a broader investigation of market
              structure in the professional services, for examining legal and regulatory
              issues in these industries, and for interpreting empirical evidence about the
              structure of professional organizations.

The second part of the proposal
              investigates the economic value of a firm's reputation, and how the dynamics of
              entrepreneurial behavior and firm reputation are linked. Building heavily on
              the insights I have gained from my previous work on firm reputation, I propose
              to empirically test the clear predictions of my theoretical work on the market
              for names using data on restaurants that combines both changes in ownership and
              reputation dynamics. The proposal also outlines some new theoretical ideas that
              would lead to a richer set of empirical predictions, and relate firm reputation
              to dynamic entrepreneurial choices. In particular, the "entrepreneurial spirit"
              may be related to particular types of people who specialize in creating new
              businesses, and who then pass on the successful ones to other people who
              specialize in maintaining ongoing enterprises. Understanding the link between
              the dynamics of a firm's reputation, and its effect on the creation and
              turnover of businesses, may help us understand the dynamics of entrepreneurial
              activity. Furthermore, the framework may offer some policy implications
              regarding the disclosure of information with respect to ownership turnover.

