Title       : CAREER: Nano-Biomechanics of Living Cells using Atomic Force Microscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0239138

Award Number: 0239138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Costa kdc17@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239138
Costa
The goals of this CAREER proposal are (1) to develop the atomic
              force microscope as a nano-tool for advancing the field of cell biomechanics
              and (2) to create an integrated hands-on educational program in cellular
              biomechanics in conjunction with these research efforts. 

Biological tissues
              are comprised of cells, and the mechanical properties of these cells directly
              impact on their fundamental functions including cell migration, proliferation,
              viability, and remodeling of the extracellular matrix in response to altered
              loading conditions. From a basic science standpoint, knowledge of cell
              mechanical properties is required to elucidate the mechanisms of cell function.
              Moreover, certain forms of heart disease, cancer and arthritis have been
              associated with altered mechanical properties of the cells of those tissues.
              Thus, characterizing cellular mechanical properties may enhance the ability to
              screen for disease and evaluate potential gene therapies and other treatments.
              

Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a recently developed technology that has
              rapidly gained popularity for measuring cell mechanics. AFM has advantages over
              alternative techniques including relative ease of use, ability to combine
              imaging and indentation capabilities, and it is commercially available.
              However, in contrast to the extensive engineering analysis of e.g. micropipette
              experiments, relatively little has been done to analyze the AFM experiment. The
              standard accepted AFM analysis assumes the cell behaves like a simple piece of
              rubber. Most biological tissues, on the other hand, exhibit complex nonlinear
              elastic and viscous properties that often vary regionally and have preferred
              axes of symmetry. These characteristics may extend to the cellular level as
              well. Therefore, this CAREER application proposes the most sophisticated
              analysis and validation of the AFM indentation problem to date. Finite elements
              will be used to simulate the full-scale 3-D AFM indentation experiment,
              incorporating detailed cell topography and probe geometry. Alternative
              constitutive models relating stress and strain within the cell, including
              effects of viscoelasticity, anisotropy, nonlinearity, and heterogeneity of
              material properties, will also be evaluated. In addition, a number of
              technological enhancements are proposed to optimize the AFM as a nano-tool for
              cell mechanics applications. The insights gained will be used to guide cell
              indentation experiments, to improve data analysis, and to help realize the
              tremendous potential of this powerful technique.

Connected with the research
              activity, a new course module in Biomechanics of Cells is proposed in the
              Department of Biomedical Engineering at Columbia University. The goal is to
              expose students to biomedical applications of nanotechnology as applied to the
              field of cell mechanics. Specifically, students in this graduate / advanced
              undergraduate course will use the AFM to gain hands-on experience interacting
              with materials at the cellular and sub-cellular scale. New advances in the
              research program will be integrated into the course and will also be
              incorporated into an outreach Summer High School Program. In addition, a
              multimedia web-based training tool will be developed and published on the
              National Science Digital Library so that it is always available educators and
              researchers interested in mechanical testing of cells and other biological
              materials using AFM. The website will include theoretical foundations, detailed
              methods, and practical "tips for success" enhanced by multi-media content.
              Through these combined research and educational activities, the PI aims to
              further the science of nano-scale biomechanics and stimulate interest in this
              new and exciting field. 

