Title       : CAREER: Simulations of Galaxy and Cluster Formation: The New Frontiers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0239759

Award Number: 0239759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kathleen D. Eastwood                    
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $703833             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrey V. Kravtsov andrey@oddjob.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID:	AST-0239759
Institution:	University of Chicago
PI:		Kravtsov,
              Andrey 

Dr. Andrey Kravtsov will use his CAREER award at the University of
              Chicago to pursue an understanding of how galaxies and galaxy clusters form
              within the framework of the Big Bang cosmology. Comparisons of data and
              theoretical predictions show that Cold Dark Matter models work remarkably well
              at scales larger than one megaparsec, but have serious difficulties in
              explaining an increasing number of observations at smaller scales. Dr. Kravtsov
              will model the formation of galaxy clusters and individual galaxies, including
              important physical processes such as star formation, stellar energy feedback,
              and heavy element enrichment, at an unprecedented level of sophistication and
              detail. High-resolution simulations will be used to study the effects of
              stellar feedback and metal enrichment on the properties of galaxies, the
              intergalactic medium, and intracluster gas of galaxy clusters as well as
              possible observational signatures of these effects. The improved feedback
              models will be used in a larger set of lower-resolution simulations of galaxies
              and galaxy clusters to evaluate the statistical effects of feedback on the
              morphology and structural properties of galaxies and thermal properties of the
              intracluster medium. He will make both the codes and the results of the
              simulations available to the scientific community. 

Cosmology, and the field
              of structure formation in particular, is an exciting subject with broad popular
              appeal. However, currently there are very few resources concerning the
              formation of large-scale structure available to educators and the public. Dr.
              Kravtsov will integrate his research projects into education and outreach by
              (1) working to deliver results of research in the area of structure formation
              as both public lectures and high-quality visualizations for educators and the
              general public; (2) involving undergraduate and graduate students in the
              proposed research activities; (3) developing new projects and classes
              introducing students to modern computational techniques and algorithms.


