Title       : CAREER: Cationic Microporous and Layered Metal Oxides for Anion-Based
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0239607

Award Number: 0239607
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Oliver soliver@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award seeks to develop a new class of microporous inorganic
              materials, where the charge of the material is positive. Microporous materials
              (see, for example, http://www.bza.org/zeolites.html) are extremely important
              industrially, with a global market of several million tons per year.  They are
              used primarily to convert heavy petroleum to fuel, or to soften or purify
              water.  In water softening, for example sodium or potassium inside the pores
              are exchanged with "hard" magnesium or calcium.  Despite their enormous
              significance, all such materials known to date are negative in charge and the
              species in the pores can only be cationic.  They would be considerable
              scientific and industrial interest in obtaining a new class discovery would
              lead to new applications based on the anions that reside in the pores.  For
              example, anionic pollutants could be trapped by the material, releasing an
              environmentally benign species in the process.  Separations of anionic
              mixtures, exchange for making new compounds, as well as new catalytic where the
              size and shape of the template complements that of the material.  Preliminary
              work has been successful in making the switch.  Our cationic material can
              exchange for a variety of other anions in high capacity.  It may be possible to
              "recycle" these anion-exchangers or absorb priority anionic pollutants, such as
              arsenates.  The research plan is integrated with the educational plan.  A
              series of laboratory experiments and lecture course modules will be developed
              that study advanced physical techniques for characterizing these materials. 
              The target courses range from freshman to graduate levels.  This project is
              highly interdisciplinary, encompassing chemistry, physics, materials science
              and engineering, and will give excellent training to graduate and undergraduate
              students.

This CAREER award seeks to develop a new methodology for the
              synthesis of cationic, inorganic microporous hosts.  Layered and microporous
              metal oxides are a class of materials central to a wide variety of industrial
              and environmental processes, but currently all hosts are anionic or neutral in
              charge.  This project focuses to create a new class of cationic hosts using
              anionic structure directing agents (SDAs).  The size and shape of the SDA will
              allow us to tune the channel size and porosity of the cationic host.  The
              potential for scientific and industrial payoff is considerable, opening up a
              range of possible anion-based applications, including environmental trapping of
              pollutants, anion-exchange, separation and catalysis.  Preliminary work with
              anionic SDAs has been successful in obtaining our first cationic layered
              materials, which is highly stable and can exchange for a variety of other
              anions in high capacity.  It may be possible to "recycle" these
              anion-exchangers by reversing the intercalation, or absorb other priority
              anionic pollutants, such as arsenates. Expertise and experience gained in the
              research plan will be incorporated into the educational plan, building upon the
              PI's past and present experience in microporous materials.  A series of
              laboratory experiments and lecture course modules, ranging from the freshman to
              graduate levels, will be developed based on open-frameworks and advanced
              characterization techniques.  This project is highly interdisciplinary,
              encompassing chemistry, physics, materials science and engineering, and will
              give excellent training to graduate and undergraduate students.  The project
              will allow the PI to make a significant contribution to materials chemistry,
              research and education over the course of his career.

