Title       : Nonstandard Work and Asset Accumulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0239995

Award Number: 0239995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69637              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Keister   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES- 0239995 
Lisa Keister 
Ohio State University Research Foundation 

 
              

This research investigates the effect of nonstandard work on worker asset
              accumulation. Researchers have documented extreme inequalities in asset
              ownership, but the processes that create these inequalities are not well
              understood. One potentially important contributing factor that has attracted
              little attention is a rise in nonstandard work. Part-time, temporary, and
              contract work can be flexible and may allow workers to evaluate a potential job
              before accepting a permanent position. Yet compensation and benefits can be
              relatively low for many nonstandard workers, altering the saving patterns of
              these workers. This project explores  (1) whether nonstandard workers
              accumulate assets differently than traditional workers, (2) whether demographic
              traits, work histories, and workplace traits of nonstandard workers affect
              their patterns of asset accumulation, and (3) the implications of these
              patterns for aggregate-level wealth inequality and related public policies. 
              The research will test numerous hypotheses drawn from social and economic
              theory to understand the relationship between nonstandard work and asset
              ownership. A unique contribution of this study is an effort to understand the
              relationship between nonstandard jobs and assets during specific working years,
              as a trajectory or path over time, and projected at retirement. The PI will
              synthesize data from three survey data sets and use simulation modeling to
              exploit these data, to investigate distributional outcomes, and to examine
              policy implications. Multiple outcomes will be used to explore these relations,
              including asset ownership, pension ownership, accumulation trajectories over
              time, projected well being during retirement, and aggregate-level wealth
              inequality. The study holds promise for evaluating theories about inequality
              and well being, for expanding understanding of the consequences of nonstandard
              work, and for anticipating the need for new policies designed to protect
              nonstandard workers during retirement.   
  
  

