Title       : CAREER: Toward a Model of Emotion-Specific Influences on Judgment and Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0239637

Award Number: 0239637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer S. Lerner jlerner@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Once an exclusively cognitive enterprise, research on judgment and decision
              making increasingly addresses the powerful influence of emotion.  Recent
              research has shown that even incidental emotion - emotion that is normatively
              unrelated to the judgment/decision at hand - can have a significant impact on
              judgment and choice.  The majority of studies in this tradition have been
              motivated by a valence-based approach, contrasting the effects of positive
              versus negative emotions on judgment and choice.  But there is growing evidence
              that specific emotions of the same valence can trigger opposing perceptions and
              judgments.  For example, in the wake of the terrorist attacks of 9-11,
              experimentally induced fear produced opposite effects from anger on both risk
              estimates and policy preferences among U.S. citizens in a nationwide field
              experiment (Lerner, Gonzalez, Small, & Fischhoff, in press).  From a
              theoretical perspective, these findings demonstrate that dimensions of emotions
              other than valence are also important components to include in decision models.
               From an applied perspective, they demonstrate how and why citizens primed for
              anger will endorse rather different policies than will citizens primed for
              fear.  
The purpose of the proposed research is to develop and test a
              parsimonious yet powerful theory that comprehensively predicts relations among
              specific emotions and judgment/choice outcomes.  The proposed research will
              expand Lerner and Keltner's (2000; 2001) appraisal-tendency framework (ATF). 
              The ATF predicts that each emotion activates an implicit cognitive
              predisposition - an "appraisal tendency" - to appraise future events in line
              with the central appraisal dimensions that triggered the emotion.  Such
              appraisals, although tailored to help the individual respond to the event that
              evoked the emotion, persist beyond the eliciting situation - becoming an
              implicit perceptual lens for interpreting subsequent situations.  The
              appraisal-tendency approach provides a flexible yet specific framework for
              developing a host of testable hypotheses concerning emotion, judgment, and
              decision making.
The proposed research will test hypotheses concerning the
              effects of emotion on three fundamental cognitive processes:  probability
              assessment, valuation, and attribution.  Probability assessment, valuation, and
              attribution are chosen for study because they underlie countless judgments and
              decisions in daily life.  Indeed, the first two processes also form the basis
              for the dominant theoretical model for decision making under uncertainty:  the
              expected utility model.  To the extent that incidental emotion influences
              subjective utility and/or probability estimates, it will have implications for
              classical decision theories and contemporary revisions.  To the extent that
              incidental emotion influences attribution processes, it, too, will have
              manifold implications because attribution plays a central role in foundational
              theories of social cognition, mental health, physical health, and justice.
The
              project also aims to disseminate knowledge about the effect of emotion on
              judgment and decision making, and about the larger field of behavioral decision
              research (BDR), to broader audiences of students, the public, and policymakers.
               Dissemination of the insights of BDR is especially important because it has
              clear practical implications for both public policy and private decisions. 
              Knowledge of the field will be circulated to wider audiences through a new,
              interdisciplinary undergraduate major in Decision Science at Carnegie Mellon;
              through briefings for policymakers and interviews with the press; and through
              the development of a sustainable infrastructure for disseminating BDR research
              in concert with the National Academy of Science's Office for the Public
              Understanding of Science.  In all aspects of this initiative, the overarching
              goal will be to demonstrate ways in which basic, theory-driven research can
              illuminate and improve judgment and decision making of individuals, groups, and
              institutions.

