Title       : CAREER: Static Properties and Dynamical Behavior of Jammed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0239109

Award Number: 0239109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric R. Weeks weeks@physics.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project will investigate connections between the microscopic and
              macroscopic properties of complex fluids.  The systems studied are "jammed"
              materials, including colloidal suspensions, emulsions, and granular
              suspensions.  All these materials possess similar microscopic properties, and
              recent theories propose that they share an underlying transition to the
              "jammed" state, analogous to a glass transition.  The objective of this work is
              to utilize microscopy to provide crucial details for testing and extending
              theories of jamming.  Experiments will connect the rheological behavior of
              these systems to the formation and dynamics of microscopic structures.  The
              overarching goal is to clarify the mechanisms underlying jamming, which will be
              highly relevant to a large number of researchers studying granular materials,
              colloids, glass transitions, and nonlinear dynamics in complex fluids. 
              Moreover, the insight from these experiments will be useful to the processing
              of industrially important materials.  Undergraduate and graduate students
              involved will receive broad training in experimental techniques and computer
              data analysis.  Because of the interdisciplinary nature of these systems as
              well as their relevance to technological and industrial processes, students
              involved in the project will be well trained for careers in academe, industry,
              or government.  The project is co-supported with the Particulate and Multiphase
              Processes Program in the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.

This
              CAREER project will investigate connections between the small-scale structure
              of complex fluids and their large-scale flow behavior.  The systems studied are
              "jammed" materials, including colloidal suspensions (small solid particles in a
              liquid), emulsions (liquid droplets in a second liquid), and granular particles
              (large solid particles).  All these materials possess similar small-scale
              properties, and recent theories propose that they share an underlying
              transition to the "jammed" state analogous to how glasses become solid upon
              cooling.  The objective of this proposal is to use microscopy to provide
              crucial details for testing and extending theories of jamming.  Experiments
              connect the behavior of these materials as they flow through tubes or deform
              under applied forces, to the formation and motion of microscopic structures. 
              The insight from these experiments will be useful to the processing of
              industrially important materials (such as food products, paints,
              pharmaceuticals, and oil).  Undergraduate and graduate students involved
              receive broad training in experimental techniques and computer data analysis. 
              Because of the interdisciplinary nature of these systems as well as their
              relevance to technological and industrial processes, students involved in the
              project will be well trained for careers in academe, industry, or government. 
              The project is co-supported with the Particulate and Multiphase Processes
              Program in the Division of Chemical and Transport Systems.

