Title       : Spatial Thinking and Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0239883

Award Number: 0239883
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337561             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald G. Golledge golledge@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Spatial thinking and reasoning is common to most knowledge domains.  It is
              central to geography and other geosciences, and it is important in domains
              ranging from astronomy to zoology where geospatial databases are common.  Other
              knowledge areas, such as dance, music, painting, sculpture, genetics, biology,
              physics, and linguistics, all require spatial thinking and use spatial
              metaphors.  The peculiar contribution of spatial thinking and reasoning to
              solve certain types of problems has been recognized by psychologists like Beck
              and Uttal, who claimed that preparing and using spatial representations of
              information (as in maps, graphs, and images) provides a perspective that is not
              matched by any other means.  The purpose of this research project is to develop
              a spatial task ontology and a concept lexicon to assist in the development of
              spatial thinking and reasoning.  The investigator will define spatial thinking
              and identify sets of tasks that will help people understand the nature and
              importance of spatial thinking and reasoning in everyday life.  The task
              ontology will identify different levels and types of tasks ranging from those
              designed to identify spatial primitives and will illustrate how such primitives
              can be expanded into discrete levels.  The levels range from simple derivations
              to more complex multiple combinations of primitives and derivations to form
              complex concepts, such as geographic association and spatial interpolation. 
              When elaborated, these concepts assist in the understanding of everyday
              activities, such as learning a route to primary school, choosing a neighborhood
              in which to live, or selecting places to work, shop, or enjoy recreational
              activities.  This project aims to synthesize theoretical work on spatial
              ontology with empirical work on spatial task performance in the world of
              everyday experience.  To achieve the project's objectives, sets of innovative
              tasks will be developed and tested in both laboratory and field settings to
              evaluate whether or not developing an understanding of spatial concepts
              embedded in everyday living leads to enriched geographic understanding of
              neighborhood, city, region, nation, and the world.

This project will explore
              the ways that people organize the ways they think about space and the forms of
              thinking and reasoning that they use when they are confronted with spatial
              information.  The research should shed light on how enhanced understanding of
              geographic concepts influences the comprehensive of spatial information, and it
              will illustrate differences that result from formal training in geographic
              concepts.  All of these developments have intellectual implications ranging
              from the formalization of geographic knowledge to the development of more
              effective geographic information systems.  This project will influence the
              development of future enhancements of geographic information systems, and it
              could help identify new strategies for more effective geographic education at
              all levels.

