Title       : CAREER: Organosulfur Natural Products Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0239755

Award Number: 0239755
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $502316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rabi A. Musah musah@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research program focuses on the organosulfur chemistry of natural products
              isolated from plants with insecticidal, agricultural, or medicinal value, and
              whose organoleptic properties imply the presence of organosulfur derivatives
              other than the ubiquitous sulfur containing compounds such as cysteine and
              methionine. Major objectives include 1) isolation and characterization of novel
              potentially useful gamma-glutamyl cysteines, 2) C-S lyase crystallization,
              structure determination, and mechanistic study, 3) assessment of the variety of
              cysteine sulfoxide precursors responsible for organosulfur headspace volatiles
              observed in selected plants, 4) chemotaxonomic classification of plant species,
              5) determination of the lachrymatory principle(s) in plants, 6) thiosulfinate
              chemistry and optical activity, 7) determination of formation pathways of
              observed organosulfur natural products, and 8) synthesis and characterization
              of observed novel compounds. A three-pronged approach to integrate teaching and
              education will be taken, involving a K-12 scientific outreach program,
              mentorship at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and pedagogical
              innovations in teaching and research.

With the support of this CAREER Award
              from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Rabi Musah, of
              the Department of Chemistry at the State University of New York, Albany, is
              exploring the chemistry of sulfur-containing natural products. Garlic is the
              best-characterized organosulfur containing plant. It has become increasingly
              evident that other plants possess considerably different organosulfur chemical
              makeups. Given the rich diversity of compounds and chemistry observed in garlic
              and onions, it is likely that numerous other novel compounds with interesting
              and important chemical and biological properties are present in other plants.
              Through a variety of integrated approaches, Professor Musah will explore the
              isolation, characterization, and attendant chemistry and biochemistry of
              organosulfur products from natural sources. In addition, Professor Musah will
              develop a K-12 scientific outreach program and implement a mentorship program
              at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
