Title       : CAREER: Glass/Polymeric Material Systems in Civil Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0239068

Award Number: 0239068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katerina D. Papoulia kp58@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,CVIS,
Abstract    :
                Glass windows are important for quality of life of a building's occupants, but
              windows can pose a hazard for the occupants when a blast load shatters them.
              This is a matter of increasing significance for building security. In addition,
              glass is an attractive structural material in settings other than windows
              because of its unique aesthetic appeal. This research project deals with the
              development of innovative models for fracture and damage to inorganic
              (silicate) and organic
(Polymeric) glass, and to laminated windows composed of
              alternating layers of glass and elastomer. Chief concerns are rate dependence
              and accurate prediction of fragment size and velocity. The models will also
              account for practical issues like framing and mounting systems and realistic
              loads. The main scientific hurdles to be resolved are better models for
              rate-dependent viscoelasticity and plasticity, more efficient and accurate use
              of cohesive interface models for explicit modeling of dynamic crack growth, and
              new homogenization procedures that will capture the results of a very fine-grid
              cohesive finite element simulation on a coarser more computationally feasible
              mesh. Each of these hurdles poses interesting technical questions; for example,
              in the case of cohesive interface models, even the basic matter of valid ranges
              for the size of the elements is currently incompletely understood and will be
              elucidated in this research effort. The computational models will be verified
              using laboratory experiments by industrial and academic collaborators.
An
              important theme in the research is bridging the various time scales: the
              fastest phenomenon
under consideration, namely the propagation of a dynamic
              cracks through one process-zone length, takes place over an interval that is
              about 18 orders of magnitude shorter than the interval required for surface
              damage to accumulate. Therefore, special attention will be paid to models that
              are able to make accurate predictions for many different time-scales and
              frequencies, and to homogenization techniques that can obviate the need for
              very small steps.

The educational aspect of the proposed CAREER plan
              involves the development of industrial
experience for undergraduates,
              restructuring of an undergraduate and graduate course to include more modern
              coverage of strength of materials especially inelasticity, creation of a new
              undergraduate course on advanced structural systems to cover nonlinear material
              modeling, and creation of a graduate seminar on computational solid mechanics
              with direct links to the proposed research. For most of these courses, new case
              studies based on industrial practice and also new computer codes tailored for
              classroom use will be developed. Outcomes of the proposed research plan include
              computational models and methods better able to efficiently predict the safety
              of windows in a secure building, better models for assessing durability under
              naturally occurring loads like wind gusts and damage from small particles, and
              new insight into fracture mechanics and the effect of loading rate. Outcomes of
              tthe educational plan will be students with a better appreciation for the
              purposes and methods of modeling of materials (particularly inelastic and
              nonlinear) at different length and time scales, new educationally oriented
              finite element codes useful in a variety of classroom settings, and new
              instructional modules for outreach to K-12 students.




