Title       : CAREER: Virtual Prototyping of Artificial Knees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0239042

Award Number: 0239042
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Benjamin J. Fregly fregly@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239042
Fregly
This CAREER proposal seeks to develop an integrated educational
              and research foundation in computational modeling of artificial knees. The two
              main objectives are (1) develop a virtual prototyping environment that can be
              used to improve wear and functionality in artificial knees, and (2) create two
              exhibits on engineering analysis of knee function for the largest science
              museum in the southern U.S. An estimated 375,000 total knee replacements (TKRs)
              were performed in the USA in 2002, and if current trends continue, over 10
              million will be performed between now and the year 2020. The ability to improve
              the longevity and functionality of these implants would make a significant
              impact on the quality of life for the millions of knee osteoarthritis sufferers
              worldwide who will receive knee replacements in the coming years. 

Current
              experimental and computational methodologies for studying TKR functionality and
              wear have significant limitations. Knee simulator machines used to measure wear
              are costly and time consuming, while dynamic finite element methods that
              predict motion and contact pressures simultaneously require hours or days of
              CPU time. Consequently, neither is appropriate for design sensitivity and
              optimization studies of knee implant design and surgical positioning issues.
              Furthermore, neither allows the study artificial knee function within the in
              vivo loading environment of the larger musculoskeletal system. This study
              proposes a fundamentally new approach for studying TKR functionality and wear.
              The approach integrates elastic contact theory with multibody dynamics theory
              to produce a hybrid simulation environment that possesses the advantages of
              both - fast dynamic movement simulation from multibody dynamics and accurate
              contact pressure prediction from elasticity. The method is fast enough to be
              integrated into a larger dynamic systems model of the musculoskeletal system,
              providing a unique in vivo computational environment for virtual prototyping of
              artificial knees. The environment will be extensively evaluated in four stages
              against existing and new experimental data to ensure that the final product is
              predictive. 

Paralleling these activities is the development of two exhibits
              on knee mechanics for the Museum of Science and Industry in Tampa, FL. The
              exhibits will take the engineering concepts and methods investigated in the
              research plan and make them accessible to the general public. One exhibit will
              be a bank of knee models that visitors can manipulate to study natural,
              injured, arthritic, and artificial knee mechanics, and the other will be a
              multimedia exhibit at which visitors can create and analyze simple knee models
              using the same engineering software as in the research plan. Minority and
              economically disadvantaged children participating in museum programs will serve
              as exhibit evaluators to expose them to the use of engineering in medicine. 

