Title       : CAREER: Fabrication and Characterization of Stimulus-Responsive Polymer
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0239769

Award Number: 0239769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan Zauscher zauscher@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research program will make significant contributions to the
              fabrication and characterization of stimulus-responsive biomolecular and
              bio-inspired polymeric nanostructures, and will contribute to the advancement
              of nanotechnology and hybrid biological/nonbiological microdevices. 
              Specifically, the research will develop nanopatterning strategies that combine
              scanning probe lithography (SPL), such as dippen nanolithography (DPN), with
              surface initiated polymerization (SIP) or direct deposition, and promises an
              inexpensive, "bottom-up" approach to create functional stimulus-responsive
              architectures.  The results from the proposed research program promise insight
              into the mechanical behavior of stimulus-responsive polymers on the ensemble
              and single molecule level.  On the single molecule level the mechano-chemical
              properties of SRPs will be probed by force spectroscopy, measuring the
              force-extension behavior of a single molecule level.  On the single molecule
              level the mechano-chemical properties of SRPs will be probed by force
              spectroscopy, measuring the force-extension behavior of a single molecule
              tethered between the tip of an atomic force microscope cantilever and a
              surface.  On the ensemble level, characterization will be accomplished by
              optical probes (imaging ellipsometry, surface plasmon resonance spectroscopy)
              and by scanning probe methods (force spectroscopy, colloidal probe microscopy).
               The results from the proposed research will lay the groundwork necessary to
              exploit the mechanical properties of biologically inspired materials and will
              provide a sound understanding of their mechanical properties on the molecular
              level for actuation and force transduction applications.

In a broader
              context, the proposed program will impact our understanding of soft-wet
              materials at the interface between engineering, biology and medicine and the
              proposed nanofabrication methods will potentially be developed into
              immunosensor arrays or used for gating in nanofluidics applications.  The
              interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research and education activities will
              equip students with indispensable experimental and analytical skills in the
              rapidly growing field of nanotechnology.  A collaboration with researchers in
              Sweden will provide an international dimension to the research and education
              activities.  Finally, the proposed program seeks to include hearing impaired
              students in the research and discovery process in an attempt to break down
              attitudinal barrier that often prevent the acceptance and inclusion of students
              with disabilities in research.

