Title       : SBIR Phase II: Characterization of Three Dimensional Discontinuity Properties
               from Digital Images of Rock Masses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0239119

Award Number: 0239119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan E. Figueroa                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499566             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Handy jeff@spliteng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Split Engineering LLC
	      110 S. Church Avenue
	      Tucson, AZ  85701    520/327-3773

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will further the
              investigation of two innovative technologies for characterizing fractures in
              rock masses. The first technology involves image-processing algorithms for the
              extraction of 3D fracture properties from fracture traces in digital images. 
              The second technology involves the use of laser-scanners to extract the 3D
              properties of exposed fracture surfaces. The two technologies complement each
              other well and there are situations where the characterization of fracturing is
              best analyzed with one or the other or both technologies. The first objective
              of the Phase II research is to continue to improve the two technologies, and to
              integrate all the various algorithms into a single user-friendly software tool.
              The second objective is to thoroughly evaluate sources of error in both
              technologies through synthetic and field studies, and to develop a set of
              recommended field procedures and equipment for various applications to optimize
              the techniques and minimize errors. The third objective is to develop
              relationships with potential customers for the software and also groups
              interested in collaborating on software development and validation. Once a beta
              version of the software is developed, this software will be provided to some
              customers for validation and assessment.

Within the broad scope of the rock
              engineering market, four distinct market segments have been identified for this
              innovation.  Each market segment has a separate end-use application: mining,
              geotechnical, petroleum, and environment.  Market research and letters of
              support from various market participants have demonstrated that a market need
              exists for automation of tasks currently performed manually by rock engineering
              professionals.

