Title       : CAREER: C-3'-Nucleic Acid Radicals: Generation and Mechanistic Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0239525

Award Number: 0239525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amanda Bryant-Friedrich friedric@oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      520 O'Dowd Hall
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    248/370-4924

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Oxidative processes are at the heart of numerous chemical and biochemical
              processes, including the damage of nucleic acids by ionizing radiation or
              specific drug interactions. This project involves the synthesis of modified
              nucleosides and nucleotides that will permit the elucidation of the mechanism
              of degradation of C-3' nucleotide radicals in DNA and RNA. Modifed nucleosides
              containing photoactive functional groups will be synthesized and incorporated
              into small DNAs and RNAs designed for the investigation of damage events. The
              nature and fate of nucleoside radicals derived from these site-specifically
              functionalized nucleic acid systems will be explored by a variety of chemical,
              analytical, and biophysical methods. A curriculum for a Master of Science
              degree will be developed, targeting specific groups in an effort to increase
              the pool of underrepresented minorities in the chemical workforce. This program
              specifically targets students who are ill prepared for graduate studies or who
              have not been successful in previous attempts to receive a graduate degree due
              to a lack of proper preparation.

With the support of this CAREER Award from
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Amanda
              Bryant-Friedrich, of the Department of Chemistry at Oakland University, is
              developing an understanding of the chemical processes which result in the
              damage of DNA and RNA.  Radiation, drug interactions, and other oxidative
              processes can lead to the formation of nucleic acid radicals. Through the
              synthesis and manipulation of modified nucleic acid subunits, Professor
              Bryant-Friedrich is elucidating the mechanisms by which these radicals lead to
              nucleic acid degradation. Professor Bryant-Friedrich is also working toward
              increasing the representation of women and minorities in the chemical
              workforce. Through development of a Master of Science program at Oakland
              University, Professor Bryant-Friedrich will provide a program targeting
              students who are academically ill-prepared for graduate study, placing them on
              track for employment or for placement in competitive doctoral programs.
