Title       : CAREER: A New Methodology for Copolymer Functionalization: One-Step Multi
               Recognition Site Self-Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2002  
File        : a0239385

Award Number: 0239385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcus Weck marcus.weck@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is on the design and synthesis of "universal" polymer
              backbones for use in simultaneous multi-recognition of functional groups.  The
              central theme is to produce a polymer backbone that can be modified as required
              by the attachment of binding functionalities of interest.  Monomers bearing
              various transition metals and chelating groups, as well as functional groups
              bearing hydrogen bond donor and acceptors with various patterns will be
              polymerized to produce polymers capable of subsequent modification.  In terms
              of broader impact, the modified polymers are expected to be useful for a wide
              range of biological, optical and electronic applications.  The focus of the
              educational effort will be the development and introduction of a new
              campus-wide interdisciplinary laboratory course for undergraduates.  

With
              this CAREER award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is
              supporting the research and educational efforts of Dr. Marcus M. Weck in the
              Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Georgia Institute of
              Technology.  Professor Weck will focus his research on the production of
              polymers capable of modification to suit various purposes in biology, optics or
              electronics.  The educational component of the award will center on the
              development of a new laboratory course designed to introduce college students
              from many different disciplines to the uses of polymers, and a workshop to
              introduce polymer chemistry to faculty at undergraduate institutions.

