Title       : Dynamics, Microviscosity, and Length Scales in Aqueous Polymer Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0239390

Award Number: 0239390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Castner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Castner will investigate friction in polymer and
              polymer-based complex fluids experimentally using time-dependent optical
              techniques.  In these experiments a simple hypothesis relating the
              microviscosity of a polymer solution to the microviscosity of the monomer will
              be tested, and related behavior in triblock co-polymers will be explored. 
              Optical-heterodyne detected Raman-induced Kerr effect spectroscopy will be used
              to measure the microviscosities.  Recent advances in femtosecond spectroscopic
              techniques will help improve the measurements.  The widely variable shear
              viscosity of these triblock co-polymer gels system will allow incisive tests of
              the microviscosity hypothesis.  A second set of experiments will explore
              dynamics in thermoreversible hydrophilic polymer gels.

Results of these
              experiments will lead to better understanding of aqueous polymer solutions and
              are of relevance to the design of improved polymer gels for drug delivery and
              other applications.  This research will be be conducted in collaboration with
              theorist Robert Cave of Harvey Mudd College, an undergraduate institution.  The
              PI also mentors first-year women students from Douglass College in an
              Introduction to Scientific Research course.  As a result, undergraduates from
              Rutgers University, Douglass College, and Harvey Mudd College can obtain
              experience in this forefront research area.  

