Title       : CAREER: Perovskite Buffer Layers for Compound Semiconductor-Silicon
               Heteroepitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0239006

Award Number: 0239006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glenn L. Schrader                       
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian G. Willis willis@che.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program will investigate the use of perovskite buffer layers for
              compound semiconductor-on-silicon heteroepitaxy.  Perovskite buffer layers
              offer potential solutions to lattice mismatch challenges in heteroepitaxy. 
              During the growth of perovskite films on silicon, oxygen diffuses to the
              interface and creates an amorphous SiOx region that separates the perovskite
              epitaxial layer from the silicon substrate.  The perovskite layer can then act
              as a template for subsequent epitaxial layers such as compound semiconductors. 
              The research program will determine if the amorphous SiOx interface
              sufficiently relieves the lattice mismatch strain generated in the epitaxial
              layers and also traps dislocation defects at the interface.  Perovskite
              "buffer" layers may therefore enable low defect density heteroepitaxy on
              silicon substrates.  The technology has enormous potential to create new
              designs that integrate optically active devices with the power of silicon CMOS
              logic. 
	
The research will provide new scientific understanding of
              metalorganic chemical vapor deposition and atomic layer deposition methods to
              be used for the growth of strontium nucleation layers and SrTiO3 buffer layers.
               Experimental investigations will develop the chemistry and reaction
              engineering fundamentals necessary for successful growth of high quality
              epitaxial perovskite layers on silicon.  The perovskite buffer layers will be
              used as substrates for III-V/silicon heteroepitaxy.  Investigations will
              analyze the gas phase and surface reaction chemistry of the strontium and
              titanium organometallic precursors.  Research efforts will optimize the
              materials quality through reactor design and operation.  Special challenges
              include controlling precursor transport to the reaction zone, avoiding
              premature adduct formation and/or decomposition, and achieving high quality
              monocrystalline, epitaxial layers.  



