Title       : CAREER: Transition Pathways in Complex Systems. Theory and Numerical Methods.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0239625

Award Number: 0239625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth J. Shaw                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2003     
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Vanden Eijnden eve2@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract of NSF Proposal 0239625

PI: Eric Vanden-Eijnden, Courant Institute
              of Mathematical Sciences

Title: Transition pathways in complex
              systems

The description of complex system driven by rare events,
              or
conformations, is a major challenge in applied mathematics
              and
computational sciences.  Well-known examples of conformations
              include
nucleation events during phase transition, conformational changes
              in
molecules, thermal activated switching of magnetic materials, and
chemical
              reactions.  The disparity between the execution time of the
conformation event
              and the waiting time between these events is
typically so large that it
              impossible to simulate the dynamics of
these processes by solving directly the
              underlying dynamic equations.
This project is a combined theorical and
              numerical effort to describe
and simulate these rare conformation changes. The
              theoretical
description of transition pathways in complex systems leads
              to
challenging problem in probability and stochastic processes theory
which
              require to go beyond the standard tools of large deviation
theory and
              extensions thereof. These new theoretical tools will be
developed so as to
              naturally lead to efficient algorithms, well-suited
for the numerical
              investigation of the transition pathways required in
realistic complex
              systems.


Applied mathematics has much to contribute, and much to gain
              in
understanding via a coordinate program of analysis, simulation,
              and
education the mechanisms by which rare conformation changes arise
              in
complex systems. Topics to be addressed include: (a) the development
of
              appropriate theoretical tools for the description of the transition
pathways
              in complex systems; (b) the development of efficient
numerical algorithms for
              the identification of these pathways; and,
(c) the development of courses at
              undergraduate and graduate levels in
applied stochastic methods which will
              provide the students with the
necessary background to do research on these
              topics at the interface
between mathematics, computer science, and the natural
              sciences.
Successful pursuit of these issues requires a
              multidisciplinary
effort, drawing expertise from computational sciences,
              applied
mathematics, in the multiple fields in the natural sciences
              which
involve complex dynamical systems.  The students and
              postdoctoral
scientists participating this effort will gain flexibility
              and
perspective through exposure to these many disciplines.

