Title       : Middleware and Grid Infrastructure Coordination Committee (MAGIC) 1st
               Documentation Workshop; August 26-28, 2002; Chicago, IL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0239912

Award Number: 0239912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Greene                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick L. Stevens stevens@cs.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Grid technologies and middleware are in the process of transforming the way
              science will be conducted around the globe.  There are currently over 100
              national and international grid projects involving many different disciplines,
              organizations, collaborators, facilities and instruments in literally dozens of
              countries.   Despite the extensive and on-going development of grids, tools,
              applications, and middleware, the long term viability  and persistence of these
              technologies is uncertain.  And, if these technologies and middleware can not
              be made persistent, it will not only threaten the future of science and
              research, but may severely impact the education community as well.

The
              workshop is sponsored by the Large Scale Networking Coordinating Group (LSN CG)
              of the Interagency Working Group in Information Technology Research and
              Development (IWG/IT R&D).  The IWG, which functions under the White House
              National Science and Technology Council, coordinates Federal multiagency IT R&D
              efforts.  The LSN CG agencies are AHRQ, DARPA, DOE ST, DOE NNSA, NASA, NIH,
              NIST, NSA, NOAA NSF, and ODDR&E.  The workshop is being planned and coordinated
              by the MAGIC Team of the LSN that includes representation from the IWG
              agencies,  the university and commercial communities, including international
              participants

The workshop's objectives are to develop a vision for
              middleware and Grid to enable science applications and cooperation (5 to 10
              years out) and to identify needed Federal networking research to implement that
              vision.  The workshop is intended to obtain inputs from the university,
              commercial, and Federal research communities on needed research to enable
              middleware and Grids, resource and tool development, and the need for
              persistent infrastructure to support researchers using middleware and Grids and
              to carry out research on middleware and Grids.  The workshop results will be
              used to develop a Blueprint for Future Science Middleware and Grid Research and
              Infrastructure that can be used by the LSN Federal agencies in development of
              their research plans and programs.  The document will also be used to inform
              decision makers and researchers of the research needed in middleware and grids
              and the need for a persistent infrastructure to support their use.

The goal
              of the workshop will be focused on producing a document "Blueprint for Future
              Science Middleware and Grid Research and Infrastructure," which will address
              the service and software infrastructure required for long-term, persistent,
              large scale Grid and Middleware-based technologies to meet the needs of
              education, research and science.


