Title       : Synthesis and Study of Theoretically Interesting Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 25,  2002  
File        : a0239304

Award Number: 0239304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $624000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weston T. Borden borden@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research involves a combination of experimental and
              computational projects designed to give deeper understanding of basic organic
              chemical reactions.  The experimental projects include the synthesis of a
              semibullvalene that is predicted to be bishomoaromatic, a study of the
              stereochemistry of the ring opening of 1,2-dimethyl-3,3-(bistrimethylsilyl)
              cyclopropane, and the matrix isolation and IR spectroscopy of
              cyclopentanone-2,5-diyl. Among the proposed computational projects are
              electronic structure calculations on the mechanism of the reaction of
              hexafluorcyclopropane with halogens, the existence of cooperative and
              competitive substituent effects in [1,5]sigmatropic shifts, and the effects
              that determine whether reductive elimination of methane occurs with or without
              ligand loss from a variety of transition metal complexes.

With this award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research of
              Dr. Weston T. Borden of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Washington.  Professor Borden will focus his work on three experimental and
              eight computational projects in the areas of organic synthesis, organic and
              inorganic reaction mechanisms and computational chemistry.  In addition to
              providing training for graduate students and postdoctorals, the project will
              have the broader impact of resulting in exchanges of knowledge between the
              Borden group and the research groups of many collaborators, including those in
              the chemistry faculty at Seattle Pacific University (SPU).  The interaction at
              SPU will also enrich the research experience of undergraduates at that
              institution.

