Title       : CAREER: Alluvial Fan Form Quantification to Advance Geographic Science and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0239749

Award Number: 0239749
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thad A. Wasklewicz twsklwcz@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The analysis of the form of the Earth's terrain has lagged significantly behind
              research of the processes that produce those forms in geomorphology. 
              Furthermore, a considerable amount of geomorphic research has focused on
              two-dimensional analyses that quantify shape rather than the three-dimensional
              spatial form of surficial features.  These emphases have produced a situation
              whereby current understanding of continuous terrain is not equated with
              repeatable, measurable attributes but rather with qualitative or simplified
              empirical interpretations.  This Faculty Early-Career Development (CAREER)
              award will support research to quantitatively assess the three-dimensional form
              of alluvial fans.  Alluvial fans are depositional features that result from
              sedimentary deposition of alluvium, debris flows, colluvium, or a combination
              of all three at the foot of a steep slope.  The objectives of this line of
              research are to produce a detailed understanding of alluvial fan form and to
              use this information to generate a precise process-response model explaining
              fan evolution in arid as well as humid environments.  High-resolution terrain
              data for a set of alluvial fans will be gathered using global positioning
              system (GPS) surveying, airborne laser-swath mapping (ALSM), and soft-copy
              photogrammetry techniques.  The investigator will convert the terrain data into
              grid-based digital elevation models (DEM).  In addition, spatial information on
              fan sedimentary units will be gathered using ground-penetrating radar (GPR). 
              The DEM and sedimentary data will be integrated, stored, analyzed, and
              visualized using a geographic information system (GIS).  Several geostatistical
              and spatial statistical procedures will be performed to analyze the spatial
              arrangement and relationships of the internal and external structure identified
              in the alluvial fans.  The spatial relationships will be used to produce the
              process-response model.  The model will be innovative because form will have
              equally quantifiable measures to compare with the depositional units.  The
              study results and data will be readily transferable to the classroom providing
              active-learning experiences based on innovative data collection, theory, and
              analytical educational experiences at the undergraduate and graduate levels. 
              The investigator intends to get underrepresented students participating in
              research and assisting them by fostering a dynamic student-centered learning
              environment

The anticipated outcomes of this research should provide a
              quantitative explanation for similarity and differences between fans generated
              from disparate processes as well as an assessment of how form varies under
              different environmental settings.  The findings will show how the spatial
              arrangement of sedimentary units impacts alluvial fan surface morphology. 
              Quantification of alluvial fan form and its relation to formative processes are
              topics with scientific, applied, and educational merit.  The use of
              arithmetical and statistical techniques will provide repeatable and comparative
              values that will advance the understanding of form in geographic science.  The
              capacity of the current research to produce accurate information on fan form
              promotes direct application of these measures for improving conditions of human
              settlements and protecting them from natural hazards.  Urban sprawl in many
              cities throughout the world has caused development to expand onto fan surfaces.
               Inhabiting these environments places people at risk and puts a burden on
              society to pay for damages from flooding and debris flows.  Scientific
              inquiries are beginning to unravel some of the causal mechanisms associated
              with flooding, channel avulsion, and debris flows on fans, and this study will
              elucidate how they link to fan morphology.  Precise information about alluvial
              fan form therefore should help produce better tools for hazard mitigation and a
              firmer factual knowledge base that engineers can use to develop safer building
              pads and structures.  The project also will provide integrative learning
              opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.

