Title       : SBIR Phase II: A New Technology for Rapid Identification of Aluminum Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0239055

Award Number: 0239055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Sommer nrtinfo@nrt-inc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Recovery Tech Inc
	      566 Mainstream Drive
	      Nashville, TN  372281223    615/734-6400

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1467,1468,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a
              new technology for rapid identification and sorting of aluminum and its alloys
              from a mixture of non-magnetic metals and will provide a new high quality
              source of these valuable materials for industrial manufacturing processes. This
              project plans to complete development of an innovative new optoelectronic
              sensing method integral to the new technology and then design, construct, and
              test a near commercial scale prototype metals processing system based upon the
              new technology. The prototype system will be integrated into an existing pilot
              plant test facility located on-site at the commercial partner's metals
              recycling facility and will be tested on metal feed streams derived from an
              automobile shredder processing line located at the recycling facility. A
              primary objective is to develop an environmentally friendly computerized dry
              process which can be situated locally and which can rapidly and cleanly sort
              aluminum scrap from mixtures of nonmagnetic metals at low cost to replace
              large, costly, and environmentally burdensome heavy media processes and
              smelting processes for mixed metals.

The commercial and broader impacts of
              this technology will be to reduce the amount of scrap aluminum alloys that are
              discarded each year in landfills because recycling of these materials are
              neither technically nor economically practical. Existing methods of sortation
              use visual examination and hand sortation, or hand-held/bench-top analyzers
              that are cumbersome and slow in speed. Heavy media separators and smelting
              facilities for mixed metals are polluting and expensive to build and operate.
              Using advanced optoelectronic detection techniques, including computer
              analysis, the proposed technology will sort aluminum alloys from mixed
              nonferrous metals automatically at speeds never before attainable. If the
              approach is successful, the impact to increased scrap utilization, increased
              scrap value and reduced environmental pollution is enormous. The potential
              worldwide market exceeds $2 Billion annually. 

