Title       : CAREER: Path Integral Simulations of the Electronic, Optical, and Magnetic
               Properties of Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0239819

Award Number: 0239819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Shumway John.Shumway@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,7203,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research on the
              electronic and optical properties of semiconductor nanostructures. The PI will
              develop new simulation techniques based on Feynman path integrals and apply
              them to nanostructures. The research is complementary to approaches that
              involve the solution of Schrodinger's equation to include quantum mechanical
              effects. Simulation techniques will be applied to detailed models of
              semiconductor structures for direct comparison to experiment with a primary
              focus on self-assembled quantum dots.  Chemical and strain environments in and
              around the dots can strongly localize charge carriers (electrons and holes),
              giving the dots interesting transport and luminescence properties. Path
              integral simulations will enable accurate and efficient calculation of spectra
              and radiative lifetimes of excited dots, and will help elucidate the properties
              of systems of interacting dots. Quantum dots may be building blocks of future
              nanoelectronics, and their properties may be useful for lasers, detectors, data
              storage, computing, and quantum algorithms. The path integral algorithms will
              have a supporting framework that allows information from growers and
              microscopists to be used to quickly generate detailed predictions of optical or
              transport properties. This interplay of experiment and theory is essential to
              understand semiconductor nanostructures and develop new technologies. This
              research relies on algorithms for fast numerical evaluation, and is based in
              part on earlier simulations of liquid Helium and other quantum systems. 
              Algorithmic advances will be shared with the physics community as open source
              software and interactive Java applets. The education component involves
              incorporating the applets together with other web technologies to develop
              tutorials and other materials to improve education in quantum statistical
              mechanics. Possible tutorials include Bose condensation of helium, condensates
              in atomic gas traps, and the quantum dot systems studied in the research thrust
              of this proposal.
%%%
This CAREER award supports theoretical and
              computational research on semiconductor nanostructures using
              Feynman-path-integral techniques. Path integrals are an intriguing and
              intuitive approach to quantum and statistical mechanics, but their mathematical
              expressions can only be evaluated analytically for the simplest problems. This
              research will develop algorithms for fast numerical calculation of optical and
              transport properties, and is based in part on earlier simulations of liquid
              helium and other quantum mechanical systems. The education component of this
              proposal involves developing and incorporating web-based tools to develop
              tutorials to improve education in quantum statistical mechanics. Possible
              tutorials include Bose condensation of helium, condensates in atomic gas traps,
              and the quantum dot systems studied in the research thrust of this
              proposal.
***









