Title       : CAREER: Functional Oxide Films for Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0239667

Award Number: 0239667
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barrett O. Wells wells@phys.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development project describes an effort to integrate
              innovative educational and research activities as a basis for an active career
              in both areas. A dearth of science majors is a national problem with serious
              implications for the country's technological future. The education component of
              this plan focuses on attracting and retaining physics majors by improving the
              class work and general environment of the University of Connecticut
              undergraduate physics program. Pedagogical efforts will apply strategies that
              have proved successful for large introductory courses to smaller courses for
              physics majors. Student advising efforts include seminars for undergraduates on
              graduate school, careers, and invited presentations from past UConn physics
              graduates on their career choices. Advanced education and training along with
              the creation of new knowledge is promoted through research into fundamental
              properties of nanometer scale films of complex, functional oxides. An array of
              advanced surface science probes will be brought to bear on in-situ grown films
              in order to study questions concerning reduced dimensionality, strain, and
              non-equilibrium structures. The focus will be on understanding properties that
              are strongly altered in very thin films, particularly phase transitions. The
              project will serve as a nexus for establishing interdisciplinary research at
              UConn and foster ties with national laboratories. 

This Faculty Early Career
              Development project describes an effort to integrate innovative educational and
              research activities as a basis for an active career in both areas. A dearth of
              science majors is a national problem with serious implications for the
              country's technological future. The education component of this plan focuses on
              attracting and retaining physics majors. Pedagogical efforts will apply
              strategies that have proved successful for large introductory courses to
              smaller courses for physics majors. Student advising efforts include seminars
              for undergraduates on graduate school, careers, and invited presentations from
              past University of Connecticut physics graduates on their career choices.
              Advanced education and training along with the creation of new knowledge is
              promoted through research into fundamental properties of nanometer scale films
              of complex, electronic materials. Under the proper conditions, very thin films
              show properties that are remarkably different from the bulk versions of the
              same compounds. However, such films are difficult to study with traditional
              techniques and the reasons for the altered properties are largely unknown. This
              project will adapt very powerful experimental techniques usually used on large
              bulk samples for use with films. The project will serve as a nexus for
              establishing interdisciplinary research at UConn and foster ties with national
              laboratories.

