Title       : CAREER: Improved Hydrologic Drought Forecasting Using Climate Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0239334

Award Number: 0239334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Piechota piechota@unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1045,1057,1187,1576,9150,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Hydrologic droughts have economic, environmental, and social implications that
              can be mitigated if advanced warning is provided.  Recent research has shown
              that global oceanic and atmospheric circulation patterns are linked to
              hydrologic extremes; however, this knowledge has not been effectively
              translated into improved hydrologic drought forecasts.

This action supports
              a CAREER-project that addresses two key research needs identified by the
              National Research Council (NRC, 2001a, 2001b): (1) to develop a better
              understanding of changes in hydrologic patterns as related to climate
              variability; and (2) to develop improved methods to forecast hydrologic
              droughts several months in advance.

The research objectives are to (1)
              develop a comprehensive understanding of the relationship between climate
              variability and hydrologic drought, (2) determine the appropriate uses of
              remote sensing data for predicting hydrologic drought, (3) develop a framework
              for integrating climate and remote sensing information into long-range
              hydrologic drought forecasting, and (4) apply the long-range hydrologic
              forecast model to river basins in the southwest United States.  The different
              modes of climate variability will be identified based on climate indices and
              global sea surface temperatures.  The relationship between hydrologic drought
              and climate variability will be investigated using statistical procedures, and
              a long-range hydrologic forecast model will be developed and applied to the
              Colorado River Basin.

Research and education are integrated through service
              learning that infuses the community service experience with student learning. 
              The educational goals are to (1) implement service learning in the curriculum,
              (2) develop improved assessment skills, and (3) develop educational tools for
              water resources of the Colorado River.  Service-learning activities will
              include freshman-engineering students working with K-12 students, and upper
              division undergraduate and graduate students working with local organizations
              to meet water resource needs in the community.  The information obtained for
              the Colorado River will be developed into an educational tool that is
              accessible to the general public and students at all levels.

The
              intellectual merit and new contributions are a comprehensive understanding of
              how hydrologic drought is influenced by other short- and long- term climate
              variability, a better understanding of how remote sensing data can be used to
              improve hydrologic drought forecasts, and the development of a tool that
              decision makers and the public can use to determine water resource allocation. 
              The broader impacts include improved drought planning, which has direct
              economic and societal benefits, a better understanding by students of their
              role in the community through service learning, and an increased public
              awareness of the drought issues in the Colorado River Basin.

