Title       : CAREER: Research on Convective Snow in the Central United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0239010

Award Number: 0239010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $445086             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Market MarketP@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Thundersnow events (snow attended by lightning and thunder) will be examined
              with a multiscale approach using standard meteorological platforms (e.g.,
              rawinsonde network, National Lightning Detection Network), observations in the
              field (integrated sounding system, snow crystal collection), and with numerical
              model simulations.  The project will begin by examining archived cases
              (1961-1990) of thundersnow to understand the synoptic environment that produces
              it.  Ensuing years will be spent in the field, in pursuit of thundersnow events
              in order to sample them directly and attempt to determine some fundamental
              characteristics of the cloud that engenders them.  Direct observations of
              thundersnow events will reveal not only cloud microphysical structure, but also
              the stability and vertical velocity profiles that accompany them.  Simulations
              with the numerical weather prediction models will help to clarify the synoptic
              scale and meso-alpha scale forcing mechanisms for vertical
              motion.

Academically, this project will seek to capitalize on students'
              natural fascination with dangerous phenomena: in this case, lightning and heavy
              snowfall.  Summer workshops will be held for area high school students to
              introduce them to meteorology and forecasting.  Undergraduates at the
              University of Missouri-Columbia will be introduced to the project in courses
              taught by the Principal Investigator with daily forecasting of thundersnow
              incorporated into the class as a lab exercise.  During the winter season, the
              high school participants from the summer workshop will be invited back to
              observe the creation by undergraduates of the routine forecasts and outlooks
              for thundersnow, thus reaching beyond prior summer programs in meteorology for
              secondary school students.  The graduate student participants will venture into
              the field to perform the observations of thundersnow occurrence.  In so doing,
              they will acquire unique experience in the operation and utility of in-situ
              rawinsonde and profiler equipment, as well as surface observations and snow
              crystal collection.  These activities will provide the graduate students with
              the gamut of research experience, from data collection in the field, to quality
              control in the lab, to the analysis of the final datasets.

The broader
              impacts of the proposed work are not limited to scientific publications or
              conferences, or the students who are mentored during the Project, but include a
              better-protected population through improved forecasting of dangerous winter
              weather.
