Title       : CAREER: An Interdisciplinary Approach Toward Understanding Dynamic Glycosylation
               in the Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0239861

Award Number: 0239861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $540000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Hsieh-Wilson lhw@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9181,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research program focuses on development of an understanding of the role of
              O-GlcNAc glycosylation in regulating neuronal function and communication,
              including the regulation of transcription and the control of genes important
              for learning and memory. The role of O-GlcNAc glycosylation in cyclic AMP
              response element binding protein-mediated transcription will be explored.
              Faciliated by development of a synthetic chemical probe enabling the
              accelerated identification of O-GlcNAc glycosylated proteins on a proteome-wide
              scale, such modified proteins will be identified in the brain. The educational
              experience of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will be
              enahnced through tailored course discussion and research involvement, and
              efforts will be made to increase the representation of women in the chemical
              workforce through provision of support mechanisms and mentorship.

With the
              support of this CAREER Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program and the Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry Program, Professor Linda
              Hsieh-Wilson, of the Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the
              California Institute of Technology, is exploring chemical changes important for
              brain function and dysfunction. Professor Hsieh-Wilson's studies additionally
              address the means by which the chemistry of the brain is spatiotemporally
              regulated to give rise to the intricate biology of the nervous system. These
              studies are leading to an understanding of the structural, functional, and
              physiological roles of specific chemical changes in the brain. Professor
              Hsieh-Wilson is involved in a number of programs designed to enhance the
              educational experience of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
              through tailored course discussion and research involvement and to increase the
              representation of women in the chemical workforce.
