Title       : CAREER: Artificial Brownian Motors - Education and Research in Biologically
               Inspired Physics at the Nanoscale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0239764

Award Number: 0239764
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Denise Caldwell                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $645196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heiner Linke linke@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 7246      BIOLOGICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1144,1164,1767,7246,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project aims at enhancing our understanding of so called molecular
              motors. Molecular motors are biological macromolecules that perform mechanical
              tasks in living cells, such as the transport of material or the contraction of
              muscle cells. The physical environment of molecular motors is strongly
              determined by random collisions with surrounding water molecules, and must
              therefore have a working principle very different from traditional, man-made
              machines. This notion has prompted the development of theoretical models that
              incorporate Brownian motion into the mechanism for molecular force generation -
              so-called Brownian motors. The present project will experimentally realize some
              of these models, using building blocks such as plastic beads, nano-patterned
              silicon chips and DNA molecules. The objective is to test theoretical models
              such as those that describe how many coupled motors co-operate when a muscle
              contracts. The experiments are expected to become a focal point for future
              theoretical work aimed at understanding biological phenomena, and may lead to
              novel bio-mimetic actuator systems. This research field is at the interface of
              biology and physics at the nanoscale, a field in which more trained engineers
              and scientists will be needed in the near future. Undergraduate and graduate
              students will be exposed to interdisciplinary scientific work, and will learn
              skills necessary for a successful career in Nanoscience. A course on the
              physics and biology of nanoscale phenomena, aimed at undergraduate and graduate
              physics and biology students, will also be developed. Broader impacts of this
              project are the training of students in interdisciplinary thinking, and to
              equip students from both sides of the biology-physics divide with practical and
              theoretical skills from the other field. The educational and scientific program
              will be integrated with existing programs in the Materials Science Institute at
              the University of Oregon, further strengthening the University's
              interdisciplinary research environment.  This project is jointly funded by the
              Physics Division in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the
              Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for
              Biological Sciences.
