Title       : CAREER: Advancing MS For Peptide/Protein Sequencing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2003  
File        : a0239800

Award Number: 0239800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Van Stipdonk Mike.Vanstipdonk@wichita.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award to Professor Michael Van Stipdonk of Wichita State University
              is supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the Chemistry
              Division.  In this project, mass spectrometry will be further developed and
              refined for identification of peptides and proteins, a crucial step in efforts
              to understand metabolic pathways, cellular signaling, and the biochemistry of
              disease.  The sequence of amino acids, the order in which they are linked
              together, ultimately identifies a peptide or protein.  Before mass spectrometry
              can be used for high-throughput and high-accuracy sequencing directly (i.e.
              without resorting to library or database searches), a clear understanding of
              the "rules" that govern peptide and protein dissociation in the gas-phase is
              required.  The project includes a comprehensive investigation of factors that
              guide dissociation reactions, including the importance of cation choice (proton
              or metal ion), peptide sequence, tautomerization, cyclization and
              intramolecular proton transfer.  The work will lead to an optimized and
              validated mass spectrometry approach to peptide/protein identification that can
              be applied to proteome analysis, biochemistry and molecular biology.

The
              project has, and will continue to include undergraduate students as integral
              participants in research.  From their experiences, new experiments for the
              determination of amino acid sequence in peptides will be condensed and
              transformed into novel educational exercises.  With regard to the K-12 system,
              a new program will be developed to address the important issue of science
              teacher preparation and retention.  The PI and several representatives of area
              public and private high schools envision a comprehensive resource to support
              science teachers, including the training of new teachers through the Wichita
              State University Alternative Certification program.  In particular, lesson
              plans, teaching strategies, and exercises in critical thinking will be
              developed and shared among many new teachers; already, more than 90 teachers
              have expressed interest in the program.  Opportunities will also be extended to
              high school teachers to spend summer months conducting research at Wichita
              State University, strengthening their mastery of chemistry content knowledge,
              and better preparing them to translate and transfer the excitement and
              relevance of science to their students.

