Title       : CAREER: Mathematical Modeling of Microfluidic Dynamics and Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0239125

Award Number: 0239125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2003  
Expires     : August 31,  2008     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $541362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas P. Witelski witelski@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate mathematical problems in the fluid dynamics of
              thin viscous films spreading on solid surfaces. The basic mathematical models
              for such lubrication flows with strong surface tension effects are fourth-order
              nonlinear partial differential equations. These equations yield certain
              singular behaviors that make them problematic. In this work, these difficulties
              are overcome through the use of physically-motivated generalized models that
              include interaction forces between the liquid film and the solid substrate.
              These so-called disjoining-pressure or ``dewetting-film'' models will be used
              as the basis for the study of an array of interconnected problems. The goals of
              this research project are: (i) to mathematically establish that dewetting film
              models can provide faithful representations of the important physical effects
              in coating flows, and (ii) to extend this basic research to the design of
              microfluidic devices. These goals will be carried out using a combined
              computational and analytic study of the nonlinear partial differential
              equations for the dewetting models. Applying numerical simulations and
              similarity solutions to the two-dimensional version of the models, the dynamics
              of flows in structured geometries will be obtained; this work will be combined
              with a study of mechanisms used to drive thin film fluid flows and their
              stability.

This project focuses on mathematical models for describing the
              motion of drops of fluids on solid surfaces. The impact of this work lies in
              its role as basic research supporting advances in biomedical engineering and
              microfluidic technology. A major focus of this project is the use
              surface-tension effects for active transport of liquids. Using carefully
              controlled changes in the local environment, we can create surface tension
              forces to manipulate fluid droplets in any desired manner. This approach is a
              key element used in the designs of microfluidic devices for the next generation
              of biomedical research tools. The project will also examine how material
              properties of the solid surfaces influence the motion of more complicated
              fluids. This work will serve as the basis for understanding the important
              physical factors in the formulation of drug delivery bio-gels used in
              physiological coating flows and other biologically-motivated fluid flow
              problems.
