Title       : Taxation and Social Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0239380

Award Number: 0239380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91587              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Diamond pdiamond@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Both the income tax and the estate tax have deductions for charitable donations.
               The theoretical literature that examines how progressive taxes should be to
              accomplish different societal goals does not consider the role of donations. 
              The project will develop the theory of how progressive taxes should be designed
              to take into account their effect on gifts and donations.  In addition to
              considering incentives for both work and donations, the analysis will consider
              the foundations of normative criteria for evaluating outcomes when there are
              voluntary gifts and donations.  The analysis will relate optimal taxation to
              different definitions of societal goals.  The end product should be increased
              understanding of the treatment of charitable deductions in the income tax and
              the estate tax.  Also considered will be transfer programs, such as
              unemployment insurance, which affect gifts from others.

Social Security
              affects both income distribution and retirement decisions.  An important aspect
              of both effects is the diversity in life expectancy in the American public. 
              This diversity also affects the demand by retirees for annuities.  Also varying
              in the public is the approach to savings, with some people showing consistency
              over time in their planning, while others do not.  This project will examine
              the role of Social Security with different formulations of individual savings
              and annuitization behavior and different insurance market structures.  Analysis
              of the impact of Social Security on behavior will be an input into normative
              analysis of the design of Social Security program parameters.


