Title       : CAREER: Octahedral Hexanuclear Clusters: Fundamental Studies and Inquiry Into
               Potential Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0239805

Award Number: 0239805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa F. Szczepura lfszcze@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
              program supports research by Dr. Lisa Szczepura at Illinois State University on
              fundamental studies of hexanuclear octahedral molybdenum cluster complexes. 
              The studies are aimed at probing two fundamentally important reactions of these
              complexes, ligand substitution and reduction-oxidation.  An understanding the
              redox chemistry of the proposed aqua cluster complexes is likely to lead to the
              discovery of novel oxidants.  In addition, the ability to predict substitution
              trends and generate linked hexanuclear cluster complexes together will enable
              the preparation of new solids based on the hexanuclear molybdenum unit with
              rigid spacer units which should provide room for molecules or ions to
              intercalate and deintercalate.  Overall, these data are crucial to the future
              use of these cluster complexes in applications such as catalysis and materials
              chemistry.  

The educational component of this project involves the training
              and mentoring of women and underrepresented minorities.  The PI proposes to run
              enrichment workshops that parallel the general chemistry sequence; these
              workshops will be available to students who are members of the Illinois Louis
              Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (ILSAMP).  Students from
              underrepresented groups will be recruited from these workshops as well as from
              other classes to conduct undergraduate research in the PI's laboratory.  By
              providing financial support to graduate and undergraduate students, the PI
              hopes to provide an environment where learning and mentoring are at the
              forefront.  Increasing the number of chemistry graduates from such
              underrepresented groups is crucial to increasing diversity in the field of
              chemistry and in generating a workforce that is capable of solving the complex
              scientific problems facing society.

