Title       : Vibrational Spectra and Structure of Macromolecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 6,  2003    
File        : a0239417

Award Number: 0239417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Krimm skrimm@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research program is to develop and apply more
              physically
accurate potential energy functions for polymeric macromolecules
              than are
presently available, in particular functions that, in addition to
              the
usual prediction of structures and energies, give
              spectroscopically
accurate reproduction of vibrational frequencies (which is
              not achieved by
current standard functions). This is accomplished by the
              spectroscopically
determined force field (SDFF) methodology previously
              developed in this
laboratory. Under this proposal, current SDFFs will be
              extended to include
polarization, which is very important in describing
              properties of polar
groups such as amides. A new protocol for determining
              parameters in the
energy function assures the avoidance of correlations and
              indeterminacy
in these quantities. The newly developed formalism for molecular
              dynamics
in internal coordinates (ICMD) will be implemented on
              macromolecular
systems. The hydrocarbon SDFF will be applied to the analysis
              and
resolution of questions concerning structural transitions and the
              origin
of spectral bands in trans-1,4-polybutadiene and band splittings in
              cis-
1,4-polybutadiene. The SDFF to be developed for the amide group will
              be
used to calculate the normal modes of nylons 6 and 66 to provide
              deeper
insights into the analysis of vibrational and inelastic neutron
              scattering
spectra of these polymers. The new ICMD formalism will be applied
              to
calculations on crystalline polyethylene, with the particular goals
              of
correcting published spectral intensity inaccuracies and of
              comparing
spectral predictions from normal mode analysis with those from the
              Fourier
transformation of the time-autocorrelation function of the dipole
              moment.  

In addition to its intellectual contributions, this research
              program will
have broader impacts. New research results will be incorporated
              into
advanced courses, and graduate students and postdocs will develop
              and
report a more sophisticated understanding of an important area
              of
science. The previous emphasis on involvement of women in the
              research
program will continue. Advanced computer programs for analysis
              of
properties of polymers will be made available to the scientific
community.
              The more acurate theoretical understanding of properties will
lead to advances
              in commercial polymer technology and the amide group
aspect of the work have
              will an important impact in the study of 
biological systems.  

