Title       : CAREER: Environmental Dechlorination Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0239461

Award Number: 0239461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristopher McNeill mcneill@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
              supports work by Kristopher McNeill in the Department of Chemistry at the
              University of Minnesota to implement a research and teaching plan centered on
              environmental chemistry.  Motivated by the widespread contamination of US
              drinking water supplies with chlorinated solvents, the research component of
              this plan has as its two goals the development of new, highly active
              dechlorination catalysts and the elucidation of mechanisms of metal-promoted
              dechlorination reactions.  A variety of cobalt, nickel, and iron complexes will
              be examined, and the mechanistic principles that are uncovered will be used to
              rationally design synthetic dechlorination catalysts that have superior
              properties to naturally occurring catalysts such as vitamin B12 and F430.  The
              proposed experiments will lead to an improved fundamental understanding of
              dechlorination reactions and will bring about the discovery of synthetic
              catalysts that will be useful for remediation.  The educational activities in
              this plan include development of environmentally themed general chemistry and
              freshman seminar courses.  A distinguishing feature of the proposed educational
              activities is its assessment plan, which will be developed and conducted with
              collaborators in educational psychology. 

By uncovering the working
              principles of metal-mediated dechlorination reactions and developing synthetic
              catalysts, this work will help provide solutions to an important environmental
              problem: contamination of drinking water with chlorinated methanes, ethylenes
              and arenes.  This study will enhance the environmental science understanding of
              undergraduate students, helping them to make informed decisions as individuals
              and as voters.  It will also provide an ideal training opportunity for
              undergraduate and graduate researchers that will enable them to become future
              leaders in environmental research and teaching.  

