Title       : A National Study of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Education
               at Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0239978

Award Number: 0239978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio R. Flores aflores@hacu.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Moder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rene A. Gonzalez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Ramirez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hispanic Assoc of Col & U
	      8415 Datapoint Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78229    210/692-3805

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, the Hispanic Association of Colleges
              and Universities will conduct a twelve-month national study of Hispanic-serving
              Institutions that will produce in-depth information on these institutions, as
              well as outline their unique role in the higher education of Hispanic students
              and their unique needs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
              (STEM) education.  The Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities
              represents more than 300 colleges and universities across the United States and
              Puerto Rico, including 182 Hispanic-serving Institutions.  Currently,
              Hispanic-serving Institutions account for 5% of all institutions of higher
              education yet they enroll almost one-half of all Hispanic students. 

The
              study conducted by the Hispanic Association of Colleges and Universities will
              contribute significantly to the understanding of the educational capabilities
              and needs of Hispanic-serving Institutions in the science, technology,
              engineering and mathematics disciplines.  Project outcomes will include
              specific recommendations to broaden the participation of Hispanics in
              undergraduate and graduate STEM study and in the Nation's STEM workforce.

