Title       : CAREER: Near-field optical tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0239265

Award Number: 0239265
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  2003       
Expires     : April 30,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Carney carney@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239265
Carney

Near-field optical tomography is placed at the nexus of two
              fields: near-field optics and inverse scattering. Near-field imaging has
              attracted considerable attention as a technique to obtain images of surfaces
              with subwavelength resolution. Applications range from the inspection of
              organic and biological samples to semiconductor devices. Various experimental
              modalities are in practical use.  Near-field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM)
              is practiced in many variations. Total internal reflection microscopy (TIRM)
              has been in practical use for decades. At the intersection of NSOM and TIRM
              modalities are the so-called photon scanning tunneling microscopy (PSTM)
              methods.  In all of these modalities, the connection between the measured field
              or signal and the sample properties has proven to be problematic.

To clarify
              the meaning of the measurements and to provide three-dimensional imaging
              capability, it is desirable to find a solution to the inverse scattering
              problem (ISP). By solving the near-field ISP two issues are resolved. The
              ambiguity in the relationship between the sample properties and the measured
              data is removed, and simultaneously three-dimensional, tomographic images of
              the sample are obtained. Significant progress in this area has already been
              made by the PI and collaborators.  The feasibility of near-field tomographic
              reconstructions has been demonstrated within the framework of a scalar model.
              Moreover, new a modality, near-field optical power extinction tomography
              (NOPET), has been proposed to circumvent the phase problem inherent in the
              ISP.

The aims of the research program are: 1) To develop inverse scattering
              algorithms for all of the modalities discussed above in the weak scattering
              limit; 2) To apply the algorithms to experiment; 3) To develop inverse
              scattering algorithms in the strong scattering regime; 4) To apply the strong
              scattering algorithms to experiment; 5) To include the results of research in
              the graduate curriculum of the Department.

The PI has outlined specific
              methods, a timeline, and assignment of personnel to achieve these aims. He has
              a proven record of accomplishment in the field of research, is an experienced
              educator and is committed to diversity in the classroom and in his group. The
              research will translate directly to the classroom. Furthermore, graduate
              students will be trained in the course of this work and undergraduates will be
              included wherever possible. Results will be disseminated through the literature
              and conferences.

The results of this work will have broad impact. The
              intellectual impact of the project is significant in that it opens a new field
              of study. The novel methods of microscopy developed will impact biology,
              material science, semiconductor research and manufacture, optoelectronics,
              chemistry, and medicine. This work will also result in a deepening of our
              understanding of the behavior of light on very small scale and will have
              applications beyond imaging in photonics and optoelectronics.  The program of
              research described here will provide students in the research group with a
              broad range of research experience from fundamental physics to code development
              and applied engineering.  Students outside the group will benefit from the
              integration of research results into graduate coursework. In the long term, the
              effect of student training will affect the future development of
              microscopy.

This work will form the basis for a career in academic
              engineering. The PI will contribute to the body of knowledge, educate in the
              classroom, and foster the development of young researchers for years to
              come.


