Title       : CAREER: Harnessing Electrokinetic Flow Instabilities for Next Generation
               Microfluidics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0239080

Award Number: 0239080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juan G. Santiago santiago@vk.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0239080
J. Santiago, Stanford University


Among the greatest
              engineering challenges of the century are the development of technologies that
              will enable massively parallel drug discovery efforts, biomedical device
              design, fundamental genetics research, proteomics, and rapid and miniaturized
              biological weapon detection.  On-chip microfluidics has an important and
              expanding role in the realization of such tools and offers the potential of
              massively parallel chemical laboratories on a chip.  Electrokinetic (EK)
              devices, in particular, combine "work-horse" processes such aselectrophoresis,
              binding assays, and electro-chromatography with a precise control of sample
              streams in compact, easy-to-fabricate devices with no moving parts.  Recent
              experiments performed in the Stanford Microfluidics Laboratory demonstrate that
              there is an important class of EK flows that are not well understood and
              largely undocumented: EK flow instabilities that arise in heterogeneous
              property liquid streams.  These instabilities occur in a variety of geometries
              relevant to on-chip assays, and flows with ionic conductivity gradients are
              particularly susceptible. 
The research plan is integrated closely with
              undergraduate and graduate teaching and the recruitment and retention of
              students of underrepresented groups in engineering at the high school,
              undergraduate, and graduate level.  NSF funding will enable several key
              efforts.  First is a significant expansion of an ongoing effort to convert
              teaching material from three engineering classes into a multimedia format that
              leverages screen-projected and animated notes as well as digitized movie clips
              for effective lecturing.  Funding will also be used to expand the student base
              of a newly-developed course on Fluid Flow in Microdevices by making the course
              available to other institutions (including industry and government labs) via
              the Stanford Instructional Television Network.  Third, NSF funds will be used
              to recruit students of underrepresented groups by leveraging a collaboration
              with the Foundation for a College Education (FCE) to conduct a series of
              workshops to advise high school students on planning for college, completing
              college applications (e.g., help with college essays), and introducing them to
              the many rewards of careers in science and engineering. At the undergraduate
              level, NSF funding will be used to increase student involvement in research by
              expanding a collaboration with Stanford's Office of Engineering Diversity
              Programs. At the graduate level, the award will help the applicant expand his
              role in actively mentoring and motivating graduate students from
              underrepresented groups in the developing field of microfluidics research.

