Title       : CAREER: Dynamics and Synchronization in Semiconductor Lasers with Feedback
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0239413

Award Number: 0239413
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Sukow sukowd@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    540/458-8400

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

0239413
Sukow

The central  goal of this NSF CAREER proposal is to
              strengthen the undergraduate 
physics program at Washington & Lee University
              through an integrated program of research and education emphasizing  optics and
              lasers.  The main objective is to develop and support a stronger research
              culture through enhancing the experimental research program in semiconductor
              laser dynamics.  This research program will consider current and exciting
              topics involving dynamical  instabilities  and  synchronization  in  diode 
              lasers  due  to  delayed  optical  feedback,  a subject of fundamental 
              interest and technological importance.   All research projects will be
              undertaken with undergraduate research  assistants and a high school student
              intern.  This environment  will  produce  significant  scientific  advances 
              while  taking  advantage  of  the  special strengths of  a liberal arts
              institution as a venue  for mentoring undergraduates.  Enriching the research
              environment is a substantial program of visitors and collaborations. 
              Supplementing the research program will  be the development of a new  Advanced
              Research Methods course, designed to create a bridge between the classroom and
              the research lab.  Existing classes will be enhanced with new laboratory
              exercises and real-time demonstrations, to help create interest in lasers  and 
              optics  while  enriching  those  courses  for  all  students.    Finally,  the
              impact  of  the  lab exercises, demos, and student expertise developed in the
              undergraduate setting will be extended to the local educational community. 

              
 Intellectual merit: The proposed research addresses current and important
              questions in laser physics and nonlinear dynamics.  The research is organized
              around realistic experimental issues in dynamics  and synchronization of
              semiconductor lasers, and emphasizes a novel approach based on simultaneous
              time-domain measurements of two optical signals.  The results of the proposed
              research will advance knowledge in laser dynamics with application to
              communications,  and  also  in  the  broader  area  of  time-delayed  feedback 
              systems.    The  PI  has significant experience and an  established record of 
              accomplishment in this research area.  Washington and Lee University has
              provided and continues to provide excellent support, adding to the feasibility
              of the proposal. 
 
 Broader impacts:  This CAREER proposal thoroughly
              integrates research and education.  Undergraduate and high school student
              participation in research every  year provides scholarly activity  in  a 
              close,  mentoring  environment.    Students  will  be  exposed  to  the 
              greater  scientific community through attendance and presentations at
              conferences, as well as an on-site schedule of collaborators, visitors, and
              international experts from academia, government, and industry.  The research
              and education infrastructure at Washington and Lee will be strengthened through
              curricular development, which will increase crossover between the classroom and
              the laboratory, and will reform existing courses by infusing them with hands-on
              laboratory work emphasizing real applications.  Traditionally  underrepresented
              groups will be actively engaged through on-campus programs and outreach to the
              local educational community, activities that will be used as teacher training
              opportunities as well.  Societal benefit may be realized through the
              application of research results applied to faster and more efficient optical
              communication systems, a well-trained technical workforce, and a more
              scientifically literate public.  All outcomes will receive wide dissemination
              at appropriate meetings and by electronic means. 


