Title       : Hurricane Intensity Response to Changes in Inflow Thermodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a0239648

Award Number: 0239648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Barnes garyb@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Tropical cyclone intensity, defined as the minimum sea level pressure or the
              maximum sustained winds found in the eyewall, remains a major forecasting
              challenge.  Current theories identify the energy content of the low-level
              inflow to the eyewall as one of the key factors affecting intensity, but there
              is a dearth of observations in the low levels available to test or refine the
              theoretical arguments.

The Principal Investigator will examine the response
              of tropical cyclone (TC) intensity to changes in the energy content of the
              low-level inflow to the eyewall for TCs Guillermo (1997), Gabrielle (2001), and
              Humberto (2001).  Each TC was sampled on two or more consecutive days with the
              new Global Positioning System (GPS) sondes deployed from the NOAA WP-3D
              aircraft.  Consecutive day sampling enables the correlation of changes in the
              inflow energy with changes in TC intensity.  

The combination of the
              vertical profiles of thermodynamic and kinematic variables derived from these
              sondes, airborne expendable bathythermographs that provide sea surface
              temperature, and reflectivity fields from the aircraft radars, are the basis
              for the production of storm scale maps of kinematic and thermodynamic variables
              and trajectory analyses.  Trajectory analyses are used to determine where,
              when, and how much energy is acquired or lost as the inflow column moves toward
              the eyewall.  These fluxes at the top and bottom of the column, and the
              disposition of the energy through the column, are critical for the
              intensification and maintenance of the hurricane.  Variations in the larger
              scale environment will be assessed with GPS sondes deployed from the NOAA
              Gulfstream, and from numerical model analyses.  Determining what changes occur
              in the large-scale environment will allow the role that changes in the inflow
              layer have on TC intensity to be isolated.

The broader impacts of the
              research include the development of effective and economic sampling strategies
              to ascertain factors that affect TC intensity change, leading to improved
              forecasts of intensity that result in substantial safety and economic benefits
              to the United States.  Educational benefits of the work include the training of
              graduate students, and in particular, the placement of women into the field. 
              The work also enhances the partnership between the University of Hawaii and
              NOAA's Hurricane Research Division.  This research is of high priority within
              the U.S. Weather Research Program.
