Title       : CAREER: Stream-of-Variation Modeling and Analysis for Multi-Station
               Manufacturing Processes Modeling Infrastructure for Virtual Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2003      
File        : a0239244

Award Number: 0239244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dariusz J. Ceglarek darek@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports an
              integrated research and education project on modeling; analysis and control of
              dimensional variation in complex multistage assembly processes (MAP) with
              compliant parts such as in automotive, aerospace, appliance and electronics
              industries.  The goal is to develop a generic MAP model with capabilities to
              represent key product and process control characteristics/features (KPC/KCC)
              with varying resolution/"information granularity" that can be utilized during
              design, launch and full production phases of a new manufacturing system.  The
              model will be based on a generic Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing
              (CAD/CAM) system integrated with statistical analysis to predict manufacturing
              process performance in early design phase.  A challenge facing the proposed
              plan is the diversity of required information and lack of physical and
              geometrical relations between KCC and KPC.  The research will focus on
              developing: (1) variation propagation models integrating statistical and
              CAD/CAM information; (2) multi-resolution/granularity of KPC/KCC as they change
              during product development; (3) computational efficiency for simulation of
              multistage assembly processes; and (4) generic issues pertaining to new
              process-oriented modeling, design and control.  The education efforts are to:
              (1) integrate statistical analysis into CAD/CAM courses; (2) explore challenges
              in the development and realization of new MAP systems; and (3) provide
              opportunities in developing and analyzing MAP systems using 3D simulation
              tools. It also includes creating grade-specific (graduate, undergraduate and
              K-12) projects.

Broader Impact: If successful, this project will lead to a
              new methodology that can:  (1) Fundamentally integrate CAD/CAM models with
              statistical analysis to predict manufacturing process dimensional variability
              during design as it relates to compliant parts, thus continuously improving
              product quality while reducing overall new MAP development time through rapid
              fault root cause detection. (2) Facilitate math-based design and manufacturing
              of the MAP systems:  The integration of product and process variables expands
              the classical "part interchangeability" concept into "process
              interchangeability" considered during early design phase of a new MAP
              development. This is critical in relation to suppliers selection, benchmarking
              or outsourcing. (3) Train Industrial Engineers in statistical methods and their
              application in CAD/CAM systems thus preparing them towards developing a new
              generation of CAD/CAM system for virtual realization of MAP.
