Title       : Microbial Observatories: Eukaryotic Microbial Communities of the Old Woman Creek
               National Estuarine Research Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0239997

Award Number: 0239997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary A. Toranzos                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Lavrentyev peter3@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Duff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Drs. Peter Lavrentyev and Robert Duff of the
              University of
Akron to examine taxonomic composition of planktonic protists in
              relation to their key functions
at the NOAA Old Woman Creek National Estuarine
              Research Reserve (OWC NERR). Samples
will be collected from four stations
              along the stream-Lake Erie transect at monthly intervals in
conjunction with
              the ongoing long-term monitoring. Microbial community structure,
distribution,
              and dynamics will be examined under different hydrologic and climatic
              conditions
using molecular, digital video, flow-cytometry, and microscopic
              methods. This study will
generate a library of protistan images and ribosomal
              DNA sequences which will contribute novel
taxonomic and ecological data to the
              scientific community and publicly accessible databases.
The taxonomic survey
              will be supplemented by field experiments, which will examine the effect
of
              differences in microbial community composition on two functional aspects of the
              community:
growth and grazing.
Protists (unicellular eukaryotic
              microorganisms) play an important role in aquatic ecosystems
by regulating
              bacterial and primary production and regenerating the bulk of inorganic
              nutrients
but the relationship between their diversity and functions remains
              poorly understood. This study
will increase our knowledge of microbial life in
              critical estuarine/coastal wetland environments
and improve our ability to
              predict complex and dynamic microbial processes in the Great Lakes
and the
              coastal ocean. On a yet broader scale, the study will provide new insights
              about the
relationship between biodiversity and function in natural
              communities. Finally, this study will
have an impact on the infrastructure of
              education within the PIs institutions and beyond.
Students at UA and FIU
              involved in the project will experience a wide range of
              professional
activities and will be involved in all aspects of the research
              enterprise. In addition, this project
will provide information for the OWC
              NERR visitor center exhibit and thus contribute to the
general public
              understanding of the importance of preserving biodiversity and
              estuarine/wetland
environments. The results of this study will be invaluable
              in informing decisions on conservation
and environmental management these
              important habitats that have become increasing threatened.
