Title       : CAREER: Superconductor/Carbon-Nanotube Junctions and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0239721

Award Number: 0239721
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $544085             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paola Barbara barbara@physics.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project addresses nanoelectronics research and introduces this topic
              at the gradu-ate level, and also to undergraduate non-science majors. The
              research focuses on carbon-nanotube/superconductor materials, and will explore
              nanotube/superconductor junctions. Spe-cific goals are: 1) Achieving control of
              superconductor/nanotube interfaces, both in the high-transparency and
              low-transparency contact regime, by using liquid metals and metals with low
              melting point. 2) Studying the superconducting proximity effect, DC and AC
              Josephson effect, and quantum entanglement in single and multiple junctions.
              Microfluidic MEMS techniques will be used to attach liquid metals and metals
              with low melting point to nanotubes. Properties of interfaces will be studied
              by varying the temperature through the liquid, solid and superconducting
              transitions. Nanotube devices will also be made using aluminum or
              niobium-aluminum bilayers as superconducting electrodes. Niobium-aluminum
              bilayers will also be used to form low-transparency interfaces by oxidizing the
              aluminum to form a tunnel barrier for the study of 
Cooper pair tunneling in
              nanotubes. The research has potential impact beyond the interplay of nanotubes
              and superconductivity. Control of the contact interface is essential for future
              mass-production of nanotube devices to assure reliability and to keep heating
              as low as possible. De-velopment of the integration of nanotubes with
              microfluidic MEMS techniques will also enhance the possibility to use nanotubes
              as biological and chemical sensors. 
%%% 
The project addresses fundamental
              materials science research issues having technological rele-vance. The research
              program provides excellent opportunities for hands-on experience in the use of
              sophisticated scientific equipment. Additionally, research will be brought into
              the classrooms of non-science majors by introducing nanotechnology in a course
              on How Things Work. An im-portant feature of the project is the strong emphasis
              on education, and the integration of research and education.
*** 

