Title       : CAREER: Innate and Adaptive Immunity in Response to Tissue Engineered Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0239152

Award Number: 0239152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carol L. Lucas                          
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia Babensee julia.babensee@bme.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239152
Babensee
Tissue engineering has the potential to revolutionize
              reconstructive surgery through the provision of engineered tissues and organs
              where no suitable alternative exists or to reduce morbidity associated with
              current procedures. Tissue engineered constructs must evade the host defense
              system to avoid rejection by the immune system and/or the consequences of
              inflammation. Otherwise, the cells of the construct will die, lose function,
              and/or be replaced by nonfunctional fibrotic or granulation tissue. Dendritic
              cells (DCs) function in innate immunity to recognize foreign pathogens and
              "danger signals" alert the effector arm of the immune/inflammatory system to
              initiate an adaptive immune response. DCs, provide a bridge between innate
              immune response to external signals such as foreign pathogens and the mounting
              of an adaptive immune response to presented foreign antigens. Similarly, it is
              expected that DCs play a central role in the inflammatory/immune response to
              tissue engineered devices. It is critical therefore, with the immunological
              complications of potential with tissue engineered cell/polymer constructs, to
              understand the molecular basis for controlling the phenotype of this cell. In
              this way, biomaterials may be designed on a molecular scale for this purpose.
              

This CAREER proposal is focused on:  1) Understanding the role of
              biomaterial contact as a maturation stimulus for DCs, 2) Defining the
              "biomaterial associated molecular patterns" (through the protein layer that
              they direct) that regulate DC maturation, 3) Identifying the DC receptors that
              recognize these chemical motifs and hence the mechanism of their maturation, 4)
              Integrating biological and engineering principles of cell and tissue
              engineering within educational programs with a hands-on approach. 

The
              overall hypothesis of the research is that biomaterials induce the maturation
              of DCs, acting as a "danger signal", such that the DCs become efficient antigen
              presenting cells and T cell stimulators. Further hypothesized is that
              biomaterial-associated DCs mature under the control of receptors similar to
              those used to respond to microbial pathogens. The overall goal of the project
              is that through an understanding of the effects of biomaterial chemistry on DC
              maturation and the mechanisms by which biomaterials are DC maturation stimuli,
              biomaterials may be designed on a molecular level to control DC phenotype.
              Specifically, biomaterials will be designed to not support DC maturation where
              immune responses are undesirable as for tissue engineered devices while
              designed to support DC maturation where immune responses are desired as for
              non-viral delivery vehicles for DNA vaccines. The objective is to delineate the
              biomedical engineering principles that underlie the inflammatory and immune
              responses towards tissue engineering constructs to enable biomaterial and
              biomedical device design with improved clinical outcome. The overall
              engineering aspect of this project is the elucidation of design rules for
              robust tissue engineered devices that withstand host defense systems.

In
              parallel with the research, the PI will develop and implement a novel cell and
              tissue engineering laboratory course for undergraduate biomedical engineering
              (BME) students in which the students will learn the key concepts of this field
              through active learning laboratory experiences. Presenting this course in a
              laboratory format will stress the research nature of this field as students
              perform experiments using non-textbook methods form the current literature. The
              experiments will introduce students to aspects that are under active
              investigation in the research community. Furthermore, diffusion of this
              knowledge to younger students will attract the biomedical engineers of the
              future. Middle school and high school students will be engaged in hands-on
              learning about tissue engineering and its impact on society in a new short
              course. Through collaboration with the Atlanta Girls' School, as an initial
              test bed for this course, the infrastructure is present in their Winterim
              program, for the development and presentation of this short course to a key
              target audience, young girls. 
