Title       : CAREER: A Mesoscopic Approach to the Theory of Optical Microcavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0239332

Award Number: 0239332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jens U. Noeckel noeckel@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              O239332
Noeckel

The project aims to leverage methods from the theory of
              mesoscopic  
systems, quantum chaos and nonlinear dynamics to advance research
              in  
microphotonics.  Microcavities as building blocks of integrated optical
              devices form 
the central application of the proposed research: their
              spectral, emission and coupling 
characteristics will be studied with a
              combination of numerical modeling and
 approximation methods. Pure numerics
              encounters resource limitations in large, 
coupled and fully three-dimensional
              systems, making approximation schemes
 crucial for speedy, goal-oriented
              design. Among the most widely known such 
schemes is paraxial optics, which
              however breaks down in the resonator 
configurations of greatest interest for
              photonic integration.

The lack of reliable analytical treatments in this
              regime is the  
central theoretical motivation for the proposed research. 
              
Non-paraxiality in microcavities translates into chaotic ray dynamics  
when
              considering the short-wavelength or large-size limit; hence,  
approximations
              relying on large size-parameters bring insights from  
nonlinear dynamics to
              bear on micro-optic design. This parallels  
developments in mesoscopic
              electronic physics where similar  
approximations arise in systems whose size
              falls into the transition  
region between quantum and classical
              mechanics.

Based on this connection, a new course to be developed within the
               
Applied Physics Master's program will aim at a unified presentation of 
              
photonics and quantum mechanics, utilizing web-based teaching  
technology.
              The latter will be tied to web-based dissemination of the  
numerical and
              analytical techniques developed in the proposed research,  
in order to
              strengthen the student's exposure to issues with broad  
interest in optics,
              nanoscience and nonlinear dynamics.



