Title       : CAREER: Integrated Circuits for Ultra High Speed Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0239343

Award Number: 0239343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seyed-Ali Hajimiri hajimiri@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0239343
Hajimiri

It is widely accepted that high-speed communications will
              remain one of the major fields of studies in the foreseeable future.
              Communications (wireless or wireline) are affected by many parameters, but it
              is essentially the limitations of the physical layer that determine its speed
              and flexibility. While a large amount of effort has been dedicated to
              development of new substrates and techniques at the physical layer, high speed
              and low power communication systems and circuits are facing the physical
              limitations of the devices and substrates used. This is particularly the case,
              in integrated systems and circuits, where non-dominant effects of the past are
              becoming dominant to haunt Moore's law for high-speed circuits. While the
              number of on-chip transistor increases, the inevitable limitations of the
              scaling process are creating limitations that cannot be easily remedied. These
              effects have completely changed the design space and have made it more
              difficult to substantially increase the bandwidth and the speed of such systems
              using the conventional design techniques. These limitations are partly due to
              the levels of abstraction defined to facilitate the design process in the past,
              that have unfortunately lost their effectiveness in the light of the new
              constraints. Still the silicon-based technologies are the most promising
              technology for the next generation of ultra-high speed communication systems
              operating at tens of gigaherz. However, before this promise is realized in a
              practical system, a set of key research challenges need to be addressed. In
              this proposal, the PI plans to investigate several of the system, circuit,
              device, and simulation challenges, as well as the general impact of the
              integration of communication systems.

During the five year span of this
              proposal, he will continue to study many aspects of ultra high-speed
              silicon-based integrated circuits, emphasizing both their relevance to the
              practical integrated communication systems and circuits that will be developed
              in the near future, as well as their ability to develop new science and
              knowledge with implications beyond the initial problem. The main topics to be
              studied include: 1. noise processes in integrated communication systems, 2.
              distributed circuits for ultra high-speed wireless and wireline communications,
              3. new transceiver architectures and concepts, 4. new device structures.

The
              PI joined academia because of his strong belief that education is perhaps the
              only real long-term solution to the primary problems faced by human society.
              Education is one of the primary human activities making learning and teaching
              two sides of the same coin. Thus, as an educator, whether in the classroom,
              solving theoretical research problems with graduate students, or in the
              laboratory helping a student create her complicated setup, the PI has had and
              will have the opportunity to teach and learn, and to broaden the vision and
              horizons of, and create new possibilities for, both his students and himself.
              His philosophy towards his career primarily as an educator is that every form
              of human interactions can and should be viewed as an opportunity to learn and
              educate. He has been and will continue to be able to make a broader impact by
              training and preparing students for their future careers, so that they may take
              on leadership roles and contribute to society at large. The primary reason for
              his joining Caltech is the unique opportunity to be a part of the strong link
              between its tradition in research and an extremely active and energetic student
              body. Caltech's excellence as a research institution, as well as its unwavering
              commitment to undergraduate education, make it an excellent place for such an
              endeavor. Also, the vigor and strength of its undergraduate body combined with
              the Institute's courage to challenge boundaries make it a perfect place to
              experiment with difficult and progressive approaches to teaching and
              education.

The main objectives of his educational plan are: 1. to continue
              teaching undergraduate and graduate level courses, emphasizing the fundamental
              concepts, encouraging creativity, and focusing on fundamental engineering
              trade-offs, 2. to continue curriculum development for all levels, trying to
              address as large an audience as possible, considering the needs of the
              department, institute, and society at large, 3. continue undergraduate and
              graduate advising by empowering students to realize their full
              capabilities.


