Title       : SBIR Phase II: Photo-Curable Silicon Oxycarbide Fiber for Diesel Engine
               Particulate Filters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2003   
File        : a0239336

Award Number: 0239336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Pope matech@thegrid.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MATECH Advanced Materials
	      31304 Via Colinas Ste 102
	      Westlake Village, CA  913623901    818/991-8500

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will scale-up a
              manufacturing process for curable preceramic polymers in  the fabrication of
              high yield and low cost Silicon Oxycarbide (SOC) fibers and bonded fiber mats
              for diesel engine particulate filters. In the Phase I effort, SOC fibers and
              fiber mats 
were successfully fabricated and the critical materials properties
              required for the diesel particulate filter application were attained. This
              development represents the first Silicon Oxycarbide glass-ceramic fibers to be
              fabricated from curable poly(dimethyl)siloxanes.  In addition, the
              photo-curable and chemically-curable polysiloxane preceramic polymers
              demonstrated also have potential as a binder or matrix phases for other
              structural composites. This Phase II effort seeks to optimize fiber mat
              production techniques through collaboration with Cummins Engine Company's
              subsidiary Fleetguard/Nelson (FGN), the world's largest manufacturer of filters
              for the automobile and truck market. In the project, critical factors related
              to automated manufacturing, process scale-up, fiber mat performance
              characteristics, and performance testing will be addressed to ensure a smooth
              transition to a commercial product. 
     The diesel particulate filter (DPF)
              market will grow dramatically due to EPA requirements that all diesel vehicles
              be equipped with diesel particulate filters by 2007, thereby significantly
              improving the nation's air quality. The diesel manufacturing industry in North
              America now exceeds $85 billion in gross output annually. Total U. S. "on road"
              vehicles requiring DPF's will exceed 3 million units annually, resulting in a
              potential on road market size of in excess of $6 billion per year. The DPF
              product to be scaled up in this project has comparable performance to the
              current extruded ceramic honeycomb filter but with a projected unit cost of
              about one-tenth. This will have a dramatic impact on diesel filtration system
              costs with substantial environmental, energy, and trade deficit benefits.

