Title       : CAREER: Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets: Parallel
               Approaches to Cluster and MCMC Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0239734

Award Number: 0239734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger L. Berger                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2008        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranjan Maitra maitra@math.umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              CAREER: Methodology for Statistical Computing in Massive Datasets:  Parallel
              Approaches to Cluster and MCMC Estimation

DMS 0239734

PI: Ranjan
              Maitra

This project is aimed at developing practical methodology for
              statistical analysis and estimation in massively sized databases.  Because of
              automated data collection methods, there is now
a surfeit of severely
              multi-dimensional records.  Grouping them into homogeneous clusters to better
              understand them is a desirable goal in a variety of applications, yet classical
              statistical methods are computationally infeasible in many cases.  I propose to
              develop parallel methodology for this context.  Although the methodology and
              theory developed will be quite general and for potential use in applications
              ranging from business, medicine, the environment, software quality assessment,
              I will conduct the research in the context of three scientific collaborations. 
              The first pertains to the
US Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA)
              self-reported Toxic Releases Inventory (TRI) databases, where profiling the
              different facilities in terms of their product, demographic and business
              information can improve the accuracy of records, as well as better characterize
              them vis-a-vis their emissions mix.  The second project is to assess the
              reliability of functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) scans, with a view
              to understanding the cognitive processes of the brain, as a first step to
              patient care and therapy.  The third application is in bioinformatics where the
              goal is to cluster microarray data and also to analyze two-dimensional
              proteomic gel images.  This will help in isolating genes and understanding
              their relationship with different disorders.  

Clustering is in general a
              very difficult problem, with empirical solutions even for very moderately sized
              datasets.  I propose to develop multi-pass methodologies in several different
              scenarios.  I also propose multi-scale simulation approaches to estimation in a
              high-dimensional context.  One of the biggest challenges faced by simulation
              methods due to high dimensionality is the low mobility around the space to be
              traversed because of its vastness.  I propose to address this issue by
              connecting these high-dimensional spaces to lower-dimensional ones  (which are
              significantly smaller) and by using these lower scales to traverse from one
              corner of the higher-dimensional space to another.  A final goal of this
              five-year plan is to investigate the development and estimation in more complex
              models for proteomic gel data.  Most of the plans proposed will be possible
              only with a parallel computing interface.  This is increasingly critical in a
              large number of scientific applications, and I propose to simultaneously
              provide statistics students with the necessary expertise by designing suitably
              tailored graduate and undergraduate classes.

