Title       : CAREER: Three-Dimensional Measurements of Atmospheric Water Vapor Using
               Miniaturized Microwave Radiometers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0239722

Award Number: 0239722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $451200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Reising reising@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The intellectual merit of this CAREER program is based on the design and
              realization of innovative sensors to improve measurement of the
              three-dimensional distribution of water vapor in the atmosphere. Knowledge of
              the temporal and spatial distribution of water vapor is fundamental for
              short-range prediction of precipitation and severe weather. The paucity of
              current observations of wind, temperature and humidity in pre-storm
              environments limits the improvement of forecast skill for these events. 
              

This project will address these needs through the fabrication, validation
              and application of a four-sensor demonstration network of miniaturized water
              vapor profiling radiometers. This novel sensor design is enabled by microwave
              monolithic integrated circuit (MMIC) technology made widely available by the
              wireless communications industry. Compared to conventional waveguide-based
              designs, MMIC technology allows these sensors to be smaller, lighter and more
              robust. New sensor technologies will enable larger networks of water vapor
              radiometers to perform higher-resolution observations. The demonstration
              network will be used to validate remote water vapor measurements using both
              radiometers and SuomiNet GPS receivers, through comparison with in-situ
              observations, including radiosondes launched by the National Weather Service.
              The automated pointing of the network's sensors will enable direct comparison
              of GPS slant water vapor with radiometric profiles along the same slant
              paths.

The educational portion of this project will introduce applications
              in atmospheric science to significant numbers of undergraduate electrical
              engineering students. Novel methods of instruction will be introduced to
              encourage students to find the relationships between curriculum content and
              "real-world" applications and to participate in peer-to-peer learning.
              Promising undergraduate students will be involved in design and fabrication of
              remote sensors in the laboratory.

The broader impacts of the program include
              the availability of miniaturized atmospheric sensors to be deployed in larger
              networks, enhancing observation of the atmospheric state in order to improve
              weather prediction and climate monitoring, clearly providing benefits to
              society. The research program will foster collaborations among universities,
              industry and government. The research goals of this program lead naturally to
              collaboration with small U.S. businesses that produce radiometers for research.
              Other broader impacts include the PI's continuing mentoring of students from
              underrepresented groups as part of an NSF-sponsored summer program.
