Title       : CAREER: Electronic, Chemical, and Mechanical Interactions at the Nanometer and
               Single - Molecule Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0239842

Award Number: 0239842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bellave S. Shivaram                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2008   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip G. Collins collinsp@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to provide
              educational and research opportunities for students interested in
              nanometer-scale materials and electronics.  The research goals of the project
              are to build a better understanding of electronic devices made from nanoscale
              materials.  Because the electrically active components in these devices can
              incorporate very small numbers of atoms or conduction channels, the devices are
              exquisitely sensitive to electrostatic, chemical and mechanical perturbations
              and are excellent probes of the interactions between these properties.  The
              research program will develop techniques for identifying and controlling such
              interactions, for example by identifying the electronic signatures of chemical
              interactions between adsorbate molecules and nanowire conductors.  In addition
              to the research goals, this project will develop a summer laboratory course
              where students can observe and participate in ongoing nanoscience research. 
              Using an active learning environment, students will explore the
              interdisciplinary nature of nanoscience and the various ways that electronic,
              chemical, and mechanical properties vary and become more closely interdependent
              at the nanometer scale.  This integration of education and research will allow
              students to experience the dynamics of scientific discovery in a rapidly
              developing new field.

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
              aims to provide educational and research opportunities for students interested
              in nanometer-scale materials and electronics.  The research goals of the
              project are to build a better understanding of ultrasmall electronics made from
              novel nanowire materials, which have a variety of unusual properties.  For
              example, nanowire electronics are exquisitely sensitive to tiny changes, such
              as when a single molecule from the air lands on the device.  Further
              investigation is necessary to understand the science behind this sensitivity. 
              The research is currently leading to new types of detectors able to sense
              ultralow concentrations of harmful chemicals.  In addition to the research
              goals, this project will develop a summer laboratory course where students can
              observe and participate in ongoing nanoscience research.  Using an active
              learning environment, students will explore the interdisciplinary nature of
              nanoscience and the various ways that electronic, chemical, and mechanical
              properties vary and become more closely interdependent at the nanometer scale. 
              This integration of education and research will allow students to experience
              the dynamics of scientific discovery in a rapidly developing new field.

