Title       : SBIR Phase II: Surface Modification of Textiles for Protective Clothing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0239038

Award Number: 0239038
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don B. Elrod don.elrod@lynntech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lynntech, Inc
	      7610 Eastmark Drive, Suite 202
	      College Station, TX  778404024    979/693-0017

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1630,9147,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project involves the
              modification of the surface of textiles through graft polymerization of an
              oxidizing polymer resulting in a fabric which has the ability to
              eradicate/neutralize pathogenic microorganisms, pesticides, and
              chemical/biological weapons. The fabric could be used to produce medical
              textiles in order to reduce the transmission of infectious pathogens in
              hospitals, protect agricultural workers from contact with pesticides, and
              protect military personnel and first responders from contact with
              chemical/biological weapons in the event of terrorism or war. The Phase I
              research showed that the grafted fabric was highly effective against both
              microbial and chemical agents. The modified fabric was also found to be
              non-irritating to both intact and abraded (compromised) skin.   In this Phase
              II project the  research will consist of optimizing the graft polymerization
              process, extensive testing of the optimized fabric against microbial and
              chemical challenges, durability testing through repeated laundering, mechanical
              property evaluation, extensive cytotoxicity and irritation testing, capacity
              and regenerability assessment, stability assessment in storage, pilot plant
              production runs, and custom production/testing of fabric for a strategic
              partner.
     The fabric technology to be developed in this  project has a
              vast amount of potential in a variety of niche applications in the medical,
              agricultural, and military arenas. In addition to the huge markets that exist
              for these products, there are obvious societal benefits that are inherent with
              the technology. Infection control is a huge problem in medical facilities
              resulting in prolonged hospital stays and leads to higher medical costs. The
              modified fabric could be constructed into medical textiles for use as surgical
              drapes, scrubs, lab coats, bed sheets, privacy drapes, gowns, etc. Farm workers
              could protect themselves from exposure to the pesticides they use in the field.
              The fabric could be employed in the production of protective clothing for first
              responders and military personnel who find themselves in an environment where
              there is a potential risk
of exposure to chemical/biological weapons. 

