Title       : SBIR Phase II: Parallel Hardware Implementation of the Split and Merge Discrete
               Wavelet Transform for Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a0239330

Award Number: 0239330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Winslow L. Sargeant                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander W. Moopenn amoopenn@mosaixtech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mosaix, LLC
	      1229 Bruce Avenue
	      Glendale, CA  91202    818/507-7946

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes to
              develop the Intellectual Property (IP) core of a novel image compression /
              signal decomposition algorithm based on the discrete wavelet transform (DWT).
              This is a fully parallel, scalable, multi-resolution, and low power
              implementation of the JPEG2000 DWT engine and is particularly well suited for
              use in both consumer applications at one end of the spectrum (as in reduced
              bit-rate web browsing over wireless communications channels as found in the
              next generation of web enabled cell phones) as well as in high-end commercial
              applications at the other end of the spectrum (as in non-linear video editing
              accelerators for the movie industry). This particular implementation is a
              highly efficient implementation of the DWT transform and makes use of a novel
              Overlap-State wavelet decomposition algorithm which minimizes memory, I/O and
              computational requirements. Over the next decade, spiraling consumer demand for
              fast mobile communication of voice and IP over increasingly integrated
              terrestrial and satellite based systems plagued by a limited electro-magnetic
              spectrum allocation necessitates the pursuit and development of better
              compression algorithms that a visually pleasing at low bit rates. As a
              consequence of extensive research, transform coding techniques now dominate
              every single image and video coding scheme proposed to-date. Consequently,
              efficient software and hardware based transform coding system designs and
              implementations have become a high priority objective.

In fact, it is widely
              accepted that JPEG2000 will become the universally accepted format for digital
              images and high quality video - whether on the web, cable, over wireless
              systems, in digital cameras, printers, faxes or remote sensors. With its
              wavelet based image-coding technology, it offers features previously impossible
              in JPEG. Compared with the old baseline JPEG, the new JPEG2000 spec poses
              formidable technology challenges for the myriad of developers and OEM's
              planning on using it. The new standard uses coding algorithms based on the
              discrete wavelet transform (DWT) which is fundamentally different from the
              discrete cosine transform (DCT) JPEG spec. In JPEG2000, the importance of
              computational and especially memory bottlenecks has clearly increased several
              fold over the old specification. In fact, various implementations of
              computationally efficientCE wavelet transforms have been reported in recent
              years.
