Title       : CAREER: Study and Control of the Optoelectronic Properties of Ternary
               Semiconductor Nanomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0239688

Award Number: 0239688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clemens Burda burda@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,7202,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this CAREER project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division, Burda will study ternary semiconductor nanodots using
              nanoparticle synthesis and chemometric modeling, detailed characterization of
              optoelectronic properties by laser spectroscopy, and device fabrication and
              application-specific efficiency measurements. The fabrication of nanoparticles
              is based on two different families of materials, namely compounds of the type
              Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se,Te)2 and TiO(2-x)N(x).  Characterization techniques include
              high-resolution transmission microscopy (EDS and EELS) and
              nanosecond-to-femtosecond spectroscopic measurements.  In the end the
              investigator will fabricate photovoltaic devices using nanoparticles of the two
              types synthesized in this research.  The educational activities of this project
              include involvement in the "Math and Science Partnership" (MSP) Outreach
              Program for Local High School Teachers, educational workshop programs of the
              NASA Glenn Research Center, and collaborative outreach projects. Undergraduate
              students and students from the local high school will be able to participate in
              the research experience of the PI's laboratory.  A new course for
              undergraduates on the topic of nanomaterials will introduce students from
              different scientific backgrounds (engineers, chemists and physicists) to
              developments in the interdisciplinary field of nanoscience. 

Understanding
              and controlling the optoelectronic properties of ternary semiconductor
              nanomaterials is of great interest to many important technological
              applications, such as fabrication of photovoltaic solar cells and lasers as
              well as semiconductor-based photocatalysis.  The outreach activities impact
              education from grades K-12 through postdoctoral training and from local to
              national arenas.

