Title       : CAREER: Ultrafast studies of exciton transport in conjugated polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0239120

Award Number: 0239120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valeria D. Kleiman kleiman@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,7202,9161,9179,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this CAREER project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of
              the Chemistry Division, Kleiman will study poly-conjugated molecules and their
              photo-physical properties using both ultrafast experiments and quantum chemical
              calculations in order to understand novel properties that arise from the
              macromolecule as a whole.  This program involves collaborative work aimed at
              the synthesis of hyper-branched polymers, dendritic macromolecules and charged
              oligomers.  Ultrafast spectroscopy is used to examine energy transport in
              conjugated polymers whose electronic and optical properties can be chemically
              controlled at the molecular level.  Theoretical calculations will provide an
              understanding of the experimental data and allow the prediction of measurable
              properties and delineation of a fundamental model of energy-transport.  The PI
              will make an intensive effort to involve young women in an area of chemistry
              where they are vastly underrepresented.  This will be accomplished via
              conscientious recruiting, mentoring and encouragement of both undergraduate and
              graduate students.  Promotion and expansion of an exchange program with
              undergraduate students from Latin-American countries will also be pursued. 
              Community outreach activities in grades K-12 will showcase the essential role
              of female scientists in today's life.

New materials with novel photophysical
              properties are crucial for developing revolutionary molecular-photonic and
              optoelectronic components.  Conjugated polymers have emerged as materials
              exhibiting valuable properties in optical sensing, energy transport, and light
              harvesting.  This research program is highly interdisciplinary, dealing with
              synthetic organic, polymer, material-science, theoretical, and
              nonlinear-optical research.  The results of these investigations will provide
              an understanding of the electronic and photo-physical characteristics that lead
              to unique optical properties useful for optoelectronics, sensing and energy
              harvesting.

