Title       : CAREER: Synthesis, Optical, and Magneto-Optical Spectroscopies of Diluted
               Magnetic Semiconductor Quantum Dots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0239325

Award Number: 0239325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Gamelin gamelin@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER award supports research into the physical and chemical properties of
              nanoscale diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs). Efforts will focus on doped
              chalcogenide and oxide semiconductors recently shown to be suitable
              spin-injection materials in prototype spin-based light emitting diode devices
              and to support room-temperature ferromagnetism. The research will combine
              innovations in chemical preparative methodologies with physical investigations
              involving sophisticated spectroscopic and magnetic instrumentation, with
              emphasis on ligand-field electronic absorption and magnetic circular dichroism
              spectroscopies. These studies will allow correlations to be explored between
              synthesis, electronic structure, and magnetism. Fundamental research in these
              areas will yield new insights into the properties of nanoscale DMSs that may
              contribute significantly to the way such materials are made and applied
              technologically in the future. This multidisciplinary research will prepare
              participating students with advanced expertise in the areas of physical,
              inorganic, and materials chemistries. These research activities will be
              complemented by synergistic educational activities having the common theme of
              enhancing the opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students at the
              University of Washington to study materials chemistry.
%%%
 This CAREER award
              supports research into the synthesis and characterization of nanoscale diluted
              magnetic semiconductor (DMS) materials important to the field of spin-based
              electronics ("spintronics") technologies. The central objectives of the
              research project are (a) to synthesize high-quality nanoscale DMSs and (b) to
              study these materials by optical, magnetic, magnetooptical, and electrochemical
              methods. This research will emphasize the development of room-temperature
              solution methods for preparing, handling, and performing chemistry upon
              high-quality internally doped oxide and chalcogenide DMS nanocrystals.
              Exploratory research into the design and construction of prototype magnetic
              superstructures involving DMS nanocrystals as building blocks will also be
              initiated. This multidisciplinary research will prepare participating students
              with advanced expertise in the areas of physical, inorganic, and materials
              chemistries. These research activities will be complemented by synergistic
              educational activities having the common theme of enhancing the opportunities
              for undergraduate and graduate students to study materials chemistry at the
              University of Washington. The educational activities will involve a balanced
              combination of new course development, departmental program development, and
              regional advocacy of materials chemistry studies among academic institutions in
              the Pacific Northwest. This project is supported jointly by the Chemistry
              Division and the Division of Materials Research.
***

