Title       : SBIR Phase II: Exploring Complex Biological Concepts in an Interactive 3-D
               Learning Environment over the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0239238

Award Number: 0239238
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Seifert dbseifert@comcast.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syandus, Inc.
	      836 Robert Dean Drive
	      Downingtown, PA  193354469    /   -

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 7256,7355,9177,9178,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will create a 3D,
              interactive learning system to communicate complex scientific concepts from
              biological and medical science, which are difficult to grasp via long narrative
              scripts.  The detailed technical specifications formulated in Phase I will be
              developed into a software solution distinctive from what is available today. 
              This learning tool allows the user to inquire about objects in a visualization
              context, where specific aspects of these objects can be manipulated.  Syandus
              has adapted sophisticated real-time 3D rendering technology common to video
              games as follows: 1) by creating the ability to interact with time driven, 3D
              process models of complex scientific phenomena; and 2) by associating textual
              information with these visualized objects and processes.  At a user's mouse
              click, objects intelligently reveal what they are about in deeply layered text,
              illustrations and linked files.  This interface can aggregate all kinds of
              information, such as all of a pharmaceutical company's technical information on
              a disease.  Finally, Syandus is building the software to be delivered across
              the Internet through a standard browser interface or launched from a CDROM and
              automatically updated via a narrowband Internet connection.
     The
              differentiation among pharmaceutical products is ever increasingly grounded in
              rapidly evolving complex science, thus making essential a mechanism for
              aggregating and communicating scientific information that relates how drugs
              work to disease states.  Focusing on the pharmaceutical industry as the firm's
              first target market, Syandus proposes to create a tool to help physicians
              understand the breakthrough medicines to treat complex disease states that
              adversely impact people's lives.  The firm's custom projects will result in
              enduring resources for medical students, professionals and healthcare
              consumers. As the technology matures, the firm will pursue higher education
              markets.  Through Internet connectivity, the product can reach wide audiences
              across the globe.

