Title       : CAREER: Engineering a Protein Molecular Switch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0239088

Award Number: 0239088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James M. Lee                            
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2008      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc A. Ostermeier oster@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposed research is to develop and implement a novel,
              combinatorial protein engineering strategy called random domain insertion to
              couple two proteins functionally to create a protein molecular switch. The
              design of molecular switches to modulate or report on biological functions has
              enormous potential for a variety of applications including the creation of
              biosensors, regulators of gene transcription, modulators of metabolic and cell
              signaling pathways, chaperones for drug delivery, facilitators of drug
              transport, and novel biomaterials. The efficacy of the random domain insertion
              strategy will be demonstrated in two models, "proof-of-principle" systems using
              well-characterized proteins. The kinetic, structural, and fluorescent behavior
              of representative molecular switches will be characterized so as to develop
              models on how the switching behavior was achieved. These models will be tested
              experimentally. The combinatorial methods and models developed will be utilized
              to initiate engineering a molecular switch for drug transport. The scientific
              insights gained from this will provide a rational basis for engineering
              switches for a variety of applications as well as provide a unique platform for
              addressing questions of structure-function relationships. For the education
              component, the PI will be developing an integrated program for infusing the
              Chemical Engineering Undergraduate Program at Johns Hopkins University with the
              proper components to prepare graduates who have a basic understanding of
              biology and who can apply quantitative and non-quantitative approaches to
              biological problems. This will include the development of a Biological
              Engineering Laboratory course.
