Title       : Reactivity and Synthesis of Fluoroorganic Compounds and Reactive Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0239884

Award Number: 0239884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin L. Polt                           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Dolbier WRD@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is to study the reactivity of sulfurpentafluoride
              radicals and trifluoromethane anions (Ruppert's reagent) for the preparation of
              fluoronated organic compounds.  This study involves the elaboration of detailed
              reaction mechanisms by the use of thermodynamics and kinetics to examine
              regiochemical and stereochemical issues as they apply to structure-activity
              relationships in the reaction intermediates.  

With this continuing award,
              the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program is supporting the research and
              educational efforts of Dr. William R. Dolbier, Jr. of the Department of
              Chemistry at the University of Florida.  Professor Dolbier will focus his work
              on the construction of commercially feasible methods for the preparation of
              materials for use in the semiconductor industry.  Methods for safe, economical
              and environmentally friendly methods for the production of organofluorine
              compounds will be developed.  The educational activities of the award will
              include the training of graduate students, post-doctoral associates, visiting
              scholars and undergraduates at the University of Florida.  

