Title       : The Interdisciplinary Study of Urbanism in Middle School
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  1995  
File        : a9155398

Award Number: 9155398
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318658             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martharose Laffey ext 115  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frances Haley  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sara N. L. Wallace  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jane J. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith D. Harries  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Counc Social Studies
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three year project, sponsored by The National Council                     
              for the Social Studies, will teach 24 Middle School teachers                   
              from Maryland and District of Columbia the basic concepts of                   
              urbanism.  The program content will be based upon the                          
              integrated study of the major disciplines which are a part of                  
              the study of urbanism-sociology, political science, geography                  
              and economics.  Using this interdisciplinary approach                          
              teachers, under the guidance of project staff, will develop,                   
              test and compare hypotheses about urbanism through the in-                     
              depth study of selected cities.  The result of these studies                   
              will be the development of activities for use in the middle                    
              school classroom which illustrate the application of the                       
              scientific method as practiced in the social sciences.                         
              During the follow-up phase, in the academic year, the                          
              teachers will implement the interdisciplinary program in the                   
              schools with the help of the project staff.  At the end of                     
              the project a book of fifty effective lesson plans for                         
              teaching urbanism in the middle school and suggestions on how                  
              to use these in in-service activities will have been                           
              produced.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Matching funds from the school districts involved, the                         
              National Council for the Social Studies and the University of                  
              Maryland - Baltimore County are equivalent to 47% of the NSF                   
              grant.
