Title       : Iowa Chautauqua: A Regional Effort to Achieve More Appropriate Science for
               Students in Grades Four through Nine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9155221

Award Number: 9155221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $716191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Yager robert-yager@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Robert Yager of the University of Iowa has developed a                     
              teacher enhancement program ("Iowa Chautauqua") for middle                     
              school teachers across the state.  This program provides                       
              teachers with a three-week workshop experience in the                          
              Science-Technology-Society (STS) approach to science                           
              instruction. The STS approach stresses the societal impacts                    
              and issues of natural, technological, and anthropocentric                      
              activities.  Examples of STS issues would include drought,                     
              agriculture, hydroelectric power generation.  Teachers will                    
              have instruction on how to identify STS issues that are                        
              local concerns and are likely to engage students in                            
              meaningful inquiry.  Teachers will develop the ability to                      
              enable student investigations by facilitating data                             
              gathering, analysis, and design of alternative social                          
              action.  These social actions can be pursued as                                
              out-of-school efforts to address real community issues.                        
                                                                                             
              The Iowa Chautauqua will reach 300 Iowa middle school                          
              science teachers in ten different areas during a two year                      
              period.  Scientists from industry and from science faculty                     
              at Iowa universities and community colleges are involved as                    
              science resources.  Dr. Yager's project leadership team has                    
              assembled an impressive array of information sources from                      
              which students and teachers may derive data for their                          
              investigations.  This teacher enhancement project will help                    
              teachers and students to develop as independent                                
              investigators with an awareness of the relationships between                   
              science and society.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing on this project represents 53% of the NSF                         
              contribution.
