Title       : Implementation of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics Standard in
               Discrete Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9155165

Award Number: 9155165
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1703960            (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Kenney peg.kenney@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Boston College will conduct a three-year project to enhance                    
              mathematics teachers of grades 7 through 12 in basic                           
              knowledge of discrete mathematics topics, in implementing                      
              discrete mathematics in their classroom and in sharing                         
              instructional experiences with their students and teacher                      
              colleagues.  Discrete mathematics content areas to be                          
              addressed are social choice, graph theory, recursion,                          
              counting and matrices.  Two possible ways to fuse discrete                     
              mathematics into the secondary curriculum will be                              
              considered:  a separate course in discrete mathematics for                     
              upper secondary students, and an infusion of discrete                          
              mathematics topics into all existing secondary mathematics                     
              classes, beginning at the middle school level.  Emphasis                       
              will be placed on mathematical problem solving, reasoning,                     
              communication and connections.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Project activities include an initial three-week summer                        
              leadership workshop for 22 teachers with experience in                         
              teaching discrete mathematics.  These leader-teachers will                     
              be trained to become members of leadership teams who,                          
              together with Presidential Award Winners who are members of                    
              the project's senior staff, will conduct three-week summer                     
              workshops in six regions of the country in years two and                       
              three of the project.  Three hundred sixty second-wave                         
              teachers will participate in these workshops  which will                       
              include a follow-up session to bond teachers at the local                      
              level into a support network for implementing discrete                         
              mathematics. In turn, these teachers are expected to conduct                   
              inservice activities within their school district, reaching                    
              approximately 4000 of their colleagues in third-wave                           
              enhancement, for a total of 4382 teachers so enhanced.                         
                                                                                             
              This proposal addresses the enhancement of teachers in an                      
              important area of mathematics, new to the secondary                            
              curriculum.  And the teachers-teaching-teachers pyramid                        
              model lends itself to wide dissemination.                                      
                                                                                             
              Boston University, University of North Carolina, Illinois                      
              State University, S.W. Texas University, Portland State                        
              University, and California State Polytechnic cost-sharing                      
              accounts for 3% of the NSF budget.
