Title       : Introducing Engineering Through Case Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1994      
File        : a9155832

Award Number: 9155832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Chalmers F. Sechrist                    
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry J. Petroski hp¦egr.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 7419      INTRODUCT CURRICULUM PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              An introductory engineering course based entirely on case                      
              studies will be developed.  It will stress timeless aspects of                 
              engineering--involving design, visual thinking, judgement, and                 
              the like--that are independent of the state-of-the-art.                        
              Differences between engineering and science will be emphasized                 
              in order to convey to students that the goals of the                           
              engineering curriculum are distinct from those of the math,                    
              science, and engineering-science courses that dominate the                     
              first two years of study.  The case studies will be chosen not                 
              only for their technical content but also for the inherently                   
              interesting humanistic and social contexts in which they show                  
              engineers how work and engineering projects do occur.  As part                 
              of the course, each student will be required to develop an                     
              independent case study (chosen from a well-prepared list) and                  
              report on it orally and in writing.  The course will thus                      
              emphasize to first-year students the importance of reading,                    
              speaking, and writing skills for the practice of engineering.                  
              Students will be expected to take from the course a broad                      
              collection of case studies that will provide a real-world                      
              context in which to interpret and integrate subsequent                         
              engineering coursework.  The experience is also expected to                    
              convey at an early stage a sense of professionalism that will                  
              have career-long implications.  The course material and case                   
              studies will be collected and disseminated widely, potentially                 
              affecting in fundamental ways how engineering is taught.
