Title       : The BioQUEST Learning Tools Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9155885

Award Number: 9155885
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167355             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Jungck jungck@beloit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Beloit College
	      
	      Beloit, WI  53511    608/365-3391

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this biology education project is to promote:                   
              1)the development of curricular materials that facilitate                      
              learning via a modern biological research approach, 2)                         
              dissemination of these and previous NSF-supported curricular                   
              materials, and 3) the establishment and maintenance of a viable                
              communication network among biologists, science educators,                     
              software developers and other individuals who share this                       
              approach.  Faculty will come together at a summer workshop to                  
              promote the development of the BioQUEST's open-ended problem-                  
              solving, long-term research approach to the teaching and                       
              learning of biology(the "3P's" approach: problem-posing,                       
              probelm-solving, and peer persuasion).  Two-thirds of the                      
              invited participants will develop materials with a view toward                 
              addressing implementation of the BioQUEST approach to teaching                 
              and learning biology and the use of computer tools and                         
              simulations in undergraduate biology education.  The other one-                
              third of the participants primarily will initiate new projects                 
              in content areas where software tools and computer simulations                 
              would enahnce undergraduate biology instruction.  In addition                  
              to materials development, each participant will play a role in                 
              in the dissemination process by either giving a presentation at                
              a professional meeting, conducting a local workshop, or writing                
              an article for submission to a journal. Materials developed in                 
              these projects may ultimately become part of the growing                       
              BioQUEST library. The effectiveness of this effort in enhancing                
              student learning will be evaluated at several sites.
