Title       : Leadership Program in Discrete Mathematics--Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1994       
File        : a9155231

Award Number: 9155231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry Kepner                            
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1693123            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Rosenstein joer@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Rutgers University will conduct a three-and-one-half-year                      
              project to enhance 340 K through 12 mathematics teachers in                    
              discrete mathematics and its applications.  In addition,                       
              approximately 3400 second-wave teachers will receive                           
              inservice from participants, for a total of over 3700                          
              teachers enhanced through this project.                                        
                                                                                             
              Three cycles of teachers will attend a three-week summer                       
              institute, four follow-up sessions during the school year                      
              and a second summer institute.  For high school and middle                     
              school mathematics teachers, the second summer institute                       
              will be two weeks in length; for middle and elementary                         
              mathematics specialists, the second summer institute will be                   
              one week long.  Approximately 115 teachers will participate                    
              in each two-year cycle.  In addition twenty participants                       
              will be selected each year to attend a seven-day leadership                    
              training program and will then be expected to work in teams                    
              of two to provide four inservice workshops in their school                     
              districts the following year.  Discrete mathematics topics                     
              will include applications of graphs; graphs and algorithms;                    
              combinatorics, probability and statistics; mathematical                        
              formulations and fairness; discrete dynamical systems; and                     
              iteration and fractals.  Participants may earn up to six                       
              graduate credits.                                                              
                                                                                             
              This project is co-sponsored by the Center for Discrete                        
              Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS), an                      
              NSF Science and Technology Center made up of a consortium of                   
              Rutgers and Princeton Universities, AT&T Bell Laboratories,                    
              and Bell Communications Research.  This group is at the                        
              cutting edge of discrete mathematics, offering the                             
              excitement of prominent researchers in the field, many of                      
              whom are also excellent at communicating their mathematics                     
              to non-researchers.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Rutgers University, Montclair State College, Bellcore and                      
              Bell Labs cost-sharing accounts for 28% of the NSF budget.
