Title       : Empowering Mathematics Teachers in Computer-Intensive Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1996       
File        : a9155313

Award Number: 9155313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999317             (Estimated)
Investigator: M.Kathleen Heid ik8@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Pennsylvania State University will conduct a three-year                    
              project to empower 300 middle and high school mathematics                      
              teachers in computer-intensive environments and to prepare                     
              teachers for implementing computer intensive curricula in                      
              general and computer-intensive algebra in particular.  The                     
              project will engage participants through four components:  a                   
              computer-intensive mathematics course, a mathematics education                 
              course in understanding student understanding, a practicum                     
              involving teaches as researchers, and classroom implementation                 
              addressing issues in the teaching and learning of mathematics                  
              in computer-intensive environments.  These components will be                  
              accomplished through four-week intensive summer courses,                       
              follow-up activities during the school year, a year-long                       
              practicum for a subset of the teachers implementing computer-                  
              intensive algebra, and support for all teachers during their                   
              first year of implementation.  In addition, this teacher                       
              enhancement model will study the effects of teacher-                           
              implemented, task-based interviews and computer-active testing                 
              on their understanding of student understanding.                               
                                                                                             
              Participants will be recruited nationwide, with targeted areas                 
              of Washington, DC, Chicago and San Francisco.  Participants                    
              may elect to receive eight graduate credits.  In addition to                   
              the first-wave participants, an additional 900 second-wave                     
              participants will be effected through enactment of roles as                    
              computer-intensive facilitators, bringing the total numbers of                 
              teachers enhanced to 1200.                                                     
                                                                                             
              In working in a computer-intensive environment, participants                   
              will learn new teaching roles -- roles that will deemphasize                   
              training in routine skills and emphasize computer-based                        
              exploration of mathematical concepts.  They will develop new                   
              strategies for assessing student learning and for assigning                    
              grades.  Pennsylvania State and participating schools' cost-                   
              sharing accounts for 8% of the NSF budget.
