Title       : Modernizing the Introductory Astronomy Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1993       
File        : a9155927

Award Number: 9155927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence A. Marschall marschal@gettysburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mia K. Luehrmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Hayden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Richard Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gettysburg College
	      North Washington Street
	      Gettysburg, PA  17325    717/337-6000

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 7419,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy is the first and only experience in science for many                 
              college students. Yet laboratories in introductory astronomy                   
              have long suffered because of the difficulty of doing                          
              "experiments" with the faint light from the heavens. They are                  
              rarely experiential or "hands-on", relying instead on analysis                 
              of photographs and data tables provided ahead of time. The                     
              available laboratory material today also exemplifies techniques                
              that are increasingly out-of-date and unrepresentative of what                 
              astronomers really do. Students rightly regard much of the lab                 
              as make-work, rarely reinforcing the concepts presented in                     
              class.A series of new exercises are being developed for the                    
              introductory lab that addresses these problems. Some will be                   
              "hands-on exercises" centered around observations with CCD                     
              cameras on small telescopes, of the kind available to many                     
              schools. Other exercises will be simulations of observations,                  
              which can be extremely realistic, since much astronomical                      
              observation is done using computers as front ends for various                  
              types of telescopes. Standardized software tools are being                     
              developed for all the labs, and data taking and analysis are                   
              being integrated with existing spreadsheet programs. The                       
              finished labs will consist of software, writeups, and teachers'                
              guides, as well as technical manuals and will be made available                
              to other institutions.The new exercises give students in the                   
              course a more satisfying and realistic experience in astronomy,                
              and provide impetus for revitalizing the introductory astronomy                
              labs in similar courses in other colleges and universities.
