Title       : Operation Toolbox: A Program in Environmental and Behavioral Biology for Science
               Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1992        
File        : a9155256

Award Number: 9155256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma L. Walton                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $478094             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard H. Hagerman hagermal@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Fulbright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn D. Berkheimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Hetherington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this three year program is to provide teacher                   
              enhancement in the subject areas of Environmental and                          
              Behavioral Biology.  Each year, twenty-four junior high                        
              school and high school biology teachers will receive                           
              instruction at the Kellogg Biological Station (KBS) of                         
              Michigan State University. Instruction will cover recent                       
              developments in environmental sustainability, agroecological                   
              practices, and the place of microbes in the environment.                       
              Lead teachers from previous workshops will be included as                      
              part of the teaching faculty.  Teams of middle school and                      
              high school teachers from the same district will be                            
              encouraged to apply.  The summer workshop can be applied                       
              toward a Masters of Biology Teaching Degree.                                   
                                                                                             
              Instruction will consist of lecture\discussion, guest                          
              speakers, and appropriate laboratory and field experiences.                    
              In addition, participants will be shown ways of integrating                    
              economic, ethical, and political factors pertaining to                         
              environmental use into their curricula.  Teacher teams will                    
              develop laboratory or field experiences that will be shared                    
              with all other participants. Participants will be required                     
              to develop a Unit plan based upon a Conceptual Change Model.                   
              Based on their summer and classroom experience, participants                   
              will provide three days of inservice workshops to peer                         
              teachers.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The total cost share of this program is 8.1% of NSF cost.
