Title       : Site-Specific Environmental Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1992    
File        : a9155194

Award Number: 9155194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Curtis D. Howard                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270703             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Stewart jhstewar@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This project builds on a successful pilot program in site-                     
              specific environmental education. Teams of elementary/middle                   
              school teachers will participate in a two-week field course in                 
              site-specific environmental education.  Materials developed by                 
              the investigators for the Goose Lake Wildlife Area, Wisconsin,                 
              site for the project, include specific glacial, bedrock, and                   
              historical geology, limnology, botany, soils, and water                        
              information, as well as ecological generalizations and                         
              teaching activities suitable for the elementary/middle school                  
              classroom.The participants will learn the natural and human                    
              history of the area, participate in field work to reinforce                    
              instruction, and participate in and develop cross-curricular                   
              teaching activities.  During the second phase of the project                   
              the participant teachers will return to the University of                      
              Wisconsin-Madison campus to begin development of site specific                 
              materials for a site of their choosing.  Following completion                  
              of their own site-specific teachers guide, in the final phase                  
              of the program, the teachers as "teacher leaders" will use                     
              their new materials and their site to provide inservice                        
              opportunities for other teachers in their districts.  The                      
              proposed project will support two cycles of teacher teams,                     
              eight teams of three teachers per cycle.  Desired outcomes are                 
              increased content knowledge in the environmental sciences,                     
              increased capability and enthusiasm for teaching environmental                 
              education, development of site-specific materials for local                    
              use by districts, and the dissemination of information and                     
              materials to other teachers in the participating districts.
