Title       : Colorado Science Teacher Enhancement Program (CO-STEP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1997 
File        : a9155199

Award Number: 9155199
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1493955            (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Maxwell dmaxwell@cc.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Ellis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Biol Scs Curriculum Study
	      5415 Mark Dabling Boulevard
	      Colorado Springs, CO  809034720    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The Biological Sciences Curriculum Study (BSCS) plans to                       
              establish a Trainer-of-Trainers Center and a state-wide                        
              network of six Teacher Development Centers (TDC) in Colorado.                  
              Each center will be a collaborative partnership involving a                    
              university, Cooperative Educational Services, a regional                       
              branch of the Colorado Alliance for Science, and several                       
              school districts.  The project design, which is consistent                     
              with the Colorado plan for the State Systemic Initiative, has                  
              four major components: 1) the teacher development network, 2)                  
              the trainer-of-trainers program, 3) the master-teacher                         
              program, and 4) the school-based teacher development program.                  
              During the 60-month period for which NSF funding is sought,                    
              project staff will build a network to provide teacher                          
              development and follow-up implementation support for 540                       
              master teachers and at least 1,080 additional classroom                        
              teachers of grades 4-6 (48,600 students).                                      
                                                                                             
              Four staff members from each of the six regional Teacher                       
              Development Centers (the Center director, the project                          
              evaluator, a master teacher, and an administrator) will be                     
              trained at the Trainer-of-Trainers Center.  Each of these six                  
              teams will then develop and implement plans for the                            
              improvement of science education via the regional Teacher                      
              Development Center (TDC) in their respective regions.  Each                    
              TDC will offer a series of courses on science and science                      
              teaching for the master teachers from their region.  The                       
              master teachers will be involved in an intensive, long-term                    
              program to improve their science teaching and that of their                    
              colleagues.  Teacher development networks will provide follow-                 
              up support to the master teachers as they implement                            
              improvements in their science curriculum and instruction.                      
                                                                                             
              This project is appropriate for the Teacher Enhancement                        
              Program because of its systemic plan to enhance in a                           
              substantive way the science teaching of a large number of                      
              elementary school teachers throughout the state of Colorado.                   
                                                                                             
              Non-NSF cost-sharing is approximately 163% of the amount                       
              requested from NSF.
