Title       : A Teacher Training Program in Biology: The Science, Techniques and Ethics of
               Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1994  
File        : a9155345

Award Number: 9155345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Curtis D. Howard                        
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $986875             (Estimated)
Investigator: Crellin Pauling cpauling@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lane H. Conn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen O'Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/469-2141

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this two year program is 1) to continue a previous              
              teacher enhancement program for high school biology teachers in                
              the areas of molecular biology and biotechnology, and 2) to begin              
              development of a cadre of teams of lead teachers (two per team)                
              capable of providing in-service training to other teachers in                  
              their local areas.                                                             
                                                                                             
              The program will provide 168 teachers with 1) A laboratory-based,              
              two-week workshop which will be held at one of four campuses of                
              the California State University System, 2) a symposium on related              
              ethical and social issues, 3) a follow-up meeting focused on the               
              evaluation of supplementary curricular materials for the regular,              
              honors, and advanced placement courses in biology, and 4)                      
              outreach support, via a mobile van and via scientist-educator                  
              partnerships.  The two-week laboratory-based workshop will                     
              provide theory and methods in molecular biology, including                     
              transformation of bacteria and gene splicing.  The workshop will               
              also address strategies for the implementation of this material                
              into the high school classroom.  During a three day symposium,                 
              the ethical and social issues related to these techniques will be              
              addressed.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              In the second year of the program, 12 teams of twenty-four former              
              participants will be selected (team members chosen from the same               
              local areas) and trained at San Francisco State University to                  
              lead local on-site workshops.  The lead teacher training workshop              
              will provide additional in-depth training in molecular biology,                
              coupled with guidance in effective presentation to fellow                      
              teachers.  Furthermore, it will provide guidance in 1)                         
              establishing local support for education projects in their                     
              communities, 2) the generation of industry support, and 3)                     
              obtaining grant funds.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing represents 90.0% of the NSF award.
