Title       : SBIR Phase I: Macroscopic and Molecular Interactive Simulations for Physical
               Science Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 12,  1998  
File        : a9860613

Award Number: 9860613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99698              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Serio mserio@AFRInc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Fuel Research Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  06138    860/528-9806

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5371,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9860613
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from
              Advanced Fuel Research, Inc. involves the development of educational software,
              which demonstrates everyday physical phenomena simultaneously at the
              macroscopic and molecular scale using interactive simulations.   Dynamic
              visualizations involving interactive computer simulations where the student can
              modify parameters and observe the results on the screen can be especially
              effective for the understanding and remembering of concepts.  This project
              involves the development of a macroscopic heat transfer and thermodynamics
              model and the combining of this model with a computationally fast molecular
              dynamics model recently developed at Advanced Fuel Research.  Students will be
              able to vary parameters in a game-like manner through an interactive user
              interface, and observe the results.  The screen could show a scene (to be
              chosen in collaboration with educators) such as a boat on a lake, with the sun,
              clouds, and various other familiar objects present.  The objective of Phase I
              is to demonstrate the range of processes that can be simulated and implement a
              few of these processes.  The objective of the next phase of the research is to
              develop the product as a companion to more conventional teaching tools for
              physical science education. 
     This project supports innovations in how
              science is taught.  Having the capability of considering a wide range of
              content topics, the proposed software product would provide an innovative tool
              to elucidate the concepts on which everyday natural phenomena are based. 
              Advanced Fuel Research aims to improve student understanding and to stimulate
              the students' interest in science as a way to understand phenomena around them
              by presenting elements in a system in a way anticipated to lead to open-ended
              group challenges and enhancement of curiosity.  

