Title       : SBIR Phase I: Advanced Nanoparticle Plasma Synthesis Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1999  
File        : a9860815

Award Number: 9860815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence C. Farrar lcfarrar@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montec Research
	      P. O. Box 4167
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/723-2222

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9860815
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project provides a
              dramatically improved method to synthesize nanoparticle materials using an
              advanced plasma reactor concept. Nanophase "super material" applications are
              developing at a rapid rate, however, the nanoparticles required for these
              materials are expensive to manufacture. Consequently, there is a strong need
              for more economical methods to synthesize nanoparticles. The Phase I project
              objectives encompass demonstrating feasibility of the novel highly- reactive,
              well-mixed reactor, to synthesize a spectrum of nanoparticle oxides suitable
              for a broad-range of commercial applications. The process includes improved
              synthesis paths and enhanced kinetics to those currently utilized. The research
              involves the development and operation of a novel reactor to synthesize several
              commercially important nanoparticle oxide materials. The detailed experimental
              plan consists of a
series of parametric tests that will be used to develop a
              fundamental understanding of the configuration and operating conditions for the
              reactor that result in the economical production of commercial grade
              nanoparticle oxides. The project features a highly-qualified team, including an
              established manufacturer of nanophase materials, who sustains a strong and
              expanding market for products that will benefit from the proposed technology.
              As well as an internationally known, and well respected, expert researcher in
              the field of nanomaterials.
     The market for nanoparticle oxides spans the
              full spectrum of needs from consumer, medical, electronic, energy,
              environmental, chemistry, aerospace, defense and heavy industry. Existing
              commercial applications include catalysts, coatings, elastic ceramics,
              pigments, abrasives, cosmetics, electronic devices, magnetics, structural
              ceramics, and is growing.

