Title       : SBIR Phase I: Dictation-Translation System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1998  
File        : a9860308

Award Number: 9860308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95410              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ron Zacharski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Onyx Consulting Inc
	      1300 El Paseo  Suite G, PMB 236
	      Las Cruces, NM  880016046    505/650-0944

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860308
     Computer and communications technologies are increasingly being
              used to make access to information sources simple, rapid, and economical.  When
              the information needed is recorded in a foreign language, however, modern
              efficiency yields to the slow, expensive, and arduous efforts of a human
              translator.  This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Onyx
              Consulting, Inc. examines the feasibility of a new approach to translation that
              will achieve very fast translations.  The proposed approach combines two
              previously used translation methods:  semi-automated tools, such as
              computer-based multi-lingual dictionaries, designed to help human translators
              work more productively, and fully automatic machine translation systems to
              replace human translators, with a third method-automatic speech recognition. 
              Specifically, Onyx Consulting will use knowledge, which can be automatically
              extracted from the source document to constrain the speech recognition problem
              enough to achieve good word accuracy.  Additional software tools allow for the
              transcribed translation to be rapidly corrected and cross-checked with the
              original.  By eliminating the need to type the bulk of the translation, the
              overall time needed to complete a written translation can be substantially
              reduced.
     The proposed system has far-reaching implications for current
              and future translation practices as well as for the future uses of information
              technology that are currently precluded by the cost of translation.  The
              potential customers of the proffered translation technology include all the
              translators at the United Nations, European Commission, NATO, OAS and other
              international organizations, scientific collaborators with foreign colleagues,
              and translators in the medical domain.  

