Title       : SBIR Phase I: Remote Visualization and Communication Toolkit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1998  
File        : a9860576

Award Number: 9860576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74493              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne K. Trail trail@sni.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kinema Research
	      18720 Autumn Way
	      Monument, CO  801329014    719/488-3187

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860576
     This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will
              develop software tools to allow researchers in ongoing scientific projects and
              collaborations to use the World Wide Web (WWW) and the Internet for displaying
              and distributing dynamic data which is typical for scientific work. The project
              has two goals: first, the development of a prototype toolkit providing a
              reasonable subset of the full functionality envisioned in the final product. 
              This includes both server and client side tools including a data server, a
              text-based discussion tool, and several scientific graphics tools sufficient to
              clearly demonstrate the feasibility of the final product.  Second, the testing
              of these tools on a few ongoing scientific projects by making the toolkit
              available to a few volunteers who will use it in their work using the tools
              from this project, even individual researchers will be able to develop robust
              Web pages including automatic data updating, manipulation of data, whiteboards,
              both audio and text discussion areas, video monitors, database access,
              controlled public access, and more.  Presently only large scientific
              organizations have the resources to advantage of the WWW in this way.  This
              project will provide a general set of tools that can be manipulated 'visually'
              in a standard graphical development environment.  These tools, directed at the
              needs of scientists, will comprise our product: the remote visualization and
              communication toolkit (RVCT).
     The remote visualization and communication
              toolkit has wide applicability in the scientific community.  Potential
              customers for the RVCT include large and small scientific research groups in
              universities, government laboratories, and industry.  The increase in use of
              the World Wide Web by scientists will enhance the need for this type of
              product.

