Title       : SBIR Phase I: Collaborative Simulation to Enhance Science, Mathematics,
               Engineering and Technology (SMET) Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9860671

Award Number: 9860671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philippe C. Marchal pmarchal@intellipro.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IntelliPro Inc
	      255 Old New Brunswick Road
	      Piscataway, NJ  088543734    732/981-0445

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9760671
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from
              Intellipro, Inc. will exploit Web technologies to respond to the national need
              for improved quality, accessibility, and efficiency of science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology (SMET) instruction at all levels.  The challenge is
              to combine the interactive capabilities of simulation with collaborative
              possibilities of the Web to create collaborative simulation, software to
              facilitate development and delivery of highly interactive, cognitively
              motivating, and socially enriched content that will substantially improve SMET
              teaching and learning in traditional and distance learning settings.  The
              proposed technology will address several initiatives in SMET
              instruction--creation of quality content, accommodation of learning styles, and
              inclusion of underrepresented students.  The researchers envision powerful and
              pedagogically scalable software to allow faculty, publishers, and others to
              create engaging content-providing real-world experiences and allowing students
              to interact, alone or with others, with the material-that will permit
              implementation of advanced learning strategies.  To determine feasibility,
              Intellipro will define a pedagogically appropriate software design; evaluate
              technology available to implement the design; and prototype critical elements
              of the design; and field-test the prototype.  A professional team with
              expertise in simulation, instructional design, and SMET content develop will
              collaborate on the research with a stellar group of engineering educators.
   
               If the proposed research meets its goals, the resulting software and support
              materials will have significant commercial possibilities, providing a platform
              for the development and delivery of interactive content at all educational
              levels, and in a variety of settings.  It has the potential to have a
              significant impact on how group learning is accomplished.

