Title       : SBIR Phase I: An Intelligent Travel Aid for Blind Pedestrians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9860040

Award Number: 9860040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason Geng gene@genextech.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Genex Technologies, Incorp
	      10605 Concord Street, Suite 500
	      Kensington, MD  208952504    301/962-6565

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5342,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9860040
     The primary objective of the Phase I Small Business Innovation
              Research effort proposed herein is to investigate the feasibility of a novel
              electronic travel aid (ETA) device designed to help blind or visually impaired
              travelers to navigate safely and quickly among obstacles and other hazards
              faced by blind pedestrians. Conventional ETA designs often require users to
              actively scan the environment for obstacle detection. This procedure is timing
              consuming, error prone, and requires traveler's constant activity and conscious
              effort. The user also must plan a path around the obstacle. There is no
              intelligent decision support function in these devices to help the user to
              pickup an optimal routine, a time-consuming, conscious effort that reduces the
              walking speeds. Furthermore, one problem with all ETAs based on acoustic
              feedback is their interference with the blind person's ability to pick-up
              environmental cues through hearing. The proposed novel ETA device totally
              eliminates these drawbacks.  In the proposed Phase 1 effort, we will build a
              prototype of the unique sensor head and develop the obstacle detection
              algorithms. Hardware experiments will be performed to validate the performance
              and speed. In the Phase II program, we will build a full-bloom version of the
              prototype with required obstacle detection speed and accuracy. We will
              implement several enhanced functions for the device, such as
              computer-controlled brakes, global navigation function using GPS device, and
              voice activated function for determining the direction. Extensive evaluation
              tests will be performed and the design will be modified accordingly.
     The
              commercial market for a high performance and low-cost travel aid device is
              large, considering the large population of blind and/or visually impaired
              persons. More importantly, the social benefit that stems from such products is
              also significant. The proposed intelligent ETA device allows a greatly enhanced
              mobility and safety of blind/ visually impaired people.


