Title       : SBIR Phase I: Economy Design in Online Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1998   
File        : a9860591

Award Number: 9860591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy O. Dang timothy@nmia.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cybernomics Inc
	      6912 E. Rosewood Street
	      Tucson, AZ  85710    520/621-6140

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 1320,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860591g
     Seeking to create expertise to exploit the potential of economies
              in online computer role-playing games, this Small Business Innovation Research
              Phase I project from Cybernomics, Inc. will explore the options of designing a
              software Economy Engine for online games, which can be licensed to game
              developers.  In addition, the project will determine whether existing
              commercial games can be exploited for economic research or whether a new game
              should be developed solely for research purposes.  The new genre of computer
              games that has emerged, Massively Multi-Player, Persistent World Online
              Role-Playing Games, is unique in that these games create small, self-contained
              economies, not economic simulations.  These economies consist of actual people
              exchanging commodities and currency of actual value in the game world.  The
              market for these games is strong and growing, with major computer game
              developers working on similar projects.  Through its experience in networked
              games for economic research, Cybernomics is in position to assist both game
              developers with design and business consultants, marketers and economic
              researchers with a new arena in which to conduct experiments.  Cybernomics will
              bring its experience in the theory and practice of market design to bear on the
              understanding and creation of market institutions for online games.  In
              addition, the firm will develop techniques to conduct low cost experiments in
              and extract data from these large-scale games salient to real-world markets.
 
                 The project targets two markets:  computer game developers and economic
              designers.  It presents an opportunity to contribute create better games as
              well as useful research tools.  It has the potential to revolutionize the way
              in which experimental research in economics is conducted and at the same time
              serve game developers and game players.


