Title       : SBIR Phase I: Characterization Of Ceramic Particles Based On Elliptically
               Polarized Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  1998  
File        : a9860878

Award Number: 9860878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99837              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sivakumar Manickavasagam   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Synergetic Techs, Inc
	      One University Place Suite D-210
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/525-2650

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1415,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9860878
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project examines
              the potential for characterizing ceramic powders and fibers using an innovative
              elliptically polarized light scattering method.  Particle size, size
              distribution, and shape are key factors in manufacturing advanced ceramic
              materials, which rely on precise mixtures of fine and coarse particles.  IOTA's
              can determine these parameters via a unique approach for optimizing
              polarization settings.  Unlike current on line particle measuring techniques,
              cylindrical and irregular shapes (such as particle agglomerates) can be
              evaluated.  The ability to discern such shapes can have a great impact for
              improving ceramic quality and process control, important for product
              development and reduced costs.  This investigation will assess the feasibility
              of using the system at a ceramic manufacturing site.  Fundamental research is
              proposed to closely examine the accuracy of the instrument (comparing results
              with electron micrographs) for a variety of particle sizes, shapes, and size
              distributions.  A particle loading study is also proposed to evaluate under
              what conditions the system can operate.  Phase I will focus on evaluating
              system accuracy and acceptable working conditions for measuring ceramic powders
              and whiskers.  In Phase II a prototype system will be constructed and tested at
              a ceramic manufacturing plant. Particle agglomeration will also be studied.
  
                The ability to measure fine particle sizes and shapes is necessary for
              controlling the quality of many high technology products, such as advanced
              ceramics and pharmaceuticals.  In addition, monitoring and controlling particle
              size is fundamental to the manufacture of many consumer products (cosmetics,
              paints, pigments), textiles, food processing, medical apparatus (parenteral
              solutions, blood processing), and environmental monitoring.

