Title       : SBIR Phase I: A Fast Out-of-Core Volume Renderer for the Visualization of Large
               Data Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1998  
File        : a9860960

Award Number: 9860960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Sulatycke psulatyc@stny.rr.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : 3DVis Technologies Inc
	      717 Mirador Road
	      Vestal, NY  13850    607/797-7579

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860960
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              determine the scientific, technical, and commercial merit and feasibility of
              developing a fast out-of core volume rendering software to visualize large
              multi dimensional data sets.  Existing visualizers assume that the data to be
              rendered is RAM resident - consequently paging or explicit naive data movements
              between the RAM and the disk cause serious performance degradation.  This
              constrains users to curtail the amount of volume data seen at a time and/or
              view the data at a coarser resolution.  A novel combination of data structures,
              parallelism, compression and systems level optimizations will be used to render
              isosurfaces of large volume data sets at a very high speed. A simple proof of
              concept implementation, using optimized disk data structures and multithreading
              seems to corroborate the hypothesis that isosurfaces are rendered for large
              data sets at a speed that surpasses by orders of magnitudes the performance
              realizable from current visualizers when the data size exceeds the RAM
              capacity.  This effort focuses on investigating further performance
              enhancements using data compression, parallel execution capabilities of the PC
              MMX-like instructions and additional optimizations of the data structures on
              the disk.
    It is anticipated that the product developed from this effort
              will dramatically improve the speed of viewing and visual navigation of large
              multi dimensional data sets.  Consequently, it will have a significantly
              influence on medical imaging, drug synthesis, gene analysis and geosiesmic
              exploration capabilities. 

