Title       : SBIR Phase I: Secondary Flow In Helium Refrigeration Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2000      
File        : a9860633

Award Number: 9860633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dariusz A. Bushko dbushko@amsuper  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Superconductor Corp
	      Two Technology Drive
	      Westborough, MA  01581    508/836-4200

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9860633                                                                         
                                                                                             
                           This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses
              the fluid dynamics of cryogenic helium gas in the rotating reference frame. The
              objective is to enable the development of refrigeration equipment which will
              have application in commercial high efficiency motors.  American Superconductor
              Corporation (ASC) is a participant in a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) program
              to develop ultra efficient electric motors using rotating high temperature
              superconductor (HTS) field windings. In these motors, it is desired to utilize
              refrigerators in the rotor to simplify the system and reduce the thermal losses
              associated with the rotating to stationary thermal interface. Rotation of the
              cryocooler is anticipated to be difficult due to secondary flows which will
              develop in packed bed regenerators under centrifugal acceleration. These
              secondary flows tend to thermally short circuit the packed bed and reduce the
              efficiency of the refrigeration cycle. In Phase I of this program it is
              proposed to analytically model the transport phenomena and to quantitatively
              measure the convective heat flux in packed beds as a function of centrifugal
              acceleration. This measurement would take place in an existing ASC facility. In
              Phase II we propose to test complete refrigerator subsystems under centrifugal
              acceleration.
     This project addresses a key technology for the
              commercialization of HTS motor technology. The ultra efficient motor should
              directly compete with induction motors and industry acceptance of this energy
              efficient technology can only be achieved with a highly reliable and efficient
              refrigeration system as the proposed rotating cryocooler.

