Title       : SBIR Phase I: Fabrication of Low-Cost Modules Incorporating Microporous Silica
               Membranes for Natural Gas Purification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9860416

Award Number: 9860416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cynthia J. Ekstein                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Higgins higgins@ceramem.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CeraMem Corporation
	      12 Clematis Avenue
	      Waltham, MA  02453    617/899-4495

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9860416     
   	                      
     This Small Business Innovation
              Research Phase I project addresses development of economical devices for
              purification of low-quality raw natural gas to pipeline quality. A large
              fraction of domestic natural gas reserves are currently uneconomical for
              recovery based on current market conditions because they contain significant
              amounts of non-methane gas. Membrane separations have appreciable potential for
              natural gas purification, but membrane devices with improved productivity over
              current state-of-the-art devices are required.
     The overall objective of
              this program is to develop a novel fabrication approach to incorporate
              microporous silica membranes into low-cost, highly compact modules. These
              membranes have high selectivity and extremely high permeability for separation
              of impurities from methane. Commercial availability of such modules would
              appreciably reduce costs associated with upgrading of low-quality natural gas
              resources. In Phase I, the chemistry underlying the novel fabrication approach
              will be studied. Microporous silica membranes will be incorporated on small
              support coupons via this approach and their gas permeation characteristics will
              be measured to demonstrate the technical feasibility of the approach.
     The
              gas separation membrane modules to be developed in this program would reduce
              costs associated with separation of a variety of industrially significant gas
              streams in applications including natural gas upgrading, carbon dioxide
              recovery from enhanced oil recovery operations, biogas processing, and helium
              recovery.

