Title       : SBIR Phase I: A New Vibration Mixer for Bone Cement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1998  
File        : a9860470

Award Number: 9860470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Saha pssaha@prodigy.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Benjamin Furman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clinical & Industrial Tech
	      1570 Woodbury Road
	      Seneca, SC  29672    864/653-6472

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5342,5371,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9860470
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed
              at developing a vibration mixer for the mixing of surgical grade bone cement.
              Self-curing poly(methyl methacrylate (PMMA) or acrylic bone cement is used
              extensively in total joint replacements, in the repair of bony defects and in
              the fixation of pathological fractures. For surgical use, the
              methylmethacrylate polymer and the liquid monomer are hand mixed. This hand
              mixing entraps air bubbles making the cement porous. Presence of these bubbles
              adversely affects the mechanical properties of bone cement, making it much
              weaker under load. The objective of this project will be: (1) to determine if a
              similar technique could also be used to reduce the porosity in bone cement; (
              2) to evaluate the resulting improvement in its mechanical properties;  and (3
              ) to design a vibration apparatus to obtain the maximum improvement in the
              strength properties of bone cement..
     Results of our preliminary study
              indicate that bone cement in the liquid state, when subjected to ultrasonic
              vibration, showed increased static compressive and tensile strength, as
              compared to normal bone cement. During this phase of the project, we plan to
              optimize the vibration parameters, namely, amplitude and frequency to achieve
              maximum consolidation and, thus, obtain significantly high strength properties
              of the bone cement. Subsequently, a mixer with these specifications will be
              designed in collaboration with a manufacturer of shaker tables and will be
              marketed for mixing bone cement.  Presently centrifuge and vacuum mixed are
              available for mixing bone cement, but these methods have lost favor with the
              orthopaedic surgeons. It is expected that the improved mechanical properties of
              bone cement obtained through the use of a vibration mixer will prolong the
              long-term survival rate of total joint replacements.

