Title       : SBIR Phase I: Engineering Application Software for Geotechnical Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1998   
File        : a9860244

Award Number: 9860244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kuokai Shyu kkshyu@manifold-engng.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Manifold Eng
	      11480 6th Street
	      Rancho Cucamonga, CA  917304804    909/483-1648

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1448,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9860244
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to
              apply Discontinuous Deformation Analysis (DDA) coupling with the Finite Element
              Method (FEM) to perform static and dynamic analyses, detailed mechanical
              response prediction, global stability and failure mode analysis of geotechnical
              structures for seismic design, construction, and rehabilitation. The research
              will prototype new commercial software, DDA+FEM - an integrated engineering
              analysis tool - to conduct excavation safety and rock slope stability analysis,
              study foundation and structure interaction, perform earthquake simulation, and
              further, to assist in the seismic design of geotechnical structures. 
              Discontinuity exists in geotechnical structures. DDA predicts the stability and
              stress associated with a block system containing preexisting cracks and joints.
              This method was primarily applied in rock mechanics with great success in the
              stability analysis of tunnels and rock slopes. DDA+FEM improves the block's
              stress/strain fields by adding a finite element mesh in each block. Therefore,
              large displacement and deformation problems for numerous discontinuous blocks
              with detailed stress distribution can be solved.  The objectives of this Phase
              I research project are to design and prototype the 2-D finite element meshed
              block, and to enhance DDA features with better boundary conditions for direct
              data input from earthquake records, laboratory or field measurements.
    
              DDA+FEM is the engineering tool to effectively perform discontinuous interface
              analysis of geotechnical structures under earthquake excitation. It can (1)
              assist designers to perform predictive numerical simulation for preliminary
              seismic design evaluation and further modification; (2) support field engineers
              in decision making to ensure global stability of the structures and safety of
              workers during construction; and (3) reduce the costs of design, construction,
              and field experiments. If the project achieves its goals, the resulting
              software will (1) have great application in geotechnical, industries,
              universities, governments, and national laboratories; (2) have important
              contributions on hazard reduction of geotechnical structures under earthquake
              excitation.

