Title       : SBIR Phase I: Simulation of Rapid Thermal Processing in a Distributed Computing
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9860814

Award Number: 9860814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jiwen Liu liu@esi-al.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Engineering Sciences Inc
	      1900 Golf Road, Suite D
	      Huntsville, AL  35802    205/883-6233

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1260,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9860814
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes
              to develop and demonstrate a computational tool for detailed simulation of
              Rapid thermal processing (RTP) in a distributed computing environment. RTP has
              become a key technology in the fabrication of advanced semiconductor devices.
              As wafers get larger and chip dimensions smaller, the understanding of the
              highly coupled physics such as radiative heat transfer, transient fluid flow
              and heat transfer as well as chemical reactions through numerical modeling
              using high-performance computing is the key to the design, optimization, and
              control of RTP reactors. In Phase I, a novel radiation model will be developed
              to take into account surface radiation with any level of radiative complexity.
              The microscale radiative properties of patterned wafers will be predicted by a
              microscopic model. The transient fluid flow, heat transfer, and chemical
              reaction equations are then solved using an unstructured finite volume method.
              The main vehicle for parallelism is to use a Recursive Coordinate Bisection
              (RCM) method to decompose the computational domain into sub-domains, which are
              distributed among a network of computers. Message passing among the computers
              will be provided through the Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM) library. The Phase
              I will demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed simulation tool on
              two-dimensional problems. In Phase II, the tool will be extended to consider
              some other physics and dynamic load balancing strategy on a network of
              computers will also be implemented.
     The proposed simulation tool will
              significantly benefit the semiconductor manufacturing equipment industries,
              which require a detailed understanding of multimode and highly coupled
              transport phenomena. The potential applications include the design,
              optimization, and control of RTP reactors and many other manufacturing and
              materials processing systems.



