Title       : SBIR Phase I: Conductive Metal-Containing High-Performance Polymer Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1998   
File        : a9860901

Award Number: 9860901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung-Tse Chu MatlsRI@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Research Inst
	      1961 N Springcrest Court
	      Beavercreek, OH      937/427-0434

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1773,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9860901
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will test
              a processing scheme for introducing exceptional electrical conductivity to a
              class of high-temperature, high-strength polymer fibers. These polymer fibers
              include poly (p-phenylene terephthalamid) PPTA, poly (p-phenylene
              benzobisthiazole) PBZT and poly (p-phenylene benzobisoxazole) PBO. They are
              prepared from their nematic liquid crystalline solutions under a very high
              extensional flow.  As a result, they exhibit extremely high molecular
              orientation and tensile mechanical properties. In this Phase I research
              program, metal precursors will be incorporated into the high-performance
              polymer fibers and subsequently reduced to form a continuous network of the
              highly conductive metal in the fiber matrix giving rise to the conductivity. 
              The proposed processing scheme is fully in line with commercial production of
              the aforementioned high-performance polymer fibers. The highly-conductive
              metal-containing polymer fibers are expected to have advantages over conductor
              metal wires in flexibility, durability, weight savings, mechanical strength,
              fine diameter and tailored electrical conductivity. They have great potential
              for power and signal transfer and electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding
              applications in space and aerospace vehicles and automobiles, where
              flexibility, weight savings and mechanical durability are important.
     The
              proposed processing scheme can be readily incorporated into the commercial
              production of many high-performance polymer fibers. The resulting conductive
              metal-containing polymer fibers are potential candidates for replacing metal
              wires for power and signal transfer and EMI shielding in space and aerospace
              vehicles as well as in automobiles, leading to improved system performance and
              reduced operation cost.



