Title       : SBIR Phase I: Electrostatic Self-Assembly Processes for Fabrication of MEMS
               Materials and Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1998   
File        : a9860084

Award Number: 9860084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99554              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanjing Liu yliu@nanosonic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nanosonic Inc
	      P.O. Box 618
	      Christiansburg, VA  24068    540/953-1785

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,1498,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9860084
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
              demonstrate the feasibility of electrostatic self assembly (ESA) processes for
              the low cost fabrication of MEMS sensor and actuator materials and devices for
              the instrumentation and control of civil and mechanical systems.  ESA
              processing involves coating solid substrates by the alternate adsorption of
              anionic and cationic complexes of polymers, metallic nanoclusters and other
              molecules from water based solutions at room temperature and pressure.  By
              controlling the molecular structure created in the resulting multilayer thin
              film, materials with different properties may be formed, including
              piezoelectric sensor and actuator elements, ultrahigh conductivity
              interconnecting thin film leads, and ultrahard surface protection coatings.
              Further, three dimensional surface micromachining may be performed as part of
              the ESA synthesis process to create MEMS devices and arrays.  The company has
              licensed nine strategic ESA patents from Virginia Tech to enable materials and
              device commercialization.  During Phase I, work will be carried out with
              Virginia Tech to demonstrate the feasibility of the ESA process for MEMS sensor
              and actuator devices fabrication, high conductivity MEMS element interconnects,
              and surface protecting coatings.   Several large industrial partner companies
              would provide input during Phase I concerning ESA process scale up and device
              testing, and would offer opportunities for Phase II development partnering.
  
                New ESA formed surface micromachined piezoelectric, conductive and abrasion
              resistant
thin films have widespread applications in MEMS sensor and actuator
              products for large scale civil infrastructure, industrial control and consumer
              use.  The ESA process allows
a powerful tool for the low cost manufacturing of
              these and other thin films, devices and
ferroelectric like materials.

