Title       : SBIR Phase I: Aeroshaping Optimization Using Computational Fluid Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9860759

Award Number: 9860759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58500              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Gallo galloj@quest-llc.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : QuEST LLC
	      155 Erie Boulevard
	      Schenectady, NY  12305    313/274-3888

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,1441,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9860759
    This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims at
              developing a shape design optimization tool by integrating a state-of-the-art
              computational fluid dynamics (CFD) technique within an efficient
              multi-disciplinary design optimization (MDO) strategy.  The ability to
              adaptively optimize aerodynamic shape of hypersonic flight vehicles is an issue
              of prime interest to aircraft and spacecraft designers.  The physics of flow
              and the spectrum of aerodynamic features involved in this flight regime are
              quite involved and include expansions, shocks, separation, recirculations, and
              reattachments.  The computational simulation of such complex flow fields
              requires an efficient, robust, and extremely accurate numerical solution
              technique that is stable for a wide range in Reynolds number and Mach number
              flows.  At the same time, nonlinear optimization of aerodynamic shape requires
              a sequence of these problems to be solved successively to arrive at an optimum
              design.  The optimization techniques that can reduce the number of redundant
              design options can result in considerable savings in time.  Employing an
              Artificial Intelligence (AI) network around this highly accurate shape design
              synthesis capability, the resulting tool shows a drastic reduction in the
              number of cycles required to reach an optimum aerodynamic shape, thus
              economizing the design cycle and reducing the cost and time.
     If
              successful, the project will lead to an inexpensive and fast tool for
              aerodynamic shape optimization of hypersonic and transonic flight vehicles. 
              The two products from this work; (a) the optimization tool, and (b) the flow
              solver, will be marketed as stand-alone capabilities as well as an integrated
              design-optimization software.  In addition to the aeronautical industry, this
              software will be of tremendous interest to the automotive industry for
              aerodynamic shape optimization of the new generation cars, trucks and bullet
              trains. 

