Title       : SBIR Phase I: Automated Performance Assessment Tools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1998   
File        : a9860581

Award Number: 9860581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Leddo jleddo@rdc.dgsys.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Research Development Corp
	      2875 Towerview Road Suite A4
	      Herndon, VA  220713205    703/904-1808

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5371,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9860581
     New educational reforms calling for challenging standards that
              emphasize real world problem solving skills have caused a paradigm shift in
              assessment to more authentic forms that support measurement of these skills. 
              Within the authentic assessment movement, an important thrust is performance
              assessment; namely assessment based on students performing realistic tasks. 
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Research
              Development Corporation seeks to develop an automated system for presenting and
              scoring performance tasks.  The system will use artificial intelligence as a
              means to make scoring more timely, cost effective, and reliable. Research
              Development Corporation proposes that the problems of labor intensiveness,
              costs, and inconsistencies across an inherently subjective rating process in
              scoring large scale assessments can be addressed by creating performance tasks
              within a simulated problem environment and using intelligent tutoring system
              and assessment technologies to automatically assess the students. 
              Specifically, the project will generate an automated performance assessment
              system for high school science using simulated science experiments as
              performance tasks, and it will evaluate the reliability of the technology by
              comparing ratings made by the technology to ratings made by trained teachers
              using the same scoring rubrics.
     Research Development Corporation proposes
              an innovative automated tool for the rapid assessment of students that has
              potential for a significant impact on student assessment, the learning process,
              and on the way science is taught.  Being able to easily measure gains in the
              applications and synthesis of knowledge is crucial to promoting the value of
              higher level thinking and application of content in our Nation's schools.

