Title       : SBIR Phase I: Fast Freeform Fabrication Using Planar Layer Deposition Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 24,  1998  
File        : a9860715

Award Number: 9860715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ritchie B. Coryell                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93965              (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Lombardi j.lombardi@acrtucson.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Advanced Ceramics Res, Inc
	      3292 E. Hemisphere Loop
	      Tucson, AZ  857065013    520/434-6392

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,9163,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9860715
     This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
              will develop a planar layer deposition system for freeform fabricating
              three-dimensional design prototypes.  The planar layer is generated by a
              container equipped with an adjustable planar nozzle consisting of one or two
              slotted plates regulated by a motorized position-controlling device of
              micrometer resolution.  The slotted plates are assembled such that they slide
              over one another, enabling the nozzle opening to be adjusted, as needed, from
              fully open to completely closed.  The nozzle can therefore form a
              semi-solidified sheet of desirable width, which undergoes rapid solidification
              after deposition on a substrate.  This forms an incremental deposit that
              contributes toward the final product structure.  The extrusion properties of
              this system will be tested by making prototypes from a variety of waxes.  By
              extruding planar layers instead of depositing or curing material, a single bead
              or beam width at a time, this approach for rapid prototyping components could
              have build-times a hundred fold less and thus enable solid freeforming in
              low-volume manufacturing as well as the prototyping process.
     The
              continuing need to reduce product cycle time requires shorter prototyping time.
               Most freeform fabrication schemes, however, are complex and slow, making
              production rates slow and production runs unattractive, particularly for large
              parts.  This new freeform technology is expected to fabricate high-strength and
              high-temperature precision metal and ceramic parts.  Being much simpler and
              faster than the current freeform fabrication technology, it would decrease
              product development cost and cycle times.  It may also used in large-scale and
              controlled manufacturing of advanced materials and structures for aeronautic
              and space applications.


