Title       : SBIR Phase I: In-Situ, Real-Time Process Control for Micro-Electro-Mechanical
               System (MEMS) Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1998  
File        : a9860514

Award Number: 9860514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvie Charpenay Sylvie@online-ftir.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : On-Line Technologies Inc
	      87 Church Street
	      East Hartford, CT  061083720    860/291-0719

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860514
     This Small Business Innovation Research Project will develop an
              in-situ, real-time process control tool for micro-electric-mechanical system
              (MEMS) deep-etch fabrication. Deep etch processes are used to manufacture high
              aspect ratio structures up to several hundred microns thick, which would be
              difficult or impossible to produce by other methods. Deep-etch and other MEMS
              technologies promise
to deliver new devices with increased performance and
              functionality at lower cost. A major difficulty in deep-etch technology is the
              control of the etch depth during the etching process. Currently etch depth is
              measured post-etch using ex-situ destructive scanning electron microscopy. This
              is extremely inefficient, and is a major hurdle to be surmounted before
              extensive production takes place.  Preliminary measurements at On-Line
              Technologies have demonstrated that it is possible to monitor the etch depth
              through the analysis of the infrared reflectance spectrum. In Phase I, an etch
              depth sensor will be constructed incorporating a Fourier transform infrared
              based reflectometer and analysis algorithms. The sensor will be integrated onto
              a deep-etch tool for in-situ testing, and data will be collected and analyzed
              in real-time during the etch process. 
     The specific anticipated results
              of the use of the proposed metrology are:  (1) to reduce cost through the
              reduction of destructive measurements and the improvement in process control;
              (2) to increase the reproducibility of the MEMS structures through better
              process control; and (3) to provide useful feed-back for process development,
              thus reducing development time. These results will have a great impact on the
              deep-etch MEMS market, as they will help future MEMS applications to mature and
              come to market at a faster pace through cheaper characterization and improved
              process control.

