Title       : SBIR Phase I: Data Mining Tool for Clustering Correlated Database Records
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1998  
File        : a9860478

Award Number: 9860478
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rohan Baxter rohan@ultimode.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ultimode Systems
	      2560 Bancroft Way #213
	      Berkeley, CA  94704    510/548-8978

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9860478
	This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project from Ultimode
              Systems takes an innovative and mathematically sophisticated approach to
              clustering of large data sets in which records are linked through spatial or
              temporal vicinity, thus promising an original contribution to the advancement
              of clustering methodology.  Clustering is a key method of data mining
              (knowledge discovery).  Building on the success of ACPro, Ultimode Systems'data
              mining software tool which provides automatic clustering/segmentation for
              finding structure in high-dimensional databases, the project aims to invent
              effective representations and search algorithms to find clusters in databases
              containing sequentially and/or spatially related records, and to devise
              visualization tools for these more complex models to facilitate ease of
              application.  Visualization of ACPro clusters provides insights into
              relationships and distinctions that would otherwise be difficult to identify in
              data.  Many phenomena are most accurately represented as comprising database
              records correlated in time and/or space, but current clustering tools,
              including  ACPro, treat database records separately and independently.
	Data
              mining or knowledge discovery, the discovery of patterns in large data sets, is
              increasing in importance in all branches of science and scholarly inquiry and
              in business.  Large-scale imaging, instrument data collection, and the increase
              in electronic commercial transactions all create large data sets with spatial
              or temporal linkages.  Thus improved methods for discovering patterns in such
              data sets will have significant impact in many areas by providing accurate
              modeling to a wider range of applications than has heretofore been possible,
              and, particularly through applicability in business, have the potential for
              commercial success.  Existing clients working with correlated data, e.g.,
              customer sales data, mineral exploration, and flight analysis, will benefit
              from adopting the resulting technology.  In addition, the enhanced clustering
              capabilities will allow expansion into new markets where clients' databases
              contain correlated database records. 



