Title       : SBIR Phase I: Modeling and Model-Based Control for Chemical Mechanical
               Planarization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  1998   
File        : a9860163

Award Number: 9860163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael F. Crowley                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abbas Emami-Naeini emami@scsolutions.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SC Solutions, Inc.
	      3211 Scott Blvd.
	      Santa Clara, CA  95054    408/486-6060

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9860163
     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a
              multi-disciplinary research effort for physical modeling and model-based
              sensing and control of chemical mechanical planarization (CMP) systems. CMP is
              a rapidly emerging technology that is playing an increasingly critical role in
              global planarization for microelectronics fabrication. Since CMP is a
              relatively new process, developed mainly by experimental trial and error, the
              process operating "windows" are extremely narrow. Therefore, there is a
              critical need for integrated physical models that can be used to predict the
              effect of important input parameters, such as pressure and velocity, on process
              performance parameters such as the material removal rate and uniformity. Also,
              various sensing approaches using in-situ and ex-situ sensors, and innovative
              model-based feedback control strategies for achieving robust performance need
              to be developed. A virtual prototype that integrates physical models, sensing,
              and control will be developed and then applied to the Applied Materials MirraTM
              CMP system. The successful development and implementation of the proposed
              research program will result in improved and repeatable performance as well as
              increased throughput relative to the existing methods of CMP control.
     SC
              Solutions proposes to focus on the development of integrated physical models
              and model-based control strategies within the context of an actual commercial
              CMP system. The result of this focused modeling and control effort will be an
              experimentally validated preliminary virtual prototype of the CMP process and
              associated control software to optimize process performance. Since this virtual
              prototype and associated control software has the potential to significantly
              improve the "trial and error" approach currently employed in CMP, the
              commercial application of the proposed product is enormous.


