Title       : Blue Light Mediated mRNA Destabilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1999    
File        : a9906432

Award Number: 9906432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lon S. Kaufman lkaufman@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The process of RNA destabilization is known to be of equal importance to
              transcription in the regulation of gene expression.  In direct contrast to its
              pivotal role in gene expression, the biochemistry and developmental regulation
              of the biochemistry of destabilization is very poorly understood.  This lack of
              understanding is even greater for plants and even greater still for 5'-UTR
              (untranslated region) mediated destabilization.  Activation of the Blue High
              Fluence (BHF) system results in the destabilization of several specific
              transcripts including the PsLhcb1*4 and At Lhcb1*3 transcripts.  The response
              is not the result of stress, occurs rapidly, and does not require protein
              synthesis.  The destabilization element resides wholly in the 5'-UTR.  Previous
              studies in this investigator's laboratory have focused on defining the
              photobiology and phenomenology of the BHF-system mediated destabilization,
              which has provided a very solid base of data establishing and describing the
              destabilization response and its relation to other cellular, developmental and
              photobiological and clock processes including:

The
              BHF-system-destabilization element resides wholly within the respective
              5'-UTR.

The destabilization mechanism may be similar, if not identical, to
              that responsible for stability and/or processing of rbcL and other chloroplast
              encoded transcripts.

The ability of the BHF system to function is
              developmentally regulated and represents a classic case of developmental
              competence.

The destabilization event triggered by excitation of the BHF
              system is also subject to regulation by the circadian clock.

NPH1, the
              blue-light activated kinase that functions as the photoreceptor for phototropic
              curvature, is the photoreceptor for the BHF system.

The proposed experiments
              are designed to build upon these observations.  All of the proposed experiments
              will focus on the BHF system mediated destabilization.  None of the experiments
              requires development of new technology, and all can be initiated immediately or
              are already under way.  Four specific aims will be addressed:

Identification
              of the sequence elements and structures present in the PsLhcb1*4 5'-UTR
              responsible for BHF system mediated (and clock regulated)
              destabilization.

Subcellular localization of the BHF system mediated
              destabilization event(s) in pea and in Arabidopsis.

Identification of
              RNA-binding and RNase activities associated with the BHF response.

Genetic
              and molecular genetic testing of existing blue-light signaling mutants and
              genes for BHF system activity/NPH1 as a potential photoreceptor.

