Title       : Quantitative Imaging & Microanalysis of Nano-Aggregates in Styrenic Ionomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9906829

Award Number: 9906829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen I. Winey winey@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9906829
Winey

The overall objective of this research project is to resolve
              outstanding and disputed questions in ionomer morphology, particularly in
              regard to the ionic aggregates.  During the first three years, the work will
              focus on model random ionomers in the bulk, specifically ionomers based on
              polystyrene, and accomplish four major scientific goals.  (1) Using bright
              and/or annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy, the PI
              will quantitatively and completely characterized the ionic aggregates starting
              with size, shape and size distribution.  She will use three-dimensional
              reconstruction from tilt series in STEM to determine the spatial distribution
              of the aggregates, including the distance of closest approach.  In addition, an
              ensemble of microanalysis methods within the electron microscope (spatially
              resolved EELS, EDS, and quantitative ADF STEM) will quantitatively determine
              the compositions of the ionic aggregates and the matrix.  (2) Again using
              electron microscopy, the PI will measure the spatial distribution of cation
              over a 10 - 1000 nm length scale to assess the origin of the upturn in
              scattering intensity at low angles.  (3) Using the morphological information
              obtained from quantitative imaging and microanalysis, she will develop a small
              angle x-ray scattering model.  (4) The dynamics of nano-aggregates will be
              studied using a heating/cooling stage and a deformation stage in the electron
              microscope.  Throughout this project the PI will evaluate sytrenic ionomers
              with various materials characteristics (%acid, %neutralization, counterion
              type, acid type, etc.), to establish their influence on the nano-scale
              morphology.   The integrated and unique set of tools to be used permits a more
              rigorous correlation between molecular parameters and morphology than
              previously attempted.

This work is in the technologically important area of
              nanoscience and nanomaterials.  The PI will train one graduate student in
              polymer science and high resolution, chemically specific imaging, a technique,
              which is currently underutilized by polymer scientists and industrialists.  In
              addition, she will also train industrial and academic scientists in these
              advanced techniques.

