Title       : FLAD-NSF International Bioethics Institute
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2002     
File        : a9906244

Award Number: 9906244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53164              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Comstock comstock@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5914,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the course of the last decades, hundreds of US life science faculty members
              have participated in fourteen bioethics institutes on university campuses
              throughout the country, and results from these workshops are being incorporated
              into life sciences curricula. This award provides support for 14 US
              participants to attend two international bioethics institutes to be held in
              Europe in 2000 and 2001. A private Portuguese foundation is hosting the first
              international institute, in Lisbon, and supporting the participation of
              European scientists. The US scientists will join European colleagues to examine
              ethical issues in the life sciences, emphasizing those associated with the
              marine sciences. Ocean issues are inherently global in nature and demand
              international cooperation and discussion. The institutes are week-long summer
              faculty development conferences that include pedagogical sessions on how to
              teach ethics to science students and lecture/discussion sessions on moral
              theory, ethics and science, ethics and religion, and public policy. The US
              participants will team with European scientists to work on a longer-term
              project: the production of international scholarly resources in marine science
              ethics, resources such as case studies, role-playing exercises, and
              bibliographies. Lisbon University, Iowa State University (ISU), and other
              campuses in the US and Europe will disseminate project information through
              their on-line discussion groups and newsletters. Project results provide
              pedagogical resources for classes; presentations and scenarios are published in
              the ISU newsletter, "The Ag Bioethics Forum." These materials may also form the
              basis for publications in several European languages. Recruitment for project
              participants will occur throughout the US and Europe; presentations about the
              project will occur at professional meetings in the US and Europe; selected
              papers may be submitted as research articles to refereed journals. Project
              evaluation includes a questionnaire for participants about the quality of the
              workshop sessions, a follow-up survey by an independent evaluator, and student
              evaluations of the ethics components the faculty participants use afterwards in
              their classes. These institutes can form the core for an ongoing, cumulative
              series of international workshops, that focus on other moral issues of global
              significance in future years.
