Title       : PPD: Non-visual Browsing of the World Wide Web: Tables, Frames & Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a9906130

Award Number: 9906130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1999  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrico Pontelli epontell@cs.nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur I. Karshmer  (Principal Investigator former)
              Gopal Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas J. Gillan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   An increasing amount of educational material is being placed on the
              Internet. University instructors commonly distribute course assignments,
              syllabi, and other course-related information on the World Wide Web (WWW). 
              This practice makes the material accessible to sighted students, but it may be
              an impediment to visually impaired students unless the material is universally
              accessible.  The basic premise of universal accessibility of instructional
              materials is that a curriculum should include alternatives to ensure that it is
              accessible and applicable to students and teachers with different backgrounds,
              learning styles, abilities, and disabilities in widely varied learning
              contexts.  In spite of recent initiatives such as the World Wide Web
              Consortium's Web Accessibility Initiative (W3C WAI) and availability of
              improved software tools such as screen readers used by blind computer users,
              many problems remain with respect to universal accessibility. These tools
              cannot handle many of the complex features of the WWW such as tables, forms,
              and frame-based Web pages. This project will perform research on developing
              techniques and tools that will make Web pages more accessible to visually
              impaired students.  In particular, research efforts will be directed toward
              developing techniques to make frame-based materials, tables, and forms found on
              Web-pages accessible.  These techniques will be implemented in a prototype
              software tool.  The approach is based on parsing and analyzing the HTML
              structures that constitute a page (containing tables, forms, frames, etc.) to
              produce tree-based structural representations.  The newly developed tool will
              navigate the structural representation and produce meaningful output such as
              audio and speech.  Particular attention will be paid to representing tables
              since tabular information is the hardest to convey to a blind person.  This is
              primarily caused by the structural information that is implicit in a table that
              is lost when it is read aloud linearly as is done by most screen readers. 
              Input from the Web-page author (such as a course instructor) will be sought so
              that this structural information can be conveyed.  The structural information
              (or hints for comprehending the table) to be conveyed is formalized as a
              hierarchy tree in the planned approach.  A separate graphical tool will be
              designed that will interactively allow the page author to produce this
              hierarchy tree.  The hierarchy tree will be employed to appropriately interpret
              the HTML structures representing tables to provide improved accessibility to
              visually-impaired users.  A similar approach will be developed for pages
              containing frames.       The tools to be developed will employ programming
              language semantics-based techniques, as the task of interpretation requires
              assigning appropriate meaning to the HTML code.  Modern parsing, language
              processing, and compilation technology will further aid in the development of
              these tools.  Many of the Human Computer Interaction (HCI) issues that arise in
              the context of blind users will be researched as well.  Finally, these tools
              will be thoroughly evaluated, and the results of these evaluations will be used
              to make the new tools even more accessible. 

