Title       : Development of the Radiogenic Helium Thermochronometer for Study of Landscape
               Evolution and Geomorphic Process in Active and Extinct Mountain Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9906357

Award Number: 9906357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48554              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Spotila spotila@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9906357
Spotila

This grant provides matching support for acquisition and
              construction of a facility for measuring radiogenic helium ages (U-Th/He) in
              the Department of Geological Sciences at Virginia Tech.  Helium
              thermochronometry is a powerful, newly-developed tool that constrains the
              cooling rocks experience as they rise through the upper few kilometers of
              crust.  Ages are determined by measuring radiogenic helium and uranium/thorium
              parent isotopes on small aliquots of apatite.  Because of the high diffusivity
              of helium in apatite, this thermochronometer is sensitive to temperatures lower
              than other techniques (e.g. apatite fission track dating) and provides
              quantitative control on rates and magnitude of rock uplift and exhumation.  It
              is thus provides valuable constraints on problems of landform evolution,
              mountain building, and other surface processes.  Helium dating may become the
              premier tool of the neotectonicist and geomorphologist, with helium ages
              becoming standard for any study to which denudation and topographic
              construction relate. 

The grant will enable construction of a high-vacuum
              extraction line with a quadrupole mass spectrometer for the analysis of helium
              content in mineral separates.  Because this technique is relatively new, such a
              facility cannot be directly purchased and must be custom built.  Measurement of
              parent isotopes (U, Th) by isotope dilution can already be made with existing
              facilities at Virginia Tech.  The helium dating technique will be one of the
              main activities applied by the P.I., J.A. Spotila, a new addition to the
              faculty at Virginia Tech.  It will be applied to three major projects of
              landform evolution in the next several years, including studies of the
              Chugach/St. Elias Range in Alaska (active orogen) and the Appalachians (extinct
              orogen).  The dating facility will be one of only a few in the nation and will
              stimulate collaboration at both the regional and international level.  It will
              also be the basis of numerous graduate and undergraduate research projects. 
              

***


