Title       : Dissertation Research: From Prevention to Infection: Aerobiology, the
               Industrialization of Disease, & Biological Warfare in the United States,
               1920-1960
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9906621

Award Number: 9906621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7513               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward W. Constant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project focuses on and links the seemingly disparate
              histories of academic and industrial microbiology, the phenomenon of
              standardization of organisms for experimental use, and the simultaneous
              development of standardization processes and artifacts within the manufacturing
              sector, most specifically in the design and production of weapons. An
              examination of the scientific and technological modifications made to the
              pathogen Francisella (Pasturella) tularensis, one of the biological weapons
              mass-produced by the United States, allows insights into the process by which
              microbial organisms are standardized for military use. In addition, this
              research examines the organizational and institutional relationships between
              various academic, industrial, and military researchers within the
              microbiological community in the US during the first half of this century. The 
              historical analysis of the scientific, technological, and institutional growth
              of this program begins during the earlier part of the 20th century. The
              scientific and technological evolution of aerosol physics and its applications
              to the stabilization of airborne biological organisms began with research
              conducted on airborne disease by scientists and public health officials
              interested in medical bacteriology and industrial hygiene during the 1920's and
              1930's. Interest in the study of the airborne spread of particulate matter and
              the subsequent causal relationship between airborne matter and disease led to
              the development of aerobiology, a subfield in microbiology. This dissertation
              explores the origin and evolution of this scientific subdiscipline, the
              militarization of the technology by the US armed forces, and the importance of
              this technology to the production of biological weapons. The theoretical
              framework that will guide this dissertation includes the concept of
              technological systems as applied to biological warfare research and development
              programs and biological weapons; the concept of discipline building to
              understand the birth of the aerobiology as an interdisciplinary field of study;
              the concept of trading zones to explain the historical evolution of aerobiology
              and its transformation from an applied science within medical technology to its
              militarization as a means of producing airborne pathogens for biological
              warfare; and "model organisms" and the standardization of organisms for
              specific scientific, technological, and medical purposes. This dissertation
              will examine the process by which the organism Francisella (Pasturella)
              tularensis, and the resultant disease tularemia, were modified from a natural
              pathogen into a standardized weapon system.
