Title       : PPD: SUCCEED-HI: Stimulating Understanding of Computational Science through
               Collaboration, Exploration, Experiment and Discovery for Hearing -Impaired
               students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  2002      
File        : a9906189

Award Number: 9906189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Gotwals   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Panoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Shodor Educ Fdtn Inc
	      923 Broad Street
	      Durham, NC  277054141    919/286-1911

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Students with hearing impairments and their teachers are in significant
              danger of being left behind with regard to technology innovations, especially
              in the rapidly emerging area of computational science (computer modeling and
              simulation).  The Shodor Education Foundation, Inc. with the University of
              North Carolina at Greensboro (UNC-G) Education of Deaf Children program, The
              Central North Carolina School for the Deaf (CNCSD), Interpreters, Inc., and the
              National Technical Institute of the Deaf (NTID), proposes a demonstration
              project entitled "Project SUCCEED-HI:  Stimulating Understanding of
              Computational Science through Collaboration, Exploration, Experiment and
              Discovery for Students with Hearing Impairments."  SUCCEED-HI builds on the
              success of an existing Shodor SUCCEED program to introduce middle and high
              school students to the technologies, techniques, and tools of computational
              science.  The goal of this project is to develop quality materials - case
              studies, enhancement/enrichment activities, supplemental labs, projects for
              independent group research, science fair ideas, summer camp activities -- that
              all include one or more of the computational components.  These materials will
              enable teachers to integrate computational science into the instructional
              programs of students with hearing impairments.  
     Products to be developed
              in the project include grade and language appropriate materials for the use of
              computational science in science, mathematics, and the social sciences;
              supporting materials, such as technical signs for computational science:  a
              report summarizing the results of pilot testing; and evaluation tools for use
              in continuing studies.  Shodor's participation in the National Computational
              Science Alliance will ensure widespread dissemination of products, approaches,
              methods, and "lessons learned" through the appropriate national educational
              communities.  
     The project methodology calls for the collaboration of
              pre-service and veteran educators of the hearing- impaired, computational
              scientists, and sign language experts, and the pilot-testing of materials and
              teaching strategies in a variety of in-school and extracurricular arenas. 
              Shodor will make the process work by ensuring that continuous support for
              materials development, the collection, evaluation, and recording of technical
              signs, access to computing resources, and evaluation are coordinated and
              enabled by using 
collaborative tools and electronic networks.  
     The
              major impact of this project will be the appropriate and authentic access to
              science and mathematics activities for students with hearing-impairments and
              their teachers.  The development of curricular and technical signs for use in
              computational science will occur only with a concerted effort on the part of
              experienced and dedicated scientists and educators.  Shodor and its partners
              are uniquely positioned, with the necessary expertise in both computational
              science education and education of the hearing-impaired, to ensure the success
              of this materials development effort.  When completed, the result of these
              efforts will be teachers of students with hearing impairments who can master
              the computational science learning with competence and confidence.

