Title       : NSF/CONACyT: Protection of Mayan Archeological Sites in Southern Mexico from
               Biodeterioration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9906337

Award Number: 9906337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph Mitchell mitchell@das.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1179,5922,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9906337  Mitchell  The combination of high humidity and temperature, together
              with increased tourist activity, is causing rapid deterioration of Mayan
              archeological sites in southern Mexico.  Much of the material used in the
              construction of these buildings was soft limestone, which is mechanically weak
              and susceptible to biodeterioration.  The objective of this research is to test
              methods for protection of the building materials against further deterioration.
               The research  will be carried out in close cooperation with the Escuela de
              Ingenieria, Universidad del Mayab.  This project is jointly supported with the
              Division of International Programs and with the NSF/CONACyT Program.
The
              importance of the microflora in the degradation of stone at sites at Chichen
              Itza and Uxmal has been determined in previously supported work.  A large and
              diverse microbial population has been found growing on the stone, with deep
              penetration into the limestone.  The local microflora has the capacity to
              degrade a number of polymeric consolidants.  The objective of this continuing
              research is to test a number of polymeric consolidants combined with biocides
              under field conditions and to develop an appropriate control mixture that would
              resist biodeterioration under local conditions.  The ultimate goal of this
              project  is to test methods to protect these archeological sites from
              deterioration.
The research is divided into three phases.  The first phase
              will consist of laboratory tests of a wide range of consolidants combined with
              commercially-available environmentally-acceptable biocides to find an
              appropriate combination to provide maximum protection against the local stone
              microorganisms.  In the second phase of the research, treated stone will be
              place in the field at two sites in southern Mexico.  The degree of microbial
              contamination, penetration and degradation of the polymeric materials will be
              tested using both electron microscopy and electrochemical impedence
              spectroscopy.  In the third phase, local stone treated with the most resistant
              combination of consolidants and biocides will be placed at a wide range of
              sites, both in Chichen Itza and Uxmal, in a variety of environmental
              conditions, including sunlight, shade, on external stone surfaces and in inner
              rooms of the buildings.  Materials will be returned to Harvard at frequent
              intervals for detailed analysis of attack both by the microflora and
              biodeterioration. ***


