Title       : US-South Africa Cooperative Research: Use of Piezoceramic Materials as Sensors
               and Actuators in Shell Structures for Vibration Damping and Shape Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9906092

Award Number: 9906092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Bruch, Jr. jcb@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Sloss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 1059,1066,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9906092
Bruch

This award supports a cooperative research project between
              John Bruch and J.M. Sloss, Department of Mechanical and Environmental
              Engineering, University of California, Santa Barbara, and Sarp Adali,
              Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Natal, and Ronald Hacking,
              Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technikon Natal, Durban, South Africa. 
              The research centers on analytical and experimental research in the field of
              smart structures.  The specific focus is on the application of piezoelectric
              materials for vibration control of laminated shell structures.  Three of the
              investigators are theoreticians and one is an experimentalist.  Using
              facilities at both UC Santa Barbara and the two institutions in Durban, the
              investigators will attempt to gain an improved understanding of some of the
              current obstacles to deployment of smart structures. 

This multidisciplinary
              US-South Africa joint research project involves the study of piezo materials,
              electromechanical effects, structural mechanics, and mathematical control as
              well as testing.  Its solution requires a team approach involving researchers
              from both countries with various fields of expertise and facilities.  The
              project will produce knowledge on the use of piezoceramic materials in
              applications involving vibration damping and shape control.  This is an
              emerging field of technology with vast potential to be used in space structures
              for improved in-service performance, in aerospace structures for improved sound
              and vibration control, and in the development of several consumer products.

