Title       : Molecular Interactions Between Angiotensin and NMDA Receptors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9906442

Award Number: 9906442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Weyhenmeyer weyhen@uillinois.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Angiotensin is a small peptide known for its role in regulating blood pressure,
              drinking behavior, neuroendocrine function, and tissue growth, which it
              accomplishes, at least in part, by activating specific Angiotensin receptors
              that are coupled to unique cell signaling pathways and gene expression
              patterns.  Recently, Dr. Weyhenmeyer  and others have shown that angiotensin
              can regulate the survival and/or death of selected neurons, and as such may
              have important implications in brain development, aging, and function.  Indeed,
              these preliminary studies suggest that angiotensin may influence neuronal cell
              death by altering the expression of death and survival genes that are regulated
              by the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) (glutamate) receptor.  The proposed studies
              will extend Dr. Weyhenmeyer preliminary findings by identifying and
              characterizing the molecular mechanisms that underlie angiotensin's ability to
              modulate the NMDA receptor-induced cell death programs.  These studies will
              specifically focus on identifying points of convergence between the angiotensin
              and NMDA receptor signaling pathways that affect downstream gene expression
              (for both known and novel death and survival genes).  The proposed studies have
              wide ranging implications regarding our understanding of the programmed cell
              death that is not only part of normal brain development and function, but also
              appears to be a significant contributor to the pathology in degenerative
              disorder (e.g., stroke, dementia) of the aging nervous system.
