Title       : Si-Based Interband Tunneling Diodes for High-Speed Logic and Low Power Memory
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9906260

Award Number: 9906260
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Berger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9906260
Berger

A team is being built amongst the University of Delaware,
              the Naval Research Laboratory, Raytheon Systems Company, and Delaware State
              University, a historically black university, to perform joint research and
              student training in industry and government laboratories. This proposal seeks
              support for the development of Si-based tunnel diodes which meet two
              criteria:

1. Peak-to-valley current ratios (PVCR) which exceed 4:1.

2.
              Process compatibility with standard CMOS or HBT integrated circuit
              processing.

Tunnel diodes which simultaneously meet these requirements will
              augment existing tran-sistor technologies by increasing bandwidth, lowering
              power consumption, and reducing the component count of standard circuits. It
              should be noted that while the prior work of this team has primarily dealt with
              resonant interband tunneling diodes (PJTD), this project will remain open to
              any Si-based tunneling device design which meets the above two require-ments.
              Achieving high PVCRs require tunnel diode designs which simultaneously maximize
              the tunnel current and minimize valley currents. As such, it is essential to
              develop a thor-ough knowledge base of the physics underlying tunneling
              phenomena. A low temperature study of the phonon structure will help to select
              an appropriate tunnel barrier. A simulta-neous study of the influence of gap
              states and deep levels will identify the media underlying excess current. The
              results of these experiments will serve to improve modelling software and will
              be essential to the engineering of high PVCR Si-based tunnel diodes. The role
              of  Si1-x Gex tunnel barriers will be investigated as well.
All members of the
              team will help in the design of structures and experiments to be performed as
              well as the interpretation of the data. In addition, the University of Delaware
              will be the primary partner responsible for device fabrication and testing. The
              Naval Research Laboratory will focus on the molecular beam epitaxial growth of
              the tunnel diodes, while Raytheon Systems keys on modeling, modeling software,
              some unique device fabrica-tion, and low temperature electrical measurements.
              Delaware State University will focus on low temperature photoluminescence using
              UDelaware facilities. A free flow of information between these parties as well
              as student visitation to each other's facilities (2 days to 1 week every 3
              months) for technical discussions and experimentation is envisioned. Some
              testing services (deep level transient spectroscopy) will be outsourced.


