Title       : Genetic Analysis of Distributive Pairing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2001       
File        : a9906429

Award Number: 9906429
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $770000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Scott Hawley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ordered movement of chromosomes during meiotic cell division is essential to
              the final development of the organism. In most instances, meiosis is comprised
              of three basic cellular processes: pairing, recombination and segregation.
              Pairing identifies homologs, recombination acts to lock them together, and
              segregation moves them to opposite poles at the first meiotic division.
              Establishing stable co-orientation requires a balancing of plateward and
              poleward forces acting on the kinetochores. This balancing of forces is usually
              achieved by chiasmata, the physical consequence of recombination. However, many
              organisms also possess systems that ensure the segregation of chromosomes that
              do not undergo recombination and the Drosophila female is one such organism.
              The focus of this project is an analysis of the mechanisms that allow proper
              meiotic segregation in the absence of chromosome exchange. NOD protein has been
              shown to control the poleward movement of achiasmate homologs as the meiotic
              spindle elongates during prometaphase. Preliminary data suggests that NOD has
              two additional functions: 1) providing a plateward balancing force that
              facilitates proper centromere coorientation; and 2) interlocking homologous
              chromosomes during early prometaphase. It has also recently been learned that
              NOD appears to be regulated extra-cellularly during meiotic prometaphase,
              perhaps via a cAMP-dependent signal transduction system. The specific aims of
              this project are: 1) Dissect the structure and regulation of the NOD protein.
              2) Continue studies of the Axs-transmembrane protein and its possible role in
              regulating the NOD protein. 3) Genetically test the hypothesis that Nod plays a
              role in mediating centromere coordination.

Failures in achiasmate
              segregation account for a high fraction of spontaneous nondisjunction in fly
              and human oocytes. The observation that the protein(s) responsible for
              achiasmate segregation may be regulated by hormonal cues provides the first
              insight as to why achiasmate nondisjunction may increase with advancing
              maternal age in human oocytes.




