Title       : Dispersed-Phase Transformation Toughening of Lamellar -TiAl+Ti3Al Intermetallic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a9906268

Award Number: 9906268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244231             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mica Grujicic mica@ces.clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9906268
Grujicic

This research involves a detailed experimental
              characterization of the fracture processes and toughening mechanisms in
              lamellar gamma-TiAl + alpha2-Ti3Al alloys containing second-phase particles of
              the V-Ti-Al-Fe b.c.c. beta-phase with a critically adjusted thermodynamic
              stability.  The purpose is to determine the potential for dispersed-phase
              martensitic transformation toughening as a means for achieving the high
              fracture toughness levels necessary to make the subject alloys commercially
              viable.  Since KIC values close to that needed have already been reported for
              the lamellar gamma-TiA1+ alpha2-Ti3A1, the beta-phase induced toughness
              enhancements presented above suggest that achievement of the required fracture
              toughness levels is feasible.  Finite element modeling of the fracture process
              is carried out to determine how the alloy should be designed in  order to take
              full advantage of crack shielding and crack-face bridging.  Toward that end,
              crystal-plasticity constitutive relations for the lamellar gamma-TiAl +
              alpha2-Ti3Al alloys containing second-phase particles of the beta-phase are
              developed, and the particle/matrix interfacial potentials determined by
              combining high resolution transmission electron microscopy analysis of
              interface orientations with atomistic simulations of the interface decohesion. 
              Finally, to account for inelastic deformation due to the change in crystal
              structure and for lattice rotation accompanying the "beta to alpha" martensitic
              transformation, a crystal-plasticity model for stress-assisted martensitic
              transformation is developed and used in modeling the interactions between
              dispersed-phase martensitic transformation and fracture.	
%%%
Due to their
              unique combination of mechanical, physical and chemical properties, alloys
              based on gamma-TiAl + alpha2-Ti3Al are of great technological importance for
              applications in high-temperature propulsion systems.  However wide scale
              application of these alloys is currently hampered by a lack of room-temperature
              tensile ductility and fracture toughness.  
***

