Title       : Sensory Pathways Mediating Motivated Behaviors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9906430

Award Number: 9906430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lique M. Coolen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1191,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of the current research is to understand the neural pathways
              and mechanisms underlying  motivated behaviors, which are complex behaviors
              dependent on both intrinsic and external factors. The aim of the present
              project is to delineate the neural pathway by which somatosensory and
              viscerosensory inputs reach motivational centers in the forebrain of male rats,
              and to investigate the functional role of this pathway in motivated
              behaviors.
	Dr. Coolen's preliminary work has provided strong evidence for a
              candidate pathway that may relay somatic and visceral sensory information to
              higher brain centers that control behavior. This pathway includes a subset of
              neurons in the lumbar spinal cord that project to specific thalamic nucleus,
              which, in turn projects to forebrain regions critical for motivated behaviors.
              The current proposal will confirm the existence of this pathway and further
              investigate its functions using neuroanatomical tracing techniques in
              combination with markers of neural activation. Moreover, this project will
              begin to address the key question of whether or not this type of sensory
              information is critical for the expression of motivated behaviors. The
              behavioral significance of the identified anatomical pathway will be tested by
              placing discrete lesions in its nodal points, the lumbar spinal cord and
              thalamus, and examining the behavioral consequences of their
              destruction.
	Together, these studies will provide a framework and well-
              defined model for exploring how sensory pathways regulate components of
              complex, motivated behaviors.


