Title       : Uivvaq: Archaeology and Paleoclimatology of an Arctic Coastal Midden
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a9906653

Award Number: 9906653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100319             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Hoffecker jfhoffeck@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Elias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hoffecker
9906653

The interdisciplinary investigation of a prehistoric and
              historic midden site in northern Alaska will be initiated.  Uivvaq, which is
              located on the Chukchi Sea shore near Cape Lisburne, represents one of the
              deepest middens on the northern coast, and has been protected from looting and
              erosion by unusual circumstances.  The site was occupied by Inupiat people
              during the early twentieth century, and appears likely to contain an
              archaeological record of occupation spanning many hundreds or several thousands
              of years.  Uivvaq may be expected to yield considerable information on the
              culture, society, technology, and economy of its past occupants and their
              environmental setting.  This research project is designed to collect this
              information within the framework of specific research questions concerning the
              occupation and paleoclimatic history of the site, and within the broader
              context of the development of arctic maritime adaptations in the late Holocene
              and the origins of Inuit culture.  The latter seem to represent social and
              technological responses to changing climates and natural resources during the
              past several thousand years.  Of particular significance are the emergence of
              whaling and the spread of Thule people across the Arctic at the end of the
              first millennium A.D.

The project entails exploratory excavations at Uivvaq,
              followed by laboratory analysis of materials collected during the field phase. 
              The research will be undertaken by an interdisciplinary team of scientists and
              students from the University of Colorado (INSTAAR), North Slope Borough, and
              the U.S. Department of Defense, and will include analysis of artifacts and
              features, sediment samples, vertebrate remains, and fossil insects.  An
              absolute chronology for the site will be established by radiocarbon dating of
              insect remains and other materials.  While excavated artifacts, features, and
              vertebrate remains would be used to reconstruct the culture-historical sequence
              at Uivvaq, as well as the economic and technological history of its occupants,
              samples of sediments and fossil insect remains would be used to reconstruct
              past climate change and its effects on the local environmental setting.   The
              analysis of the artifacts, features, stratigraphy, and sediments would also be
              used to understand the formation of the midden deposits, which probably
              involved a complex interplay of geologic, paleobiotic, and anthropogenic
              processes within the context of local climatic change.  

Excavations at
              Uivvaq will be conducted during July-August 2000 by 8-10 persons, including
              students from Barrow.  It is estimated that approximately 15 square meters of
              midden deposits would be excavated and sampled.  Laboratory analyses of
              artifacts, sediments, vertebrate remains, fossil insects, and radiocarbon
              samples would be conducted during September-December 2000.  It is anticipated
              that one or more additional phases of excavation would be needed to expand the
              samples of artifacts, recorded features, and vertebrate remains in order to
              fully address the research questions.


