Title       : Diagnostic Studies of Heavy Convective Rainfall Events in Complex Terrain: A
               Contribution to the Mesoscale Alpine Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2001  
File        : a9906012

Award Number: 9906012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2000     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222860             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Smith jsmith@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthias Steiner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Heavy rainfall and (flash) flooding often result from convective systems that
              are either quasi-stationary or slowly moving with individual cells repeatedly
              tracking over the same area. The interplay of advection (i.e., cell motion) and
              propagation (i.e., new cell formation) to produce a slow net storm motion,
              together with a high precipitation efficiency that is fueled by a very moist
              storm environment, are prominent features of extreme rainfall events.  Heavy
              rainfall events frequently occur in complex terrain, where the storm dynamics
              interact with the air motion past terrain features.  Observations indicate that
              such events are frequently accompanied by strong boundary-layer winds directing
              moist air towards a topographical barrier.  Although there is some basic
              understanding of how air moves past terrain features and what synoptic-scale
              situations are favorable for severe precipitation, little is known about the
              precise mechanisms that lead to the triggering, organization, location, and
              persistence over many hours of these types of precipitation systems.  This lack
              of understanding of mechanisms at scales of 10km or less has been attributed to
              a lack of detailed observations at those scales.  From a hydrologic
              perspective, assessment of the temporal and spatial distribution of rainfall at
              scales of few minutes and kilometers is crucial to evaluate the hydrologic
              response (e.g., flooding) of precipitating cloud systems at the land
              surface.

The Mesoscale Alpine Program (MAP) is a research initiative in
              mountain meteorology that will make use of advanced observing technology and
              numerical models to explore the effects of complex topography on weather.  The
              proposed research entails diagnostic studies of heavy rainfall and flash
              flooding events based on: (a) Observations on the soutside of the Alps made
              during the Special Observing Period (S OP) of MAP and (b) comparable
              observations in the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains and Appalachian region
              of the United States (US). Analyses will be performed to characterize key
              elements of heavy rainfall from orographic convection at scales ranging from
              the synoptic to the storm scale.  The questions to be addressed through
              diagnostic studies are: (1) What are the mechanisms responsible for
              quasi-stationary storm motion of orographic convection on the south side of the
              Alps? (2) How do these mechanisms differ from those observed in the Front Range
              of the Rocky Mountains and Appalachian region of the US? (3) What are the
              microphysical processes responsible for extreme rainfall rates from orographic
              convection on the south side of the Alps? (4) How do these microphysical
              processes differ from those in the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains and
              Appalachian region of the US? 

Quasi-stationary storm motion in mountainous
              regions will be examined through the interrelationships between convective
              initiation, storm advection and storm propagation.  A major difficulty in
              mountainous terrain is that standard procedures for relating storm motion to
              steering-level wind and low-level jet configuration do not hold.  A principal
              objective of storm motion studies will be to develop procedures for assessing
              storm propagation in mountainous terrain.  For analyses of MAP SOP events, the
              Doppler-on-Wheels (DOW) may provide especially useful information on the
              relationship between storm propagation and the low-level wind
              field.

Microphysical studies of extreme rainfall rates from orographic
              convection will focus on Low Echo Centroid (LEC) storms, like the Big Thompson
              (July 1976) and Fort Collins (July 1997) storms in the Front Range of the Rocky
              Mountains and the Rapidan storm (June 1995) in the Appalachian region of the
              US.  Particular attention will be given to the hypothesis that extreme rainfall
              rates are linked to accumulation zones, in which a coupling of warm rain
              processes and riming results in efficient precipitation production. 
              Polarimetric radar observations of MAP SOP and US heavy rain cases will play a
              central role in analyses of extreme rainfall rates.


