Title       : Dissertation Research: American Radio in Shanghai, 1919-1941
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906205

Award Number: 9906205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth S. Cowan ruth.cowan@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project addresses two primary questions concerning
              American involvement in Shanghai's interwar era radio market. First, how did
              beliefs that non-Western societies lacked the capacity to utilize technology
              effectively influence American activities in Shanghai's radio market? Second,
              how was Shanghai's interwar era radio market ultimately shaped by its varied
              experiences with imperialism, international rivalry, divided political and
              judicial authority, and a rapidly commercializing urban economy. The analysis
              addresses the issue of technological determinism, and explores the societal
              context in which new technologies are conceptualized, developed, and
              implemented. A collection of American government, corporate, and periodical
              sources will provide a overview of the American perspectives and policies;
              these sources will demonstrate popular understandings of technology in the
              United States and how such understandings manifested themselves in official and
              corporate policies directed toward Shanghai. To evaluate American
              understandings and actions, Shanghai's political economy during the 1920s and
              1930s will be researched using Chinese language sources; the Municipal Archives
              in Shanghai have specific holdings on the city's inter-war era broadcasting,
              while a host of other Chinese language books and periodicals addressing radio
              can be accessed through the university library at Stony Brook. The
              multinational research proposed for this project is necessary to analyze
              technological development in an international, multijurisdictional context like
              interwar Shanghai-- especially when dealing with a radio, a communications
              technology whose signals can traverse jurisdictions at will. By analyzing both
              Chinese and American approaches to a developing communications medium like
              radio, this dissertation research project will underscore a key component to
              teaching the history of technology from a social constructivist perspective:
              that the course of technological development results from the numerous
              interactions between technology and the complex cultural, economic, political,
              and social forces in a particular societal context.





