Title       : PPD: Haptic Audio Scientific Graph Analysis Project (HASGAP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9906143

Award Number: 9906143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Morford autofunc@tmn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Automated Functions Inc
	      7700 Leesburg Pike, Suite 420
	      Falls Church, VA  22043    703/883-9797

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Many high schools use graphing scientific calculators to assist students in
              math and science courses.  These calculators perform scientific functions and
              have a built-in screen to display graphs.  These calculators are used widely in
              higher math (Algebra and beyond) and science courses.  They are valuable tools
              both for teachers and students.  Unfortunately, the graphing scientific
              calculators are not usable by visually impaired students.  This project will
              attempt to design, develop, and test a system, which provides better access for
              visually impaired students to graphs and scientific expressions.
     The
              Haptic Audio Scientific Graph Analysis Project (HASGAP) involves research,
              development, and testing. Real time, interactive, independent comprehension of
              two-dimensional graphs by visually impaired students is the goal of the
              project.  This project will increase the knowledge base in interactive graph
              analysis and interactive scientific calculation research for visually impaired
              people. 
     The force feedback WingMan Mouse from Logitech will be used. 
              This is a haptic two-dimensional mouse that became commercially available in
              January 2000.  Automated Functions, Inc. (AFI) has been using the prototype
              WingMan Mouse that was designed and developed by Immersion Corporation and
              called the FEELit Mouse for the past 1.5 years.  AFI was a beta tester of the
              FEELit Mouse and suggested many functions that were placed in the commercial
              WingMan Mouse product.  The price for the WingMan Mouse is only $100.  This is
              significant to HASGAP since the WingMan is a vital part of the system which
              includes custom PC software, synthetic speech, stereo sound, and the haptic
              WingMan Mouse. 
     The WingMan Mouse will be used as the graph input
              peripheral.  Stereo sound will be used to represent the graph(s).  AFI will
              design, develop, and test different haptic effects in order to increase the
              ability of the visually impaired user to comprehend two-dimensional graphs. 
 
                 The researchers will design and develop custom software that runs on a PC
              using Windows 98, the operating system platform supported by the WingMan Mouse.
               The speech and sound will be created using an internal sound card to augment
              the haptic feedback provided by the WingMan Mouse. 
HASGAP uses a screen
              reader to speak what is typed and to verbalize the different menu options and
              graphic controls.  The system has been designed and developed around the
              Henter-Joyce JAWS For Windows screen reader.  Other screen readers will be
              tested with HASGAP to assure compatibility. 
     The project will be field
              tested by visually impaired students who attend a local Virginia school system.
               
     If HASGAP is successful, visually impaired students will be able to
              interpret graphs and perform scientific calculations independently.  This
              project may significantly affect the ability of visually impaired students to
              succeed in math and science courses. 


