Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Agricultural Development, Environmental
               Destruction and Prospects for Conservation in the Savanna (Cerrado) of Eastern
               Mato Grosso, Brazil
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9906946

Award Number: 9906946
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9470               (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Carney carney@geog.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5209,9178,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              One of the most significant lines of inquiry with respect to the human
              dimensions of global change in research on the patterns and processes of
              land-use and land-cover change in different parts of the globe.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project examines the dramatic process of accelerating
              land conversion in the Brazilian cerrado of the Amazon Basin, a species-rich
              arboreal savanna that has undergone tremendous land conversion by modern
              agricultural development.  Soybeans, hybrid maize and cotton, upland rice, and
              large-scale cattle ranching consumed more than a third (or roughly 7 million
              hectares) of the cerrado.  This investigation of agricultural and environmental
              changes in the region will begin by focusing on local land and resource users
              in eastern Mato Grosso state of south central Brazil, paying particular
              attention to the sociocultural and economic processes associated with recent
              land conversion that operate at multiple geographic and temporal scales.  Field
              research will assess changing local resource use in eastern Mato Grosso since
              1969 by exploring land-use decision-making structure, process of colonization,
              and local history of agricultural and agronomic technology, land tenure, and
              access to natural and capital resources.  Remotely sensed images will be
              interpreted and a geographic information system (GIS) used for spatial analysis
              in order to determine the loss of cerrado vegetation and the establishment of
              new croplands, pastures, and settlements.  Archival and policy research will
              highlight the ideological and political economic forces at the local and
              national scales that are supporting and also contesting agricultural
              modernization.  This project will shed new light on the role of local-scale
              processes in human-environmental interactions, with special attention given to
              the state's role in agricultural subsidies and technological advances in
              production.  It also will provide new insights into the integration of
              field-based ethnographic research with remotely sensed data.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

