Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Elect oral District
               Structure and Political Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9906209

Award Number: 9906209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7184               (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Alford jra@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Do variations in the shape and location of electoral districts affect citizen
              engagement in the political process?  Can districts be manipulated in ways that
              impact the political attitudes and behaviors of citizens?  Although these
              questions are central to current debates over congressional redistricting,
              there has been little systematic examination of the link between district
              characteristics and citizens.  This dissertation analyzes this linkage by (1)
              collecting data on electoral district characteristics and citizen attitudes and
              behavior in the 1980s and 1990s, and (2) using multi-level analytical
              techniques to investigate how the context created by various electoral
              districts impacts the political attitudes and behaviors of district
              residents.
	The primary objective of this researc is to address a basic and
              important question:  How can electoral districts be structured geographically
              to encourage or discourage political engagement and participation on the part
              of citizens?  Specifically, it develops and tests a theory linking geographic
              characteristics of districts to citizen behavior via the effects that a
              district can have on the ease of information exchange in the environment.  By
              gathering data on district characteristics (such as compactness scores and the
              degree to which districts conform to county and city  boundaries) from the
              range of districts in place in the United States, and merging this information
              with citizen attitude and participation measures, this dissertation is able to
              determine how variation in citizen attitudes relates to district differences. 
              This provides much-needed information to the debate over the standards applied
              to the drawing of electoral districts.  More generally, it also provides
              insight into how contextual variables can contribute to an understanding of
              individual-level behavior. 

