Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Nation, the Public, and the Transformation
               of Mexican Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9906961

Award Number: 9906961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn A. Staeheli lynner@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In order to understand the modern political dynamics of a democratic nation, one
              can view political activities from different perspectives.  One set of
              perspectives is associated with the relationship between "the nation" and "the
              polis" and the ways in which this relationship is changing.  Nation and polis
              imply very different political relationships between and among their community
              members.  Nation implies a community bound together by a shared history,
              culture, and set of values that is considered unique; it is a community that
              cannot easily incorporate members that do not share these particular
              characteristics.  A polis, by contrast, implies a community bound together by a
              shared set of political principles that include a pluralistic public sphere;
              new members can be incorporated if they are able to adhere to those political
              principles, regardless of their identity or other characteristics.  Current
              theory about democracy theory assumes that the transition to democracy involves
              a movement from nation to polis, but in practice, the relationship is never so
              clear-cut.  This doctoral dissertation research project focuses on the
              relationship between the nation and polis as a way of understanding political
              transitions in contemporary Mexico.  Special attention will be given to changes
              in the scales and spaces of political activity.  This research will be
              accomplished through a comparative study of two urban locations in very
              different regional contexts:  Monterrey in northern Mexico and Oaxaca in the
              south.  Intensive fieldwork will be conducted in both locations over a
              ten-month time span.  Methods to be used include archival research and
              interviews and focus groups involving political and civic leaders.  This
              research will provide an in-depth analysis of the democratic transition as
              Mexico faces a pivotal presidential election in 2000.  It also will develop a
              specifically geographic approach for evaluating the processes of
              democratization and democratic consolidation.  While focused initially on
              Mexico, these theoretical insights also will be valuable for evaluating
              contemporary democratic processes in other nations, especially forces that
              often seem to be leading to social fragmentation and national disintegration. 
              As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

