Title       : Characterization of Ku-Dependent Pathway for Repair of DNA Breaks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a9906440

Award Number: 9906440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Dynan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ga Res Inst
	      1120 Fifteenth Street
	      Augusta, GA  309124810    706/721-2592

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              MCB 9906440
PI: William S. Dynan

Abstract

     The recognition,
              processing, and repair of double strand DNA breaks is of fundamental importance
              in the maintenance of chromosomal integrity.  The heterodimeric Ku protein is
              one of the central players in the eukaryotic double strand break repair system.
               Biochemical and genetic studies reveal that this binding is the first step in
              a DNA repair pathway that involves a number of other proteins.  In mammalian
              cells, these include a protein kinase catalytic subunit, a nuclease, a DNA
              ligase, various accessory proteins, and perhaps, additional proteins that have
              yet to be discovered. The overall goal of the project is to understand the
              Ku-dependent repair pathway at a mechanistic level.  The work focuses on
              biochemical experiments using purified proteins and defined DNA substrates. 
              The experimental strategy involves the development of a cell-free repair
              system, based on purified components, that mimics the behavior of the in vivo
              double strand break repair pathway.  To accomplish this, known proteins that
              are required for repair will be expressed, purified, and tested for their
              ability to substitute for their endogenous counterparts in a crude repair
              system based on whole cell extracts.  Additional, unknown proteins that may be
              required for repair will be identified by an activity complementation assay,
              or, in an alternative strategy, by protein-protein interaction assays.  If
              novel proteins are discovered, their role in double strand break repair will be
              validated by in vivo assays.  The reconstituted repair system, based on
              purified proteins, will then be used to investigate mechanistic steps in the
              repair pathway.  Defined oligonucleotide substrates will be used to
              characterize the assembly of repair proteins into complexes, with the objective
              of defining a series of complexes that are arrested at different stages of the
              pathway. 

     The DNA repair pathway that is to be defined in these studies
              is the major innate healing mechanism by which animals and humans respond to
              genetic damage from ionizing radiation.  Sources of ionizing radiation exposure
              include X-rays, gamma rays, and other particles emitted by radioactive
              materials.  Exposure to low level radiation is a significant issue on a global
              scale. An improved understanding of the fundamental biochemical processes
              underlying repair of radiation-induced DNA damage may lead to better ways to
              diagnose low level radiation exposure and protect against its effects.  An
              improved understanding of the Ku-dependent DNA repair pathway may also lead to
              a means to sensitize cells to therapeutic radiation.


