Title       : Mammalian Sibling Rivalry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9906445

Award Number: 9906445
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kay E. Holekamp holekamp@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura Smale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey A. French  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Glickman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
The occurrence of sibling rivalry has now been documented in many species of
              animals, including humans. Mammalian sibling rivalry is widely believed to be
              less deadly than that among avian brood mates. The broad goal of the current
              research is to evaluate the generality of existing sibling rivalry theory by
              exploring sibling conflict in mammals. The work will focus specifically on one
              species of gregarious mammal, the spotted hyena, in which sibling rivalry is
              more intense than is that described in other mammals. A combination of
              techniques, including behavioral observation, monitoring of excreted hormone
              levels, and fetal ultrasonography, will be used to determine whether siblicide
              occurs facultatively or obligately in free-living hyenas in Kenya.  The
              influence of hormones on dispersal will also be addressed.

Siblings are
              often each other's closest associates and closest competitors, so they often
              bear the heaviest costs of selfish behavior. Because the best interests of
              rival siblings need not necessarily coincide with those of their parents,
              conflict between parents and
offspring often affects the form and outcome of
              sibling competition. The study of sibling rivalry is thus of great significance
              for understanding the occurrence of both selfish and altruistic behaviors among
              close kin in our own species and in other animals.


