Title       : Development of Sonification Design Theory: Metaphors, Mappings, Holistic Sound
               Design, and Data Specific Sonification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9906818

Award Number: 9906818
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402781             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lane lane@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Auditory representation of data, or sonification, promises gains in the
              representation of temporal and high-dimensional data, in data monitoring tasks
              where the eyes are busy, in tasks requiring recognition of patterns in a data
              set, in high-stress or critical conditions where cross-modal correlations would
              be of value, and where the display users are students or researchers with
              visual disabilities.   However, very little work has been done to determine the
              best ways to map data dimensions, such as temperature or pressure, onto
              auditory display dimensions, such as pitch or tempo.   We also know little
              about the metaphorical associations that sounds create, and how to utilize
              these connotations to design effective, compelling, and pleasant sonifications
              which are easy to learn and intuitive to use.  This research seeks to discover
              the optimal data-to-display mappings for use in scientific sonification, and to
              investigate whether these optimal mappings vary within and/or across fields of
              application.  To accomplish this, the PI and his team will develop a
              cross-platform research environment that incorporates sophisticated sound
              synthesis and data collection capabilities.    A series of experiments will
              investigate:   (a) listener preferences and population stereotypes in
              data-to-sound mappings;   (b) how mappings differ across various scientific
              areas; and (c) the effectiveness of data sonification for graphical
              interpretations and data mining.   The PI will develop a cross-platform
              sonification software tool to create auditory displays suitable for the domain
              of study, the characteristics of the user, and the type of data to be explored.
               This tool will facilitate data analysis in a number of disciplines, and
              provide visually-disabled scientists and students immediate inroads into the
              world of science.
