Title       : Conflict, Cooperation and the Evolution of Conditional Social Behaviors in
               Colonial Marine Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a9906741

Award Number: 9906741
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $665002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Grosberg rkgrosberg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
Grosberg   9906741

The tension between conflict and cooperation drives the
              evolution of social behavior, occasionally leading to permanent transitions in
              social organization.  More commonly, however, the tension results in the
              evolution of transitory social liaisons among conspecifics that form,
              disintegrate and reform from place to place and generation to generation. 
              Underlying many of these transient associations is a spectrum of plastic
              behaviors -some altruistic, some selfish - whose expression depends on the
              social environment provided by interacting conspecifics.  Current theories of
              social evolution build on the fundamental role of kin selection, while
              acknowledging that other facets of the social environment influence the costs
              and benefits of altruistic and selfish behaviors, hence the conditions under
              which they should be expressed.  All else being equal, individuals should
              direct altruistic (or cooperative) behaviors toward relatives, and selfish
              behaviors away from relatives.  Individuals should also modulate the expression
              of altruistic and selfish behaviors according to the prevailing social
              environment and their own ontogenetic state.  Finally, changes in the social
              environment experienced by different species should promote the diversification
              of social behavior.
Despite the ubiquity and theoretical importance of these
              conditional behaviors in the regulation of ecological interactions involving
              predators, competitors, and mates, virtually nothing is known about how the
              social environment affects their expression and evolution, especially in marine
              organisms.  This research project will test and extend the basic predictions of
              social evolutionary theory using a group of colonial marine cnidarians (the
              hydractiniids) that exhibit dramatic, context-dependent behaviors, including
              intergenotypic fusion (and chimera formation) and aggression, and that
              experience a broad range of social environments.  By examining from ecological,
              genetic, and phylogenetic perspectives how selection mediated by the social
              environment influences the expression and evolution of fusion and aggression in
              this behaviorally and socially diverse group of hydrozoans, this research will
              build a general foundation for understanding the evolution of conditional
              behaviors, the cues underlying their expression, and their widespread effects
              at the level of the population and community.

