Title       : Dissertation Research: American and German Judicial Approaches to Nazi Genocide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9906411

Award Number: 9906411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Beyerchen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will examine German and American judicial
              approaches to the postwar prosecution of Nazi war crimes, especially
              "euthanasia"-related crimes committed by German doctors and medical personnel.
              The aim of the project is to examine the variety of assumptions (ethical,
              epistemological, anthropological, and theological) that guided the judges,
              counsel, and other participants in these trials. Such assumptions pertain to
              the following: (1) the types of evidence considered probative on issues of
              guilt and innocence; (2) defenses permitted/forbidden by American and German
              courts; (3) judicial views of Nazi criminality (i.e., whether jurists believed
              that the Nazi elite planned the massmurder of European Jewry and other groups
              from early on in the regime, or instead held that genocide occurred as a series
              of improvised, ad hoc measures to deal with unmanageable populations of Jews in
              the East); and (4) judicial conceptions of Nazi medicine and science. Prior
              literature on postwar national trials of Nazi defendants has largely focused on
              one national trial, and on issues of the quality of justice achieved by
              prosecutorial authorities. One exception to this trend is the recent work of
              Dick de Mildt, who has studied an array of national trials from the Nuremberg
              International Tribunal in 1946 to the present day. Even de Mildt, however, has
              not situated national trials in a comparative framework that allows for their
              cross-cultural comparison. The research project will seek to construct such a
              framework, thus filling a significant gap in current scholarship on the
              national trials of Nazi defendants. Research will proceed in accordance with
              two hypotheses. (1) The German judiciary and legislature were more concerned
              with the subjective state of mind of the accused than were their American
              counterparts. This heightened interest in subjective intent was a product of
              two situational factors: first, the Germans were confronted with cases in which
              they had to adjudicate the guilt or innocence of "respected" professionals,
              cases in which the German educational system that had trained the defendants
              was also under indictment; second, German jurists were deeply influenced by a
              Kantian ethical tradition, which emphasized the subjective intentions of moral
              actors in assessing the nature (admirable or culpable) of their actions. (2)
              The Americans regarded Nazi science as non-science or pseudo-science,
              characterizing the euthanasia doctors as criminals guilty of first-degree
              murder. The Germans, on the other hand, were more inclined to see Nazi science
              as an extreme form of science, leading them, in some cases, to either acquit
              euthanasia defendants or to mitigate their sentences. 	Subjects for study will
              be the trials of the "euthanasia" gassing experts, a group of medical doctors
              brought before German courts between 1948 and 1986. After analyzing the German
              cases, the project will contrast the German approach to Nazi medicalized
              killing with the earlier American euthanasia trials (part of the Nuremberg
              Military Tribunal's larger medical case involving doctors and scientists of the
              Third Reich). Documentation on these trials will be reviewed in the U.S.
              Holocaust Memorial Museum library and archives, the National Archives, the
              Stautsanwaltschaft for Frankfurt, Germany, and the Zentrale Stelle der
              Landesjustizverwaltungen in Ludwigsburg, Germany. Research will utilize both
              primary and secondary source materials.



