Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Geographically Targeted Economic Development
               Incentives and Business Outcomes: Evidence from the Enterprise Zone Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906894

Award Number: 9906894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Engberg JeOi@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to deteriorating conditions in many U.S. urban areas, a common state
              and local policy initiative has been the provision of tax and other business
              incentives aimed at attracting or retaining businesses in these distressed
              areas.  Over recent decades, a large variety of autonomous, geographically
              targeted initiatives, commonly referred to as enterprise zones, have emerged. 
              The enterprise zones of different states vary considerably over a number of
              important dimensions:  the type and the monetary generosity of the incentives
              offered to zone businesses, the criteria for selecting the targeted areas
              designated as enterprise zones, and the business eligibility rules to receive
              the enterprise zone incentives.  In principle, the recent experience of
              different states can be thought of as a natural experiment from which valuable
              lessons can be learned to refine future local economic development tools.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will be a comparative empirical study of
              the impact of state enterprise zone policies on the location and production
              decisions of private firms.  The analysis will combine information on the
              location and incentive mix of state-sponsored enterprise zones with panel data
              on economic outcomes.  The outcomes data include both establishment-level data
              on location, input mixes, employment and wages as well as census tract level
              aggregates of economic activity for the entire nation.  Regression analysis
              will be used to compare business outcomes in places with and without zones. 
              Different econometric methods will be used to control for the tendency of
              states to designate zones in locations with limited economic vitality prior to
              designation.  By examining whether geographically targeted incentives can
              revitalize communities and stimulate economic growth, this project will
              contribute to the understanding of the spatial dynamics of local economies.  It
              will also give policy makers a better understanding of which incentives work
              best, whether some areas are better suited for enterprise zone solutions than
              others, and whether zone incentives tend to be favored by businesses of a
              particular industry.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

