Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Labor Geography of Financial Service
               Restructuring in Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9906935

Award Number: 9906935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9835               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria A. Lawson lawson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although the growth of global financial service industries has been phenomenal
              in recent decades, relatively little scholarly attention has been given to
              geographic dimensions of labor force participation and the impacts of global
              economic changes on people's everyday lives.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project will explore the ways in which increasing flows of global
              financial capital impact the lives of service workers in developing countries. 
              Critical questions to be answered through this project are:  What is the role
              of local forces in an era of increasing flows of global financial capital? and
              What is the relationship between the restructuring of occupations, changing
              identities, and forms of worker organization and resistance?  Fieldwork will be
              conducted over a nine-month period.  The first phase will focus on a set of
              in-depth interviews with senior representatives of the top four banks in Bogota
              concerning the impact of foreign capital flows on financial services labor
              markets in Colombia.  The second phase will examine restructuring from the
              perspective of labor organizers of the Central Unitaria de Trabajadores. 
              Interviews with workers in the third phase will elucidate the relationship
              between changes in the nature and spaces of work and how women perceive of
              themselves as political actors.  Participant observation of service work and
              union proceedings also will be used to illuminate the relations of financial
              service production and union negotiation.  This research will make theoretical
              and empirical contributions to understanding how global financial restructuring
              is intertwined with political processes that span scale ranging from the local
              to global.  By synthesizing approaches to labor relations from labor geography,
              critical development geography and critical feminist theory, the project will
              generate cross-disciplinary theoretical perspectives.  This research connects
              conceptualizations of economic production and political representation through
              a spatial analysis of changing terms of employment and forms of civic
              engagement, and it will explore how employers, unionists and workers interpret
              the scope of, and their role in, the political economy through their experience
              of work.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

