Title       : Choosing Among Approaches to Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9906128

Award Number: 9906128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148715             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry E. Kyburg kyburg@redsuspenders.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
There is an ever-increasing variety of procedures for managing uncertainty
              available. These methods are discussed in the literature of artificial
              intelligence, as well as in the literature of philosophy of science. Heretofore
              these methods have been evaluated by intuition, discussion, the general
              philosophical method of argument and counterexample. The present project
              consists of the analytical development of a test according to which these
              methods can be compared to each other.

One difficulty with developing such
              tests is that almost any method of uncertainty management will have the
              property that in the long run it will deliver numbers approaching the frequency
              of the kinds of events at issue. Thus unbiased estimates in classical
              statistics approach the corresponding long run frequencies and the degrees of
              belief of subjective Bayesians approach the same number. To find a measure that
              will provide a meaningful evaluation of these treatments of uncertainty, we
              must look, not at the long run, but at the short or intermediate run.

Our
              project attempts to develop such a measure in terms of short or intermediate
              length performance. We represent the effects of practical choices by the
              outcomes of bets offered to agents characterized by various uncertainty
              management approaches.

We focus on only two treatments of uncertainty, the
              subjective Bayesian treatment, and the frequency-based treatment developed by
              the author elsewhere. A number of parameters are identified that affect the
              results of this test, and their importance and effect will be examined. It is
              hoped that the general approach will prove applicable to the test of other
              approaches than these two.

