Title       : Dissertation Research: Measurement of Productivity in Car Assembly Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2000    
File        : a9906403

Award Number: 9906403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21440              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Wolak wolak@zia.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study differs in three important aspects from other studies that document
              or explain productivity differences at the plant or firm level.  First, firms
              are supposed to organize their production process in two stages. In the first
              stage, a firm decides what type of plant to build. This choice will mainly bear
              on the resulting allocative efficiency. In the second stage, a firm actually
              operates the plant conditional on the type built before. Performance in this
              stage can be interpreted as technical efficiency. The estimation procedure
              reflects these consecutive choices.

Second, a more accurate measure of
              productivity is obtained by supplementing the usual data on inputs and outputs
              with industry detail. Knowledge of the production process is used not to derive
              conclusions directly but to specify a more sophisticated model of production.
              Focus is on variables the actual decisions are made over.

Finally,
              productivity is not separated from the structure of production. In contrast
              previous studies have specified an input aggregator function for capital, labor
              and intermediate inputs, and added a multiplicative Hicks-neutral productivity
              term. Here technical efficiency is conditional on the type of plant chosen.
              That choice can be evaluated too and is interpreted as allocative efficiency.

