Title       : Brittle to Ductile Transition in Cleavage Fracture of Fe-3% Si Alloy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a9906613

Award Number: 9906613
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $293260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali S. Argon argon@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9906613
Argon

The important role of grain boundaries in polycrystalline
              steel in suppressing the brittle-to-ductile (B-D) transition temperature by
              promoting plastic relaxation processes is well documented.  However, the actual
              forms of this beneficial interaction are inadequately understood.  In recent
              fundamental experimental and theoretical considerations of thermally initiated
              B-D transition in the propagation of cleavage cracks, it is clear that repeated
              mechanical arrest of such cracks by grain boundaries promotes plastic
              relaxations that have distinct beneficial effects in suppressing the B-D
              transition temperatures.  Accordingly, a comprehensive research program is
              planned involving the experimental measurement of the fracture resistance of a
              broad selection of individual grain boundaries in large bi-crystals of a Fe-3%
              Si alloy, harvested from a large ingot containing a range of grain sizes. 
              Additional experimental research examines the thermally stimulated B-D fracture
              transitions in Fe-3% Si single crystals to develop a clear understanding of the
              dislocation mechanisms governing the transition.  Complementary experiments are
              planned on the topological features of cleavage fracturing through
              finer-grained polycrystalline panels.  These measurements of boundary cracking
              resistance and other noted aspects of percolation of cleavage fracture through
              a field of grains are incorporated into models of global cleavage cracking
              resistance.  The models should have immediate applicability in engineering
              practice for dealing with the B-D transition not only in the lower shelf region
              but also in the upper shelf region.
%%%
Transitions in fracture mode from
              brittle cleavage to ductile forms, or vice versa, in intrinsically brittle
              crystalline solids, particularly steels, is a phenomenon of both basic
              scientific interest and immense technological importance in assuring safety in
              structures.
***

