Title       : Multicorn as an Example of Regulation of Proteolytic Activities of Large
               Complexes on a Molecular Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2001       
File        : a9906434

Award Number: 9906434
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389260             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria E. Gaczynska gaczynska@uthscsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas HSC San Antonio
	      7703 Floyd Curl Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  782293900    210/567-2333

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Gaczynska
9906434
The aim of this project is to broaden our knowledge about
              molecular mechanisms regulating activities of large enzymatic complexes and to
              provide the basis for understanding the biological role of a new large
              protease.  Multicorn is the subject of this study, which is a newly discovered
              protease ubiquitous among Eukaryotes.  It is associated with the ability of
              cells to overcome the effects of partial inhibition of the proteasome, and may
              also play a role in the cell cycle progression. Controlled proteolysis is one
              of the key processes coordinating cellular physiology on the molecular level. 
              Irreversibility of proteolysis marks its unique position among other signals,
              like posttranslational modifications or oligomerization.  Large, multisubunit
              proteolytic complexes are especially well suited to serve as regulators because
              their actions can be precisely controlled by intracellular signals.  The
              proteasome is the best-known example of such enzymatic complexes of
              organelle-like status in the cell.  The proteasome is built from numerous
              exchangeable subunits, and its activities can be adjusted by attaching
              additional protein complexes. Despite numerous studies our understanding of
              such regulation of enzymatic activities is far from complete.  The very
              complicated structure of  the eukaryotic proteasome has thus far allowed only a
              relatively limited insight into mechanisms which govern proteasomal actions. 
              In  constrast, multicorn seems to be very well suited to the role as a model of
              a large enzymatic complex for studies on molecular regulation of its
              activities.  Preliminary data from the  P.I.'s lab strongly suggest that, at
              least partially, the multicorn activities may be modulated by its
              oligomerization.  The specific aims of this study are to:  I.  Clone the gene
              of the  fission yeast multicorn subunit and express it in homo- and
              heterologous systems.  II.  Study the  structural basis for functional
              differences between the oligomeric forms of the multicorn. III.  Identify
              catalytic centers and explore functional differences between oligomeric forms
              of the multicorn. To accomplish these goals, the multicorn from fission yeast, 
              Schizosaccharomyces pombe will be purified and biochemically characterized.  It
              was shown that the yeast multicorn exists in two stable oligomeric forms: 
              about 900 kDa and more than 4,000 kDa.  The two forms differ in their catalytic
              abilities and substrate specificities.  Both forms display peptidase activity,
              but only the large form is a proteinase.  Both forms have been found to be
              composed from a single 150 kDa polypeptide.  Multicorn activities and
              oligomerization status change depending on the physiological status of the
              cell. In the light of  the prominence of proteolysis in cellular physiology it
              will be very important to establish the modes of control of  the multicorn
              activities on the molecular level.  Results to be obtained from this study will
              contribute to better understanding of how large enzymatic complexes are
              regulated in and by the intricate web of cellular processes. It will have a
              broad impact on our understanding of how to manage the operation of complex
              biological catalysts, and how interplay of large "protein machines", like the
              multicorn and the proteasome, may affect each others' performance.
              





Proteolysis, or breaking down proteins to create proteins with new
              properties or to recycle the protein building blocks, is now considered one of
              the most important processes regulating the life of the cell.  Proteolysis is
              performed by  proteins called proteases, or proteolytic enzymes.  Many such
              enzymes act as large multisubunit complexes because this way their actions can
              be tightly regulated and physically separated from other vulnerable components
              of the cell.  Proteolysis, among other events, decides if the cell
              proliferates, if it overcomes the effects of environmental stress or internal
              abnormalities.  Explaining molecular mechanisms of proteolysis is extremely
              important for understanding the regulation of cellular physiology.  The aim of
              this project is to provide the basis for dissecting the actions and,
              ultimately, the biological role of a new large protease named the multicorn. 
              To reach the goal, the P.I. and her colleagues have purified and biochemically
              characterized the protease from fission yeast, and  have found that the
              multicorn exists in two stable forms of different size.  The unique feature of
              the multicorn is that, although the two forms are composed from apparently the
              same subunit, they differ in their abilities to break down proteins.  This
              property creates a potential for precise regulation of the actions of the new
              protease.  This is especially important because the amount and activity of the
              multicorn forms strongly depend on the physiological status of the yeast, which
              suggest that the enzyme plays a specialized role in the cell.  In this work,
              the molecular basis for the functional differences between the two forms of the
              multicorn will be established.  The knowledge gathered will contribute to
              better understanding of the role and actions of large proteases in the
              cell.




