Title       : Electron Transport in Archaeoglobus fulgidus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  2003    
File        : a9906433

Award Number: 9906433
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Hartzell Hartzell@UIdaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hartzell

Members of the domain Archaea thrive in extreme environments,
              including hydrothermal and anaerobic niches, that may represent the conditions
              on the earth when life originated.  Members of the genus Archaeoglobus are the
              only sulfate reducers in the Archaea and the only hyperthermophilic
              sulfate-reducers.  Sulfate-reducers are strict anaerobes that use sulfate as
              the terminal electron acceptor of dissimilatory sulfate reduction to generate a
              proton motive force.  This project uses a combination of biochemical and
              microbial genetic approaches to understand how Archaeoglobus fulgidus utilizes
              D-lactate as a sole source of carbon for growth and electrons for reduction of
              sulfate to hydrogen sulfide.  The sequence of the A. fulgidus genome includes a
              single gene, dld, predicted to encode D-lactate dehydrogenase, the
              membrane-associated enzyme that oxidizes D-lactate to pyruvate and transfers
              electrons to the anaerobic respiratory chain.  The dld gene is the central gene
              of five A. fulgidus genes that likely comprise an operon, which will be tested
              directly by mapping the start site of the dld mRNA.  Its upstream (noxA2; NADH
              oxidase) and downstream (abc, ABC transporter) genes may also encode products
              involved in D-lactate catabolism.  The genes encoding Dld and NoxA2 have been
              expressed in E. coli.  Dld, purified from E. coli, is thermostable and has
              D-lactate -specific dehydrogenase activity.  Purified NoxA2 also is stable and
              requires NAD for activity.  Purified Dld and NoxA2 will be characterized
              biochemically to identify cofactors and metals that may be involved in electron
              transfer.  Genetic techniques will be used to identify the critical amino acid
              residues of these enzymes that are involved in cofactor binding and
              oxidation-reduction cycles.   To determine if Dld and NoxA2 interact to form a
              complex, and to identify other proteins that interact with Dld, affinity
              chromatography and the yeast two-hybrid approach will be used.  A. fulgidus is
              the first sulfate reducer for which a complete genome sequence is available. 
              Starting from this sequence, biochemical and genetic approaches will provide
              powerful tools to reconstitute its unusual respiratory pathway of electron flow
              that initiates with D-lactate.

Sulfate-reducing organisms play critical
              roles in the environment by degrading and detoxifying compounds in sediments
              and waters. The cellular components used to eliminate these compounds are the
              same proteins that carry out energy production for the sulfate-reducer during
              growth.  Unlike organisms, including mammals, which use O2 as a sink for
              electrons during energy production, sulfate-reducers use SO4 as a sink for
              electrons.  This project is aimed at identifying the proteins that are involved
              in energy production in the sulfate-reducer, Archaeoglobus fulgidus and
              determining how these proteins interact with one another to permit the flow of
              electrons to sulfate.  A. fulgidus, a member of an ancient group of microbes,
              grows only at very high temperatures (83 C, 181 F).  The project will focus
              initially on the activity and properties of two proteins, lactate dehydrogenase
              and NADH oxidase.  These proteins are related to proteins involved in energy
              production from other single-cells organisms as well as complex organisms,
              including humans.  The information obtained through this research will help
              scientists understand which proteins are involved the essential process of
              energy production and how these proteins link to one another to control this
              universal, complex process. 



