Title       : Inhibitory and Facilitatory Processing in Image Segregation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1999     
File        : a9906063

Award Number: 9906063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Peterson mapeters@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Award Abstract
PI: Mary Peterson

One of the earliest steps in the process of
              perceiving the visual world is to segregate the visual input into figures and
              backgrounds. When two adjacent regions in the visual field share a contour, 
              one region is typically seen as the figure, and the other region appears to be
              the ground. Figures are endowed with a definite shape, whereas grounds are
              shapeless near the contours they share with figures. It has traditionally been
              assumed that figure-ground segregation is based on low-level cues, such as
              depth cues and configural cues (i.e., symmetry, convexity, enclosure or
              smallness of relative area). These low-level cues are thought to operate before
              memory representations are accessed. Contrary to the traditional view, recent
              research indicates that memories of object structure are accessed earlier in
              the course of perceptual processing than assumed on the traditional model.
              Furthermore, these object memories exert an influence on image segregation.
              These findings are consistent with a number of models that allow higher-level
              processes, such as those accessing memories of object structure, to influence
              processing at a figure-ground stage. The proposed experiments test the
              viability of a unique model that does not consider figure-ground segregation to
              be a stage in the hierarchy of visual processes. Instead, it considers
              figure-ground segregation to be one possible outcome of the interactions among
              early image segregation processes operating on both sides of a contour. The
              model entails facilitation between processes operating on the same side of a
              contour and inhibition between processes operating on opposite sides of a
              contour. In addition to accounting for the evidence indicating that memories of
              object structure can affect image segregation, this model explicitly accounts
              for three previously unexplored segregation phenomena. Those phenomena are: (1)
              objects can be recognized consciously only when they are depicted by figures,
              not when they are depicted by grounds; (2) grounds are shapeless; (3)
              figure-figure outcomes (in which the regions on both sides of a contour appear
              to have a definite shape) can be perceived, although figure-ground outcomes
              tend to be preferred. The experiments in the current proposal constitute a
              strong test of the inhibition proposed in this new model. 

The planned
              experiments use a priming paradigm to assess whether processes operating on
              regions ultimately determined to be grounds are first activated and then
              inhibited in the course of perceptual processing. Other experiments in the
              proposal explore the relationship between segregation-mediated inhibition and
              an attentional phenomenon, called negative priming. The proposed experiments
              promise to provide evidence that will be critical for distinguishing among
              competing models of how high-level processes affect the earliest visual
              processes -- those processes that are fundamental to perception and action. In
              addition, these experiments will integrate two formerly disparate areas of
              study -- attentional inhibition and image segregation.


