Title       : US-Turkey Workshop: Changing Nature of Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, June
               21-25, 1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a9906299

Award Number: 9906299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1999       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. M. White white@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adnan Akay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 5940,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9906299
White

Description: This award is for the support of a US-Turkey
              Workshop on the Changing Nature of Engineering to be held in Istanbul, Turkey
              in June 1999.  The US organizers are Dr. Robert M. White, Chairman of
              Electrical Engineering and Dr. Adnan Akay, Chairman of Mechanical Engineering
              at Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.  The Turkish
              co-organizer is Dr. Nilufer Egrican, Dean of Mechanical Engineering at Istanbul
              Technical University in Istanbul, Turkey.   Six topics have been suggested for
              the discussion in the workshop: engineering in a multinational company, the
              design process, changes in engineering curricula, lifetime and distance
              learning, increased mobility and diversity, and the shift to the services
              industry.  In addition, the Turkish side will make presentations on:
              engineering curricula in Turkey, the engineering profession in Turkey, case
              studies of major engineering projects, impact of foreign presence, major
              factors affecting engineering in Turkey, and the role of distance learning. 
              The workshop will develop a clear understanding of Turkey's innovation process,
              the process by which its engineers are trained, technology is commercialized,
              how intellectual property is protected, as well as identify barriers to
              collaborations on international engineering projects.  Also it will define how
              engineering practices in a developing country are changing so that the US
              engineering community might take steps to better interface with such
              countries.

Scope:  This project will support participation by US engineers
              and engineering educators in a workshop that addresses the rapidly changing
              nature of engineering education and profession as they serve industries and the
              public sector.  The meeting will provide a forum for exchanging information
              between the United States and Turkey, and for learning especially how Turkey, a
              developing country, is dealing with these changes in the engineering profession
              and curricula.  The US participants' list includes several eminent men and
              women who have significant records in engineering education and who have
              responsible positions in engineering societies, industry, and government.  The
              project will be of mutual benefit to the United States and Turkey as well as to
              participants who may come from central Asia.  The project fits well within the
              objectives of the Division of International Programs.

