Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Activism and the Cultural Politics of Scale: The
               Case of the American Indian Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1999    
File        : a9906888

Award Number: 9906888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4510               (Estimated)
Investigator: Don Mitchell dmmitc01@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Social movements take form and evolve in response to the complex interaction
              among many different geographic, political, cultural, and economic factors. 
              While the latter factors have been examined extensively, far less attention has
              been given to the geographic dimensions of social movements, particularly
              changes that occur when movements focus their attention on issues and locales
              of different geographic scales.  This doctoral dissertation research project
              will focus on the impact of space and geographic scale on the geographic
              activities and influence of the American Indian Movement (AIM) from its
              establishment in 1968 to the present.  Special attention will be given to AIM's
              transformation from a small organization focusing on a very local and specific
              set of issues in Minneapolis to a truly national organization addressing a
              broad range of American Indian concerns that gained international renown
              through its occupation of Wounded Knee, South Dakota, a place far more
              important for its political symbolism than its natural resources.  This project
              will explore the changing geography of AIM's activities from its founding to
              the height of its influence in 1973 and then through its decline in influence
              during the 1980s and 1990s.  Primary research will focus on archival materials,
              including those from AIM, the FBI, and local police and court records. 
              Attention also will be given to how the group's activities were represented
              through print and television media.  This project will contribute to
              contemporary theories of the role of boundaries and scale in the cultural
              politics of space, place, and social movements.  It will offer a deeper
              understanding of the spatial dynamics of American political activism in the
              late 1960s and early 1970s, thereby adding to understandings of relationship
              among culture, space, and political activism.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

