Title       : Nonlinear Inverse Scattering Methods for Three Dimensional Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9906651

Award Number: 9906651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Weng C. Chew w-chew@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906651
Chew

The previous support period under the five-year PYI grant plus
              a subsequent one-year and then three-year grant enabled the investigator to
              make significant progress in both inverse and forward scattering theory.  New
              nonlinear inverse scattering methods were developed to account for multiple
              scattering effects within the scattering object. The Born-iterative method
              (BIM) and distorted-Born-iterative method (DBIM) were developed that
              demonstrated the inversion of objects with contrasts as great as 10:1 and
              exhibited super-resolution on the order of 0.1 wavelengths for EZ (TM)
              polarized wave. Another new technique known as the local-shape-function (LSP)
              method was developed to perform inverse scattering on metallic scatterers, for
              HZ (TE) polarized waves, and variable density acoustic waves, where previous
              methods failed to produce a convergent solution due to extremely strong
              nonlinearities and Green's function singularity. More recently, the frequency
              hopping approach where large scatterers with high contrasts can be
              reconstructed, have been developed. Furthermore, preliminary three-dimensional
              inverse scattering result has been obtained
.
 The need to invert very large
              scattering objects stimulated research in fast forward scattering solvers.
              These fast algorithms solve the scattering problem exactly and achieve
              computational savings by exploiting inherent redundancies in the scattering
              calculations. The first of these are recursive algorithms (RATMA, RTMA) that
              solve the scattering problem valid for all incidence sources in 0(N2)
              operations by exploiting translational properties of wave phenomenon. The new
              algorithm (NEPAL) instead uses the surface equivalence principle resulting in
              an 0 (N1.5) algorithm that is amenable to parallel pro-cessing. This algorithm
              has been generalized to three dimensions. Recently, various fast iterative
              solvers have been developed that furnish the solution for one excitation in 0(N
              log N) operations and using 0(N) memory. They involve the use of fast multipole
              method, and various methods to diagonalize the translation operator.

The
              current proposal is to continue developing new nonlinear inverse scattering
              theo-ries with special emphasis on three-dimensional scatterers. The
              investigators plan to move away from the Born-type methods and exploit new ways
              of parameterizing the scattering object in order to achieve the best possible
              reconstruction. They will use their progress in fast forward scattering solvers
              as building blocks to speed up the inversion and solve much larger objects and
              three-dimension-objects. Other means of solving large objects, particularly
              objects buried in a slowly varying inhomogeneous background would be
              investigated as well. Finally, they wish to develop new experimental apparatus
              that can achieve high-fidelity measurements so that the super-resolution
              phenomenon can be verified experimentally.  
***  

