Title       : Reframing Rights: Constitutional Implications of Technological Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a9906834

Award Number: 9906834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila S. Jasanoff sheila_jasanoff@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick Schauer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,9123,9139,9179,9278,BIOT,EGCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Concepts of rights in the constitutions of contemporary democratic societies
              reflect understandings of human identity, liberty, property, and nature that
              predate the industrial revolution, let alone today's so called revolutions in
              information, genetic, and environmental sciences and technologies.  In
              addition, constitutional reasoning generally takes for granted the boundary
              between society and nature, or between law, norms, and rights on the one hand
              and science and technology on the other. Much of the literature on science,
              technology and the law is simplistically framed in terms of technological
              determinism. Thus, the law is seen as trying to bridge gaps and lags created by
              rapid scientific and technological advances. More generally, technology is seen
              as having impacts on taken-for-granted constitutional rights, which may need to
              be protected through judicial vigilance. This project examines the concept of
              rights from the standpoint of work in science and technology studies (S&TS).
              S&TS research has shown that the products of science and technology not only
              influence but also embed human norms and institutions. Technological artifacts
              such as ozone holes, genes, Dolly, smart bombs, computers, and the oncomouse
              are repositories of human commitments, reasoning, moral judgments, and social
              practices. The deployment of such artifacts engages with and reshapes our
              perception of rights at many levels, going far beyond formal constitutional
              law: for instance, by redrawing the boundary between human and non-human, by
              altering fundamental notions of identity, and by challenging settled
              expectations of privacy and autonomy. Legal scholarship should take better
              account of the complex ways in which scientific facts and technological
              artifacts interact with concepts of rights.

This three-year research and
              training program, based at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government,
              will train doctoral students, postdoctoral fellows, and faculty to reexamine
              the constitutional implications of scientific and technological change through
              interdisciplinary work in law, public policy, and S&TS. Particular attention
              will be given to explicit and tacit reformulations of rights conceptions around
              new developments in the areas of genetics, information, and the environment.
              The program will address both US legal developments and developments pertaining
              to the emergence of global constitutional norms. Theoretical work will be
              integrated with policy analysis in order to encourage more reflexive practice
              at the intersections of science, technology, and law. The program includes core
              seminars, a seminar in research ethics and public policy, and an annual
              research workshop. The program will be widely advertised to attract adequate
              diversity and quality in the applicant pool. NSF funds will be used to support
              two graduate students and a post-doctoral fellow each year over the three years
              of the award. Oversight of the project resides in a committee of faculty
              advisers that includes members with expertise in S&TS, law, ethics, political
              science, and the three areas of S&T covered by the grant. Results will include
              dissertation projects and scholarly as well as policy relevant publications,
              outreach via popular publications and practitioner workshops, a project
              website, the development and placement of sophisticated professionals in this
              field, and new curricula. The program will also serve as a catalyst for an
              emerging program in law, S&TS, and public policy based at the KSG. Together,
              these activities will promote the integration of S&TS as a field of study at
              Harvard.

