Title       : Early Modern Atomism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9906126

Award Number: 9906126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116398             (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Newman wnewman@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will address the role played by scholastic theories of matter,
              particularly those emanating from alchemy, in the formation of early modern
              atomism. Since the seventeenth century marks the period when corpuscular
              matter-theories first acquired a detailed experimental component, and since
              much of the evidence was drawn from existing chemical theory and practice,
              there is a compelling need for scholarship to address the particular debt of
              early modern atomism to alchemy. From the late Middle Ages, alchemists had been
              professing a theory that metals and minerals were composed of "minimal parts"
              or corpuscles at the microlevel. This alchemical theory was itself partially
              dependent on Aristotelian concepts of matter which it passed on, in modified
              form, to central figures in the formulation of the seventeenth-century
              "mechanical philosophy," such as Robert Boyle. As the P.I. has elsewhere
              argued, Boyle's corpuscular theory of matter was heavily influenced by the work
              of Daniel Sennert, a professor of medicine at the University of Wittenberg.
              Sennert, in turn, was an important intermediary in the transmission of late
              medieval alchemical corpuscularism, as found in the thirteenth-century Summa
              perfectionis of "Geber." The current project will therefore consist of a
              thorough analysis of Sennert's corpuscular theory and its sources. This will
              include a short visit (three weeks are projected) to Germany, in order to
              determine if any manuscript or archival materials of Sennert's remain there.
              The bulk of the project, however, will consist of a close reading of Sennert's
              extensive works - in their various editions. Since Sennert adopted atomism only
              after publishing several works, and made important modifications to his matter
              theory in successive editions, it is imperative to gather microfilms of as many
              versions of his works as possible - a task already begun several years ago by
              the applicant. This research will result in a new understanding of the forces
              that led early seventeenth-century thinkers such as Sennert suddenly to abandon
              the hallowed peripatetic notion that matter was a continuum in favor of
              atomism. Since Sennert and his generation provided the direct foundation upon
              which the "mechanical philosophers" would build, an explanation of his voile
              face would cast important new light on the origins of modern science.
