Title       : Causal Modeling, Causal Inference, and Causal Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a9906565

Award Number: 9906565
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Twardy ctwardy@alumni.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Korb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
SES 99-06565 - Charles R. Twardy (Indiana University)
"Causal Modeling,
              Causal Inference, and Causal Perception"

Under the auspices of this grant,
              the Principal Investigator will conduct a two-year training and research
              fellowship at Monash University (Clayton, Victoria, Australia) to learn the
              techniques of Bayesian network modeling so that he can extend his
              investigations into causality, causal inference, and scientific
              methodology.

The Principal Investigator will employ Bayesian network models
              to represent human cognition in the context of argument generation and
              analysis, and to model how humans learn causal networks (including deviations
              from theoretically normative inference). He will then analyze the implications
              of this work for causal perception, causal judgment and causal reasoning in
              scientific inquiry. Bayesian network models are a unified and more powerful
              alternative to several mainstream analyses of causation: they naturally
              accommodate complex causal interactions and progressive causal inference. This
              proposal seeks to extend the domain of these models to provide a method for
              more thoroughly testing or analyzing human causal induction than has been
              available in the philosophical or psychological literature.

The leading
              account of causality in the philosophy of science, CQ theory, may be able to
              provide an ontological solution to Hume's problem, but it does not deal with
              Hume's profound worries about human causal induction. Bayesian theory is one of
              the leading methods of dealing with inductive inference, and Bayesian networks
              are being employed specifically to represent causal networks. The Principal
              Investigator proposes to combine causal insights from Bayesian modeling theory,
              cognitive psychology, and the philosophy of science to provide a unified theory
              of human causal inference. This proposal involves training the Principal
              Investigator in the methods of Bayesian network modeling, and then applying
              Bayesian models in ways analogous to the work the Principal Investigator
              recently completed to combine psychological and philosophical accounts of
              causal perception and causal judgment. This will provide the Principal
              Investigator with the solid technical foundation for continuing philosophical
              inquiry in causation and methods of scientific discovery.

