Title       : Collaborative: Mapping Behavior as a Cultural Universal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a9906418

Award Number: 9906418
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83015              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Stea ds34@swt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marites F. Pinon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Texas State U
	      
	      San Marcos, TX  78666    512/245-2111

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This ongoing program of research probes the hypothesis that mapping behavior is
              displayed by essentially all people in all cultures.  More specifically, the
              theory suggests that the making and use of map-like models (defined as material
              artifacts or groups of artifacts which represent geographical landscapes as
              viewed from overhead, reduced in scale, and depicted with abstract or iconic
              signs) should be characteristic of all contemporary and past cultures.  In
              addition, an untaught ability to make, read, and use simple map-like models
              should be displayed by very young children in all cultures. Four experiments
              will explore preschool-age children's spatial knowledge and mapping ability.
              Study 1 examines 4-year-olds' ability to construct map-like landscapes using
              small models depicting environmental objects, comparing individual and group
              behavior and determining whether modeling behavior precedes ability to express
              such behavior using natural language. Study 2 replicates Study 1 in a
              contrasting cultural setting--a peasant village in Oaxaca, Mexico.  Study 3
              will determine whether Texan children aged 4 and 5 can use a simple iconic map
              to solve a navigation problem in a 1-hectare-size macro-geographic landscape.
              Study 4 will discover whether 4- and 5-year-olds in Chicago can understand the
              semantic dimension of mapping by testing these children's ability to interpret
              and use self-defined map-signs in landscape modeling. A fifth, supplementary
              study extends earlier exploration of archaeological and ethnographic reports of
              mapping behavior. 
In order to find out how people manage to understand, cope
              with, and get around in large, geographical environments, it is necessary to
              study the way people of all ages and cultures make and use map-like models
              (depicting the landscape as though seen from overhead).  The study of this
              phenomenon is cross-disciplinary, extending from geography (cultural ecology)
              to environmental psychology and anthropology. Until recently it was widely
              believed that children do not acquire this ability until the age of about 7 and
              that the mapping ability is not found everywhere. In more recent research, the
              present investigators and others have shown, in several contrasting cultures,
              that 3-5-year-old children possess significant map-making and map-using
              abilities.  Preschool-age children can read aerial photographs without
              instruction and can construct map-like landscapes in play. This project
              proposes to go well beyond earlier research to examine other dimensions of
              young children's mapping. It involves study of social and cultural factors in
              young children's mapping, of the relation of mapping to ordinary language and
              to the use of abstract map-signs, and of young children's utilization of
              semi-pictorial maps in wayfinding in large environments. The research will
              contribute to understanding the development of environmental cognition and
              behavior in young children. It should have considerable significance for
              primary education in the sciences: if preschool children already possess basic
              mapping abilities, then kindergarten and early elementary education can be
              broadened, and enriched, to encompass macro-scale, map-scale, concepts and
              theories in physical, biological, and social science (for instance, land and
              water forms, ecosystems, urban structure, and location systems), concepts that
              are usually taught only to much older children under the wrong assumption that
              children of school-entering age do not have natural mapping abilities.

