Title       : SGER: Thin Film Electronics on Plastic Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1999     
File        : a9906622

Award Number: 9906622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vikram L. Dalal vdalal@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906622
Dalal
 
Thin film electronic devices on plastic substrates are likely
              to become a very important class of new devices.  Among the many applications
              of such devices are conformal flat panel displays, organic LED'S, very large,
              fault-tolerant memories for terrestrial and space applications, hybrid imagers
              and cameras based on combinations of amorphous and crystalline materials,
              strained-layer superlattice light emission devices in Group IV materials,
              chemical sensors, self-powered sensors, photovoltaic devices etc.  To fabricate
              many of these devices, it is essential that the crystallinity, composition,
              electronic properties and stability of the materials and device interfaces be
              controlled in-situ during growth.  To-date, various approaches, such as
              post-deposition laser recrystallization, have been used to fabricate devices on
              plastic films.  But these approaches are not always feasible for large areas,
              nor do they easily allow mixed-phase [e.g. amorphous/crystalline] or
              superlattice devices to be made.  Therefore, the critical research need for all
              these novel devices is the ability to deposit materials of high electronic
              quality, stability and controlled crystallinity directly on plastic substrates.
              In this exploratory proposal, we suggest using a well-controlled growth
              process, reactive plasma beam deposition, to deposit high quality Group IV
              materials, such as microcrystalline and polycrystalline Si, (Si,Ge) and (Si,C)
              directly on plastic substrates and then measuring their electronic properties. 
              The deposition process uses a well controlled beam of reactive ions, such as H,
              produced using an ECR reactor, to control crystallinity, alloy composition and
              grain size during growth so that no post-processing laser crystallization is
              needed.  The objective of the exploratory program is to develop the basic
              understanding and process control needed for depositing high quality, stable
              Group IV devices on plastic substrates in later years.

The program has a
              strong educational component, involving graduate students, post-Doctoral
              scientists, and undergraduate students.

The industrial impact of the program
              is likely to be significant.  The devices mentioned are the cutting-edge
              technology for display industries, photovoltaic industries, sensors, new
              generation of imagers etc., and are likely to enjoy very high growth
              rates.
***



