Title       : Discrete Choice Estimation of Workers' Valuation of Fringe Benefit Dollars and
               Employee Choice among Employer Health Insurance Plans
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9906229

Award Number: 9906229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46135              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Beeson Royalty   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SBR-9906229
Royalty

ABSTRACT

This study will develop a new approach to
              estimating workers' valuation of fringe benefits and produce estimates of how
              much workers value fringe benefits dollars relative to wage dollars. The
              proposed framework solves many of the problems encountered in previous attempts
              to estimate workers' valuation of fringe benefits, most notably the bias caused
              by fixed individual-specific unobservables. This study will also estimate the
              value to workers of the characteristics of employer-provided health insurance
              plans with new nationally representative data. Additionally, the study will
              extend that model to estimate the loss of consumer surplus that may be
              associated with the contraction of the health plan choice set of many workers
              that has occurred as employers have increasingly chosen to offer employees only
              a choice among HMO's rather than among both HMO's and traditional
              fee-for-service plans.

To accomplish these goals, the researcher will first
              develop the discrete choice model that represents workers' valuation of fringe
              benefits. The model will use choices of workers who are offered a menu of
              fringe benefits with different prices to the employee to understand how much
              workers are willing to pay in foregone wages for additional benefits. One major
              advantage of this approach is that the comparison among observed alternatives
              that determines which plan a worker will choose differences away unobservable
              individual fixed effects believed to be the main problem in estimating the
              standard compensating differentials hedonic model. The researcher will compare
              the discrete choice model of fringe benefits to the hedonic model traditionally
              used to analyze this question and assess advantages and disadvantages relative
              to the traditional model. Second the analyst will develop a model of health
              plan choice and a methodology to quantify possible losses in consumer surplus
              due to contraction in, or other changes to, workers' choice sets in the wake of
              large changes in firm health benefit offerings in recent years. The proposed
              model will value contractions in workers' health plan choices using
              cross-worker differences in available choice sets using a method similar to
              that developed by Trajtenberg (1989) to value year-to-year increases in
              consumer surplus that occur as consumers' choices increase as product
              innovations occur. Third, the researcher will prepare data from the Medical
              Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) Household Component and the MEPS Insurance
              Component and merge the two to construct a dataset with which to estimate these
              models. The merged data will include individual and family demographic and
              health data, employment, income and other important worker characteristics, as
              well as firm-level data provided by workers' firms, including information on
              the health plans offered by the firm and which of the offered plans was chosen
              by this worker. Last, the analyst will use these data to estimate both proposed
              models.

The study will make a contribution both methodologically and
              empirically. Methodological advances include the development of an alternative
              to the hedonic model for estimating workers' preferences for fringe benefits
              and the adaptation of the model of Trajtenberg to a different setting. The
              estimates obtained will be useful in policy evaluation of many sorts. Estimates
              of workers' valuation of fringe benefits are necessary to evaluate policies
              such as mandated employer-provided health insurance and tax incentives for
              fringe benefits. Estimates of the value of health coverage provisions and
              variety of health plan offerings will contribute substantially to the current
              debate in Congress on how to regulate the managed care industry.


