Title       : PPD: User Friendly Exhibits: Designing Accessible Exhibits for Science Museums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2002    
File        : a9906095

Award Number: 9906095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $467921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Middlebrooks smiddlebrooks@astc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assn of Science-Tech Ctrs
	      1025 Vermont Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  200053516    202/783-7200

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   In 1997, the Association of Science-Technology Centers (ASTC) launched an
              initiative to familiarize its member institutions with the challenges and
              opportunities for better meeting the needs of persons with disabilities and, in
              particular, young people with disabilities.  The proposed project "User
              Friendly Exhibits: Designing Accessible Exhibits for Science Museums" is an
              information dissemination project that will help make science museums more
              inviting places for persons with disabilities by fundamentally changing the way
              science museums are developed and tested.  Over the three years of this
              project, ASTC will conduct a series of six Regional Training Workshops and
              three workshops prior to the ASTC annual conference to train exhibit design
              professionals working in science museums and science-rich institutions in ways
              to make exhibits accessible to persons with disabilities.  Participation will
              be drawn from ASTC member institutions as well as science-rich institutions
              represented by four national profession organizations.  An estimated 330
              exhibit planners from 100 science museums will receive this training, making a
              long-term impact on the infrastructure of exhibit design in the science center
              field.  Faculty for the workshops will be drawn from more than 50 individuals
              with personal and professional experience with disabilities who were contacted
              by ASTC in the course of work on a 1997 NSF planning grant to create an
              information clearinghouse for accessible museum practices on ASTC's web page.

                  Science museums provide science enrichment activities for well over 12
              million school children each year, as well as home schoolers, summer program
              participants, and teenage explainers and assistants.  The exhibits and programs
              of science centers and museums, planetariums, nature trails, zoos,
              collocations, and school and family programs support multi-m661, experiential
              learning that accommodates different learning interests.  ASTC is the world's
              largest organization of science museums.  Its annual conference is the largest
              professional gathering for people working in a field dedicated to fostering
              curiosity and opportunities for exploring the world, enhancing a learning
              process throughout life.

