Title       : Scientific Culture and the Making of the Industrial West: Part Two
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9906044

Award Number: 9906044
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret C. Jacob mjacob@history.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9149,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
SES 99-06044 - Margaret Jacob (UCLA)
"Scientific Culture and the Making of
              the Industrial West:  Part Two"

The approach presented in Part II of the
              study of scientific culture and its role in industrialization expands
              significantly upon the models and insights, as well as it advances the
              chronology, laid out in Scientific Culture and the Making of the Industrial
              West (Oxford UP, 1997). That book explored the period before 1800, before the
              term "industrial revolution" became part of common speech. It examined
              situations throughout northern and western Europe where the goal was profit and
              actors were either unaware, or dimly aware, of their participation in what
              would be seen in retrospect as a movement with enormous historical
              implications. By 1800 that naivete had largely disappeared; this project covers
              the period from 1800 to 1830.

By the first decade of the nineteenth century
              state bureaucracies throughout Western Europe had become deeply concerned about
              the British lead in industry and the need to compete. In their concern the
              French revolutionaries led the way. Astute observers believed that having a
              population educated toward industrial activity and accepting of its
              consequences, made for profit and national wealth. Did some regions of northern
              and western Europe instill that message more effectively than others? If so,
              why did they? Can their efforts be tied to achieving earlier, rather than
              later, advances in industrial activity of a mechanical sort? How did the
              educational systems of the period from 1800 to the 1 830s change under the
              impact of a growing awareness of industrial development? How and when does
              curricular content, both scientific and ideological, change in the period? A
              set of related questions inform the first set of questions: How do would-be
              entrepreneurs perceive what they must know and value in order to succeed? Are
              there national differences, even between the Dutch and the Belgians --
              particularly before and then after 1830 when The Netherlands and Belgium are
              once again separated -- as to how to approach economic development? Do
              differences in religion matter, particularly in the Low Countries where
              Catholics and Protestants are so closely interspersed, or in France where
              tensions between Catholic educators and secularists were endemic to the period
              from 1800 to the reforms of the 1830s and beyond? We do not have a detailed and
              comparative picture of the science and mathematics being taught in the daily
              curricula of primary and secondary schools in English, Dutch/Flemish and
              French-speaking Europe. Case studies of clerical and non-clerical schools,
              colleges and academies in all four countries are proposed as one key element -
              but by no means the only element - in the research here proposed. Attention
              also needs to be paid to the inculcation of ideologies about time, work and
              social prestige as instilled by textbooks and teachers. We need to know more
              about the informal sources of industrial education, for workers and employers,
              and especially about the role of women in that process. In particular voluntary
              associations in all four countries need to be examined. For example, in
              Middleburg in The Netherlands the PI has discovered the records of a scientific
              society for women that met for more than 100 years beginning in 1785. One goal
              of one year of the project will be the production of a monograph about the
              first women's scientific society in the West. Throughout the three-year project
              comparative questions will dominate the research agenda. Did markedly
              industrial areas like Birmingham, Lille, or Liege put in place a different set
              of informal societies and formal educational practices from what can be seen in
              markedly under-industrialized areas like East Anglia, or Maastricht, or the
              region around Cahors? Can differences in curricula be found between Flemish and
              French-speaking areas of Belgium? Are cultural factors at work in creating the
              disparity in wealth evident by 1830 between various geographic and linguistic
              regions?


