Title       : Formulating Redesign Strategies for Product Evolution: A Proactive Approach to
               Managing Technological Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9906265

Award Number: 9906265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Satyandra K. Gupta skgupta@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana S. Nau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O. Ball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program and GOALI, this research focuses on the
              development of an intelligent product representation for evolvable designs that
              can determine when new innovation indicates that a change in a previous
              decision is warranted. Deciding when to redesign a product is one of the most
              important decisions made by any company.  Incorrect redesign timing can lead to
              a variety of problems and poor market response. Current strategies for deciding
              when to redesign products are usually ad hoc in nature, and may result in a
              significant lag between the time a technological innovation occurs and the time
              when it is successfully incorporated into a product design. 

The researchers
              are developing decision-making models that will work on intelligent product
              representations and generate suggestions for redesign These decision making
              models perform a detailed trade-off analysis whenever technological or business
              constraints change in the intelligent product representation. These models
              incorporate decision variables, design constraints, and evaluation criteria
              that have led to the decisions currently in use. The project will develop a
              multi-disciplinary course sequence that will incorporate the latest advances in
              the management of technology area into engineering and business curriculum.  

