Title       : Late Quaternary Variations in Sediment Provenance and Ice Sheet Dynamics: NE
               Sector of the Laurentide, Innuitian and the W/NW Margin of the Greenland Ice
               Sheets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  1999    
File        : a9906812

Award Number: 9906812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97667              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Lang Farmer farmer@terra.colordao.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Andrews  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Jennings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-99-06812
Farmer

The Principal Investigators will use
              neodymiun, strontium, and lead isotopic data, and clay-silt mineralogy from
              glacial marine sediments in the NW Atlantic Ocean to study Laurentide and
              Greenland ice sheet dynamics on time-scales of the last full glacial cycle. 
              Their basic premise is that the mineralogic and isotopic compositions of the
              less than 65 micron fraction from glacial marine will allow them to reconstruct
              the extent of the various ice sheets and their internal dynamics.  

The
              project consists of two main parts.  First, they will determine the isotopic
              and mineralogic character of fine-grained glacial sediments delivered to the
              marine environment at various "point" sources of icebergs in Baffin Bay and the
              Labrador Sea.  Samples for the point source characterizations exist within
              their present core and surface sediment sample collections, or are available
              from the Core Repository Facility at Geological Survey of Canada.  These data
              are critical for downcore studies of glacial sediment provenance because they
              will indicate if 1) sediments derived from a given portion of the ice sheets
              are mineralogically and isotopically distinct, and 2) if each iceberg source
              has provided isotopically and mineralogically homogeneous sediment.  These
              characteristics must be established before any attempt to reconstruct ice sheet
              dynamics from sediment provenance studies can be attempted.

In the second
              part, the Principal Investigators will undertake specific downcore studies on
              three existing cores to determine changes in sediment provenance, style of
              deposition, phasing of ice sheet reactions, and ice sheet/ocean interactions. 
              These cores have been selected along the iceberg transport trajectory and
              should show increasingly complex mixtures of sediment from different source
              regions.  The cores selected are from northern Baffin Bay (HU77029-006), from a
              site east of the mouth of Hudson Strait (HU97048-007), and, south, from
              Cartwright Saddle on the central Labrador shelf (HU87033-017).  Their analyses
              will concentrate on H139704S-007 because it is a new core.  They will expand
              the chronological control by obtaining additional radiocarbon dates and
              undertake a full suite of sedimentological, foraminiferal, stable isotopic, and
              provenance studies.  This will enable them to compare data in this core with
              data from present studies and to compare downcore mineralogic and isotopic
              variations to those of the glacial "point" sources.   This comparison should
              provide new insights into changes in the extent, configurations, and dynamics
              of ice sheets around the NW Atlantic over the past 50 thousand years.  


