Title       : Advanced Process Diagnosis with Principal Components and Parity Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a9906250

Award Number: 9906250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janos J. Gertler jgertler@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Implicit modeling approaches to fault detection, which are based on
              multivariate statistical methods, have attracted great interest in chemical and
              process engineering.  Principal component analysis (PCA) has been successfully
              applied to model the normal process behavior.  PCA can significantly reduce the
              dimension of the model for large-scale systems with correlated process
              variables.  Unusual events are then detected by referencing the observed
              process variables against this model.  However, PCA does not specifically
              address the important issue of fault isolation.  One of the PI's of this
              proposal has extensive experience with the development and application of PCA
              techniques.

Analytical redundancy methods rely on explicit models of the
              monitored plant.  Based on the model, consistency (parity) relations are
              derived which return residuals indicative of faults.  The parity relations may
              be so designed ('structured') that their residuals follow clear patterns in
              response to various faults, thus facilitating fault isolation.  While parity
              relations were developed for linear systems, most results are applicable to a
              broad class of nonlinear systems as well.  One of the Pi's has played a
              substantial role in parity equation research and successfully applied this
              method to car engine diagnosis.

To explore the above idea, the PI's
              submitted a proposal previously.  The proposal was funded at a reduced level,
              with the stipulation that the feasibility of the approach had to be first
              demonstrated, with special focus on nonlinear systems, before more substantial
              funding could be made available.  In the present proposal, we report the
              results of the first year of investigations which, in our view, proof the
              viability of the approach.  We also outline our plans for the continuation of
              the work.  The first-year effort has brought two major results, both documented
              in several research publications.

Based on the very encouraging results, we
              propose to continue the research of structured PCA, along the following
              lines:
1. Further studies of the polynomial nonlinear modeling approach,
              including a search technique for the best structured polynomial model set and a
              study of the non-uniqueness of partial models with insufficient degree.
2. The
              extension of structured PCA to discrete dynamic system models.
3.  Generalized
              likelihood ratio testing of PCA residuals utilizing their directional
              properties.
4.  The generation of structured and directional residual sets,
              both in the PCA and in the parity relation framework, which are optimal for
              some information criteria.
The above activities will be supported with
              extensive simulation, both on the Tennessee Eastman simulator and on the
              simulation of a larger vinyl acetate process.





