Title       : Gordon Research Conference on Solid State Studies in Ceramics; August 1-6, 1999;
               Kimball Union, NH
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9906391

Award Number: 9906391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Liselotte J. Schioler                   
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn A. Bonnell   (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Craig Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The solid state ceramics community has traditionally focused its attention on
              optimization of a limited number of physical properties in a broad range of
              ceramic materials.  The scope and depth of fundamental science of processing is
              very impressive and commercial successes, which have grown out of this
              research, are becoming increasingly common. The ceramics research community now
              has a fundamental science for the relation to microstructural development and
              the relation of microstructure to strength and toughness through
              micromechanics.  The community will convene at the Ceramics Gordon Conference
              on Solid State Studies in Ceramics in the summer of 1999 and turn the its
              attention and skills towards new frontiers for the applications of ceramics. 
              The goal of the conference is to establish, within a framework of the emerging
              technologies, outstanding critical fundamental scientific issues and approaches
              to their resolution. To accomplish this goal, new formats are being introduced
              to the conference:  invited posters on a pre-selected topic, 2 panel discussion
              where senior people present short outlines of the topic, and then take
              questions from the floor, a poster competition, and a focussed session on
              education.  Approximately 100 people will attend the conference, including
              faculty, students, industrial and government scientists, and government program
              officers.
%%%
Ceramics are being utilized in novel devices and new
              applications.  Some of the development and utilization of ceramics in such
              emerging technologies has occurred outside of the traditional community of
              solid state ceramics.  Emerging technologies often involve the use of ceramics
              at very small length scales.  Current examples include miniaturization in
              consumer electronics, biochemical sensors, satellite communications,
              ferroelectric computer memories.  This conference will help define the critical
              research areas to enable these emerging technologies.
***
