Title       : PPD: Multisensory Calculus for Visually Impaired People
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9906115

Award Number: 9906115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Kress   (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert A. Blank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen L. Gourgey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Computer Science Department of the College of Staten Island, in
              collaboration with the Computer Center for Visually Impaired People of Baruch
              College, proposes a Research and Development Project over the course of three
              years.  It will produce a set of teaching materials including audiotactile
              graphics to enhance access by visually impaired college students to the
              quantitative disciplines in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology
              (SMET).  The computer assistive methodology for the project has been developed
              at the participating institutions and deployed in the development of a
              precalculus unit on coordinate geometry.  The specific goal is to further
              extend access to the calculus as rapidly as feasible.  In the three-year
              period, the project will create computer assistive course materials for basic
              differential and integral calculus for functions of a single variable and as
              much of the applications as time and resources permit.  In each year, the
              deliverables will consist of text coupled with more than forty graphics plates
              captioned in both audio and braille with supporting computer files.  The text
              will be produced on audio tape, as ASCII text to be read by a screen reader,
              and on CD-ROM.  There will also be a print text for sighted advisors and
              tutors.  Insofar as possible, the materials will be freely disseminated on the
              web sites of the participating institutions. The larger goal of the project is
              to enable students with visual impairments to read technical graphics directly
              with little dependence upon sighted assistance. The project is unique in
              deploying the technology to an extended course of study planned explicitly and
              in detail to meet the needs of students who are visually impaired.  The
              methodology can be used to incorporate graphical materials in any course at any
              grade level.  The general accessibility of SMET to people with visual
              impairments would be greatly improved by deployment of this project's
              techniques to all grades, K-16.  Although the specific materials of this
              project are developed with the needs of college students with severe visual
              impairments, they should be useable by anyone with the requisite background in
              elementary algebra and geometry at the secondary or higher level and with any
              degree of impairment.  Moreover, the core elements, text and graphics, of the
              course will not be specifically bound to the current state of the art in
              computer technology but will be designed so that they can be adapted to
              technology as it evolves.  The specific course content will cover at least the
              conventional first semester of a calculus in a SMET curriculum: differentiation
              of elementary functions, their compositions, and implicitly defined functions,
              with application to rates of change, maxima and minima, and sketching graphs:
              integration of elementary functions with application to calculation of area,
              volume, mass, arclength, and the like.  As feasible, such topics as numerical
              methods, techniques of formal integration, differential equations, and infinite
              sequences and series will be added.  
