Title       : MII: Software Engineering Research and Education Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9906590

Award Number: 9906590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499833            (Estimated)
Investigator: Deidre W. Evans evans@cis.famu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara F. Stoecklin  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2886,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9906590
Stoecklin, Sara 
Williams, Diedre D. 
Florida  A & M
              University

Software Engineering Research and Education Laboratory
              (SEREL)

This award contributes to strengthen Florida A & M University
              objectives:
Increase participation of minority students in research activities
              to stimulate students' interest in advanced degrees in computing and software
              engineering.
Strengthen instructional and research capabilities of the CIS
              Department.
To meet these objectives, academically promising students are
              recruited and tracked for participation in scholarships, internships,
              workshops/conferences, faculty mentored research, and pre-graduate school
              enrollment activities.  Serel,  a focal point for stimulating student research,
              will be enhanced with networks, computers, and server capabilities to further
              research in software engineering.  The award will also be used to prepare the
              CIS Department for CSAB accreditation.  Software Engineering methods,
              techniques, and tools will be developed further to:
Predict execution times of
              code segments by examining object code generated
Extend UML with Real-Time
              Architecture Specification (RAS) and Real-Time Computational Tree Logic
              (RTCTL)
Adapt spoken language dialogues allowing linguistic knowledge to
              evolve the dialogues
Build a system prototype to "compute with words" that
              provides users the freedom, to use their natural language protocols
Develop
              testing techniques and tools
Develop methods and algorithms for information
              retrieval from structured un-structured data sources using ontological
              knowledge domains 

While increasing the participation of women and
              minorities in graduate education, the project will facilitate, enhance, and
              intensify research in CISE areas.  Through this effort, FAMU is expected to
              develop further its computer and information science and software engineering
              research capabilities involving minority students in greater numbers, paving
              the way for the conferring of more doctoral degrees to under-represented
              groups, particularly African Americans and women in Computer Information
              Science and Engineering.  It is hoped that through these efforts, the nation
              might find a successful model that will help in building a better racially and
              ethnically balanced technological enterprise for the benefit of its present and
              future generations. 

