Title       : Collaborative Research: Advection and Population Dynamics of Calanus
               Finmarchicus in Mesoscale Eddies in the Barents Sea: A Quantitative Approach
               Using the Biomass-Spectra Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9906575

Award Number: 9906575
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Meng Zhou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9908079/9906757
Ashijan/Zhou

The Barents Sea contains a fishery rich in
              commercially important species such as capelin, polar cod, and herring.  The
              southern Barents Sea functions as a critical nursery area for the herring,
              which depend on zooplankton stocks during early life stages, and also supports
              populations of the planktivorous polar cod and capelin.  It has been suggested
              that Calanus finmarchicus, as an expatriate in Arctic waters, may not reproduce
              successfully or be capable of sustaining its populations.  The transport of
              zooplankton into the southern Barents Sea by the Norwegian Atlantic Current
              (NAC) and the Norwegian Coastal Current is an important mechanism to the
              Barents Sea ecosystem.   
To understand the spatiotemporal distribution and
              fate of zooplankton in the ocean, it is necessary to understand the interaction
              between advection, migration behavior, and population dynamics, especially at
              the mesoscale.  This interaction is most profound in polar regions because the
              internal Rossby Radius is on the order of 101 km.  Obtaining quantitative
              measurements of 3-dimensional advection and in situ population dynamics rates
              of plankton in a mesoscale eddy are daunting tasks.  Traditional sampling and
              experimental methods cannot resolve processes at mesoscales.  Acoustic
              instruments can resolve these scales, but cannot provide information necessary
              for traditional models to estimate population dynamics rates.  Optical
              instruments, such as the Optical Plankton Counter (OPC) or Video Plankton
              Recorder (VPR), can provide information on the size-distribution of zooplankton
              at high vertical and temporal resolution but have not been used for the study
              of zooplankton rate processes.  Theories and models describing rate processes
              in zooplankton based on size structure exist but have not been applied
              extensively.
The PI's of this project have synthesized survey strategies using
              new high-resolution sampling methods with new mathematical theories of
              population dynamics and objective analysis, yielding a quantitative approach to
              the study of advection, vertical migration, and population dynamics of
              zooplankton on unprecedented scales.  This project will undertake a critical
              test of this synthesis of theories and survey strategies in Tromsoflaket,
              northern Norway.   
Tromsoflaket is an important ecosystem located where the
              Norwegian Atlantic Current (NAC) bifurcates.  A permanent eddy is formed in
              Tromsoflaket between these two branches. The northeast-flowing branch of the
              NAC appears to be an important mechanism for transporting zooplankton
              productive shelf water farther northwards into the Barents Sea during the
              productive season.  In the vicinity of Tromsoflaket, a single species (Calanus
              finmarchicus) accounts for 95% of the copepod biomass in May and June.  A
              composition of mixed species is found in August and September.  This provides
              opportunities to test our new approach first in a simple case of a single
              dominant species, and then in a more complicated general case of mixed
              species.
The successful outcome of this research could lead to an
              understanding of how zooplankton population dynamics in mesoscale eddy systems
              support high trophic levels in Arctic regions, and represent an important
              advance in biological oceanography, opening up the possibility of
              high-resolution measurements of zooplankton dynamics in mesoscale eddies, not
              just distributions.

