Title       : Reconciliation or Retribution?: The Effect of Truth Processes on Perceived
               Fairness and the Legitimacy of Law
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  2000       
File        : a9906576

Award Number: 9906576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264501             (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Gibson jgibson@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to test hypotheses connecting the desire for
              retributive justice with the legitimacy of South African legal institutions.
              Based on a survey of the mass public, the PI will assess the implications of
              the truth and reconciliation process for mass perceptions of justice, for
              support for key legal and political institutions, for attitudes toward the rule
              of law, and ultimately for lawful behavior and willingness to acquiesce to
              outputs of policy-making institutions.  An important component of this project
              involves connecting "Social Identity Theory" (SIT) with theories of legitimacy
              and retributive justice. Recent research has posited that identity plays a
              crucial role in determining the consequences of perceived injustice. The
              racial/linguistic/ethnic diversity of South Africa provides a good context for
              testing these hypotheses.  It is unlikely that the lessons of the West readily
              translate into transitional and traditional societies like South Africa. This
              research will therefore provide a more general understanding of the ways in
              which injustice undermines the legitimacy of law. Ultimately, this research
              should provide insight into the ways in which perceptions of justice and
              injustice affect the consolidation of democratic transitions.


