Title       : Organic Carbon Remineralization Rates in Polar Sediments: Relationships Between
               Initial and Terminal Steps, and Microbial Community Composition, Distribution,
               and Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9906054

Award Number: 9906054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol Arnosti arnosti@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906054
Arnosti

Perrmanently cold temperatures are characteristic of the
              deep and polar oceans and therefore of the majority of ocean sediment yet our
              understanding of these environments is still limited. The suggestion that
              microbial processes in these environments are necessarily hampered by
              low
temperatures or combined effects of temperature and substrate
              (Reichardt,1987; Pomeroy et al., 1990; Wiebe et al., 1992) has recently been
              countered by a number of studies which have found evidence that microbial
              communities function as efficiently in polar as in temperate environments
              (Thingstad and Martinussen, 1991; Nedwell et al., 1993; Wheeler et al., 1996).
              The specific means by which polar microbial communities maintain their
              activities under conditions which inhibit their temperate counterparts,
              however, have yet to be investigated in detail. 

The objective of this
              project is to examine in detail the regulation and efficiency of organic carbon
              turnover by microbial communities in permanently cold Arctic sediments. The
              focus will be on the relationships between rates of the initial and terminal
              steps of organic carbon remineralization, the composition and size of the
              microbial community, the activities and distributions of individual members of
              the community, and the temperature responses of isolated organisms as well as
              of the net microbial community. The work will be carried out jointly by
              scientists from the Max-Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology (Bremen,
              Germany) and the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill. The project will use
              both newly-developed and well-established methods to characterize the
              physiology, activity, distributions, and temperature sensitivity of polar
              microbial communities, and to measure the rates of initial and terminal
              processes in organic matter remineralization. Field studies will be carried out
              principally in fjords near the west coast of Svalbard, in the Arctic Ocean.
              Extracellular enzymatic hydrolysis of macromolecules, the initial step of
              organic carbon remineralization, will be measured through the use of a
              newly-developed technique involving fluorescently-labeled polysaccharides
              (Arnosti, 1996). Polysaccharides will be the target macromolecules because they
              comprise a significant proportion of total organic matter, and recent studies
              (Amon and Benner, 1994) have highlighted  their importance in the global carbon
              cycle. The terminal step of organic carbon remineralization in anoxic marine
              sediments, sulfate reduction,  will be measured using well-established
              techniques (Jorgensen, 1978). Both the  initial and the terminal steps of
              organic carbon remineralization will be measured in intact sediment cores at in
              situ temperatures. In addition, both the initial and the terminal steps of
              organic carbon remineralization will be measured as functions of temperature in
              order to determine the net microbial community response. Sulfate-reducing as
              well as extracellular-enzyme producing bacteria will be isolated at low
              temperature and characterized, and their temperature sensitivities and growth
              responses will likewise be determined. A major goal of the proposed research is
              to develop molecular probes to determine the population composition of the
              sedimentary microbial community and distributions of specific organisms in
              sediments. In addition, the hydrolysis, transformation, and remineralization of
              a suite of polysaccharides will be investigated in bacterial enrichment
              cultures in order to provide information on specific hydrolysis mechanisms and
              carbon degradation pathways which cannot be obtained from intact sediments. A
              detailed study of the rates and temperature responses of the initial and
              terminal steps of organic carbon remineralization in anoxic polar sediments
              will effectively provide 'bookends' between which remineralization of a major
              portion of organic matter occurs, and will help delineate the boundaries of the
              microbial community response to environmental temperature. Polysaccharides
              constitute a high percentage of the organic macromolecules which ultimately
              fuel sulfate reduction; defining their contribution to terminal
              remineralization processes will bring closer the goal of a quantitative
              understanding of the sedimentary carbon cycle, with all of its complexities. By
              determining the physiology, activity, and population distribution of some of
              the organisms responsible for the initial and terminal steps of carbon
              remineralization, this research project will shed light on these important but
              insufficiently understood microbial communities. This study should lead to new
              insights into the factors controlling microbial activity and carbon cycling in
              permanently cold sediments, which comprise a major portion of the global
              sedimentary
environment.


