Title       : Scale of Local Production and City Size
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9906087

Award Number: 9906087
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Feinberg                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154756             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Holmes holmes@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      Preliminary results indicate the existence of a convex relationship
              between the level of wholesale activity in a city and the population of a city.
              Consider for example, grocery wholesaling. Preliminary results indicate that in
              cities with 200,000 people, an increase in population by one person is
              associated with an increase in grocery wholesaling volume of $1,100, whereas in
              cities with two million people, sales volume increases by $2,700.
        This
              project develops an explanation for this pattern based on increasing returns,
              product differentiation, and transportation costs. Models with these three
              ingredients have received substantial attention in the economics literature in
              recent years. This project will contribute to this important literature on the
              theoretical and empirical fronts.
        The proposal argues that the models
              in the existing literature do not deliver as an implication a convex
              relationship between output and market size, at least in the range above the
              threshold where output is positive. The literature has focused on an important
              margin, the relationship between market size and the variety of
              locally-produced differentiated goods. But the literature has ignored a second,
              perhaps equally important margin, namely the relationship between market size
              and the scale of production of a given, locally-produced differentiated good.
              This margin has been ignored because, in the Dixit-Stiglitz model of
              monopolistic competition (the workhorse model in the literature), the output
              level of locally-produced goods is invariant to city size. As population
              increases, local industry production expands by adding new varieties; the scale
              of production of any existing product remains fixed. This is an implausible
              implication. It is reasonable to expect that the output of existing products
              would increase. This project departs from the standard formulation to
              incorporate this second margin. Industry output at a location equals the
              product of the total number of varieties times the average scale of production
              of each product. As population in a city increases, both terms of this
              multiplicative product increase: variety expands and the scales of existing
              varieties increase. Thus there is a natural source of convexity in the
              relationship between industry output and market size.
        The project has
              three parts.
        Part 1 of the proj ect is to study the empirical
              relationship between wholesaling activity and city size in greater detail. It
              will be argued that the wholesaling sector is an excellent sector to study
              because it is one where the three key ingredients of economic geography models:
              product differentiation, scale economies, and transportation costs, are likely
              to be important.
        Part 2 of the project is to develop the theory
              discussed above.
        Part 3 of the project is aims to distinguish the
              implications of the proposed explanation for convexity from the implications of
              other potential explanations. A key implication of the proposed theory is that
              the more disaggregated the data, the less the convexity. Indeed, aggregation is
              the source of the convexity. In other explanations that are considered, a
              convex relationship should exist even with finely-disaggregated data. This
              provides a way to distinguish the theories.
        The project will use data
              from the Census of Wholesale Trade. The Census releases some geographic data on
              sales. However, the only way to get access to highly disaggregated data, at a
              fine level of industry and geographic detail, is to use the micro data
              available at the Center for Economic Studies at Census headquarters in
              Suitland, MD. A major component of the funding request is to finance access to
              this data. To date, economists have made extensive use of micro data from the
              Census of Manufactures but have not yet made use of micro data from the Census
              of Wholesale Trade. This project's use of this data can be expected to have
              spillover benefits for other projects that might use this data.

