Title       : Viruses in Marine Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9906989

Award Number: 9906989
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Garrison                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed A. Fuhrman fuhrman@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Planktonic viruses are the most abundant biological entities in the sea and have
              a tremendous potential impact on biogeochemical and ecological processes,
              primarily via their interactions with microorganisms. However, the data suggest
              a great deal of variability of the true impacts, and the reasons for this are
              unknown. The most likely factor seems to relate to the spatial and temporal
              variations in diversity of both the viruses and their hosts, because viruses
              are thought to have a narrow host range. Models and some limited field data
              suggest that viruses can exert substantial control over microbial diversity,
              and this also implies that host diversity has a feedback to viral activity and
              hence biogeochemical processes. Such diversity has been extremely difficult to
              study via traditional cultivation methods, but the past few years have seen
              remarkable strides in our ability to investigate microbial diversity, via
              several molecular biological methods that rely primarily on variations in 16S
              rRNA sequences. Also, just within the past few months a method has been
              published to investigate viral diversity in marine systems based upon total
              viral genome lengths. 

This project will use these approaches to study
              natural and experimental marine microbial systems, primarily from Southern
              California, with the goal of determining the interactions between virus and
              host diversity and the effects on general viral and prokaryotic processes. The
              specific study sites include the new oceanographic time-series station midway
              between Los Angeles and Santa Catalina Island, run by A. Michaels of the USC
              Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies. Samples will also come from Santa
              Monica Pier (relatively rich coastal seawater) and the dock at the USC Marine
              Lab on Catalina (pristine and relatively oligotrophic coastal waters). As part
              of the observation, or exploratory, component of the project, samples would be
              analyzed monthly for 2 years by a battery of methods, including the basic time
              series parameters of temperature, salinity, inorganic nutrients, chlorophyll,
              and dissolved oxygen.  The investigators will add measurements of bacterial and
              viral direct counts, frequency of infected bacteria, bacterial production,
              primary production, flow cytometry counts of cyanobacteria, as well as pulsed
              field gel electrophoresis of viral DNA for viral diversity, and prokaryote
              diversity assays with denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, terminal
              restriction fragment length polymorphism, length heterogeneity PCR, and
              fluorescent in situ hybridizations. Short-term, more frequent sampling and
              mesocosms will be used to examine population dynamics on the generation time
              scale. The various methods, each with its own advantages and shortcomings, will
              provide data on the interplay in nature between bacterial and virus activities
              and their diversity, suitable to test the hypotheses that viral diversity and
              overall activity are related to the diversity of the prokaryotic community. The
              experimental component of the project includes experiments examining the effect
              of viruses on altering the outcome of competition between native bacteria grown
              in filtered seawater, testing which taxa in natural mixed communities are
              susceptible to infection by their co-occurring viruses, and measuring the host
              range of clonal cultivated viruses (including noncultivated hosts in mixed
              natural communities). The project has the added value of a unique time series
              of microbial diversity at an easily accessible marine site, suitable for
              further analysis such as examining the links between diversity and stability in
              marine microbes.


