Title       : CISE MII: Institutional Infrastructure in Support of Computer and Software
               Engineering with Special Focus on Human-Computer Interface Research and
               Information Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9906600

Award Number: 9906600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1437770            (Estimated)
Investigator: Malek Adjouadi adjouadi@fiu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ana Pasztor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gustavo A. Roig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maria E. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Armando B. Barreto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida International Univ
	      11200 SW 8th Street
	      Miami, FL  33199    305/554-2000

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2886,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9900660
Adjouadi, Malek
Barreto, Armando
Pasztor, Ana
Martinez, Maria
Roig,
              Gustavo
Florida International University (FIU)

Development of an
              Institutional Infrastructure with Special Focus on Human-Computer Interfaces
              and Information Processing

This award enables the establishment of a
              multidisciplinary educational infrastructure with key innovations in
              engineering that promote an environment with effective learning strategies
              based on bridging instructional activities with research facilities. The award
              drives an ambitious program that focuses on FIU's strengths in the areas of
              human-computer interface research to include those persons with disabilities;
              key aspects of information processing (image and signal), including real-time
              applications; hardware-software integration; distributed processing, and data
              structures.  A supplemental instruction component is included to tackle head-on
              the failure rates in those SEM "high risk" courses (failure rates exceeding
              30%), which are critical foundations for Computer Science and Engineering.
              Within the proposed infrastructure, a comprehensive pipeline is established to
              attract more students in engineering and to redress at FIU the national trend
              showing limited graduation rates in Computer Science and Engineering.  The
              project also addresses the recruitment and retention of students from groups
              traditionally underrepresented in Computer Science and Engineering, namely
              women, Hispanics and African Americans. In addition to these educational
              enhancements, the impact of the project will be extended through expected
              research results in distributed processing, and image and signal processing,
              particularly in their application to human-computer interfaces for individuals
              with disabilities.

Through this effort, Florida International University is
              expected to develop further its computing science and engineering research
              capabilities involving minority students in greater numbers, paving the way for
              eventual conferring of more doctoral degrees, not only to Hispanic students,
              but also to African American, and disabled students. It is hoped that through
              these efforts, the nation might find a successful model that will help in
              building a better racially and ethnically balanced technological enterprise for
              the benefit of its present and future generations.
 

