Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Perception of Fairness in Social Exchange: A
               Comparison of Negatively and Positively Connected Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1999 
File        : a9906712

Award Number: 9906712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5775               (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Molm molml@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Research on perceptions of justice in social exchange settings has focused on
              negatively connected networks, i.e., exchange in one of an actor's
              relationships entails diminished or non-exchange in others. In positive
              exchanges, exchange in one of an actor's relationships implies exchange in one
              or more others. This doctoral dissertation research expands the scope of
              distributive justice theory by comparing justice evaluations in negatively
              connected and positively connected networks. A key distinction relevant to
              justice theory is that in negatively connected networks actors often must
              compete with one another for valued exchanges, whereas this is not the case in
              positively connected networks. This fundamental difference is expected to lead
              to differences in perceptions of fairness. In addition, this study proposes to
              examine behavioral reactions to injustice by investigating the use of
              punishment in both types of networks. The research design involves a 2x2x2
              factorial experiment with the factors being network connection (positive or
              negative), base of power (reward only or reward and punishment), and equality
              (equal or unequal). In order to insure control over manipulated variables,
              subjects will interact with computer simulated partners in 3-actor networks.
              The significance of this research project lies in the extension of the justice
              literature to incorporate positively connected networks. Furthermore, this
              dissertation presents the first study of an anticipated research program
              examining differences between negatively connected and positively connected
              exchange networks. 
