Title       : GOALI: SUPER-HIGH Q TE01 MODE DR FILTERS FOR WIRELESS PERSONAL COMMUNICATION
               SERVICES (PCS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9906242

Award Number: 9906242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pradeep P. Phule phule@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906242
Phule

This multi-university, cross-disciplinary industry-university
              collaborative (GOALI) proposal represents a well defined, coherent research
              plan to address some of the most significant scientific and technological
              challenges currently faced by the rapidly growing and highly competitive
              personal communication systems (PCS) industry. 

We propose a two-prong
              approach that involves a combination of experimental and modeling researches to
              address these key challenges facing the US PCS industry. The first objective of
              this GOALI program to undertake systematic experimental investigations to
              unravel the DR materials processing issues. We will elucidate the
              processing-microwave property relationships for barium magnesium tantalate
              (BMT), an archetypal DR material. The processing of resonator materials has a
              profound influence on the quality (as defined by the microwave Q Tf , K) of the
              DR. At the present time, the BMT materials used for PCS base station filters
              are quite difficult and expensive to process. The processing of these materials
              is not well understood and utilizes a trial-and-error approach. Processing
              routes for achieving super-high Q DR require several days of processing in
              oxygen ambient and often result in unpredictable and large variations in the
              microwave properties, especially the Q factors. We will carefully investigate
              the fundamental-issues related to the processing of BMT materials and identify
              innovative routes that will result in high performance DR with controlled and
              more predictable microwave dielectric properties. The second objective is to
              develop practical, realistic computer design tools for virtual prototyping for
              PCS devices such as filters, multiplexes, and power dividers. At the present
              time, although the device structures for PCS are witnessing increasing levels
              of complexity, the tools for designing these devices remain quite modest in
              terms of their capability. Therefore, we will develop sophisticated, precise,
              and efficient numerical techniques for modeling complex guiding and resonant
              electromagnetic structures. Mode matching techniques for the determination of
              generalized scattering matrices of structures, that cannot be described by a
              single coordinate system (e.g., cylindrical obstacles in rectangular
              enclosures), will be developed and used. Significant cost savings can be
              realized and a trial-and-error approach, that involves several iterations of
              building an actual prototype, can be eliminated using the virtual prototyping
              tools we plan to create.

PI's with considerable experience and complementary
              research are joining forces to conduct the proposed cross-disciplinary
              research. An active industrial collaboration (Trans-Tech, Inc. and Conductus
              Inc.) will constitute an important facet of this GOALI program. In addition to
              exchange of information and materials, frequent visits of students and faculty
              to industry (as well as reverse visits) will also positively impact this
              program. Special attention to the training of graduate, undergraduate, and
              high-school students, especially those from underrepresented minorities and
              tapping every conceivable opportunity to integrate our research into the
              appropriate academic courses will be some of the other important dimensions of
              this program.

In the area of wireless technology the competition from
              foreign countries is intense. In this regard, our proposal is timely and will
              ultimately help further enhance the competitiveness of the United States in the
              area of devices for wireless communications. Our program addresses some of the
              most compelling needs of the PCS base station filter industry. This program
              will catalyze the development of novel and improved processing routes for DR
              materials and DR based devices. The new knowledge we expect to generate will
              serve as a tool for future commercial development of improved and innovative DR
              based devices for PCS. In addition to PCS, our ideas/findings would be
              exportable to such other areas as tunable filters using planar structures in
              superconducting materials and magnetic materials. Therefore, in the long run
              our program will have a broader impact on the area of wireless communications
              and the educational training of the next generation of scientists and
              engineers.
***
