Title       : The Microstructure of Secondary Securities Markets: A Comparative Historical
               Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2001        
File        : a9906164

Award Number: 9906164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288214             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lance E. Davis led@hhs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry D. Neal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene N. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                             We propose examining the results of a natural experiment run by
              the world's leading stock exchanges from 1801 to 1971. In this period, the
              formal securities markets of London, New York, and Paris traded a broad set of
              similar securities while operating under distinctively different rules for
              governing their trading procedures and the flows of information among
              participants-what we call today the market's microstructure. We will combine a
              comparative with an historical analysis to assess the differential impact of
              alternative microstructures adopted by these markets, and to determine how and
              why they evolved.
	While the microstructures of established contemporary
              markets in the US, Britain, Europe, and Japan have been studied intensively, it
              is still not clear how market rules evolve and perform over long periods of
              time in different countries. In our study, we examine the effects of financial
              crises, war finance, changes in monetary regimes, improved communications
              technology, and the rise of new industries on the first emerging
              markets-London, Paris, and New York-from their formal beginnings at the
              beginning of the nineteenth century. By exploring how these earlier markets met
              precisely the challenges confronting regulators and practitioners in emerging
              markets today, we hope to show which forms of microstructure are most robust
              with respect to different legal, political, and financial systems.
           
                 The time span covered by our natural experiment encompasses three distinct
              epochs, each one capable of yielding distinctive insights relevant to today's
              emerging markets. In the first period, 1801 to 1880, the three markets dealt
              with the problems of war and postwar finance on a massive scale. The transition
              economies emerging today from the economic rigors of the Cold War have much in
              common with the new nations that arose in Latin America and continental Europe
              in that much earlier period. The classic gold standard period of 1880-1914 was
              a period when a largely free international capital market emerged. The
              innovative products created in that period resemble in intent and effect many
              of the financial products that have been developed in past decades to minimize
              exchange rate risk, country risk, and interest rate risk. The years from 1914
              to 1971 saw for all intents and purposes the abolition of free international
              capital markets. As individual governments respond differentially to the shocks
              of the global capital market today, we may expect to see many similar
              initiatives to constrain both capital movements and speculative activity.
    
                        Economic theory helps to assess the likely impacts on trading
              behavior given the different incentives and quality of information that can be
              generated by alternative microstructures. What is missing to date is a
              systematic analysis of the impact of different microstructures on capital
              markets operating under alternative regulatory and legal environments. By
              contrast with the brief experience guiding practitioners and students of
              today's emerging markets, we are able to specify the evolving microstructures
              of each market and assess their effects on market liquidity, efficiency,
              trading costs, and volatility over the course of a century and three-quarters.
              The results of our project will be useful to practitioners, regulators, and
              researchers confronting the problems of designing securities markets both in
              the transition economies and in the less developed areas of the world, not to
              mention redesigning markets in the advanced economies.

