Title       : Institutions for Managing the Commons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1999 
File        : a9906253

Award Number: 9906253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. Stern pstern@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An increasing number and range of scientists are focusing their attention on
              issues associated with common property resources, a topic significant not only
              for its intellectual challenges but also for its relevance to the maintenance
              of environmental quality, the survival of species, and the quality of life of
              residents around the world.  No single discipline has sufficient tools and
              perspectives to undertake a comprehensive analysis of the performance of
              diverse institutional arrangements to manage such common resources as fresh
              water, forests, the atmosphere, fisheries, oceans, and the pool of genetic
              resources.  Furthermore, considerable academic debate surrounds claims for the
              efficiency, equity, and sustainability of diverse institutional arrangements
              for coping with local, regional, and global commons in multiple sectors.  To
              further interdisciplinary work on this topic, a National Research Council study
              committee will prepare a synthetic report on "Institutions for Managing the
              Commons."  This report will be based on major papers presented by leading
              researchers from a range of relevant disciplines and will focus on six major
              issue areas:  (1) the emergence and sustenance of self-organized cooperation;
              (2) property rights, markets, and common-pool resources; (3) linkage across
              levels of organization as a problem for common-pool resource management; (4)
              heterogeneity and change among resource users; (5) uncertainty, variability,
              and shocks; and (6) a formal theory of individual behavior in commons dilemmas.
               Discussion of the papers will occur at special panels associated with the
              meeting of the International Association for the Study of Common Property in
              June 2000, with the final report scheduled for publication early in 2001.  This
              project will facilitate interaction among scientists from a broad range of
              disciplines, and it will provide a base for future research and policy analysis
              on common-pool resources, including a new multiyear research effort under the
              International Human Dimensions Programme. 

