Title       : Upgrading of Scanning Electron Microscope for Chemical and Morphological Feature
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9906361

Award Number: 9906361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Duke eduke@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906361
Duke

This award provides critical funding needed to complete
              modernization of the scanning electron microscope (SEM) laboratory at the South
              Dakota School of Mines and Technology.  In July 1999 the energy-dispersive
              X-ray detector on the SEM will be replaced with a new light-element detector
              and microanalysis system funded with institutional and laboratory resources. 
              The additional funding provided by this NSF grant will be used to add advanced
              chemical and morphological image analysis software and to replace the existing
              backscattered electron detector with a new TV-rate detector.  The upgraded SEM
              will combine state-of-the-art capabilities in imaging, X-ray microanalysis, and
              compositional and morphological image processing.
The new analytical and
              imaging capabilities will benefit basic and applied geoscience research in the
              following areas:  petrologic evolution of granites and pegmatites;  element
              redistribution during metamorphism; spectroscopic properties of rocks and
              minerals;  genesis of hydrothermal ore deposits;  systematics of marine and
              terrestrial vertebrate fossils;  fluid dynamics of wind-blown dust;  and
              applied geological remote sensing.  The principal benefits will derive from the
              efficiency of the new backscattered electron detector for examination of
              polished petrologic thin sections, the ability to generate mineral maps or
              modal analyses based on X-ray or backscattered electron signals, and the
              capability for rapid chemical and morphological characterization and
              classification of particles.  These improvements to the SEM facility are
              considered critical to the research and training activities in geology and
              geological engineering at SDSM&T.  Moreover, the SEM facility serves the entire
              campus and many important interdisciplinary research projects have been
              initiated in the laboratory.  Consequently, the improvements resulting from
              this award will have a broad impact on faculty and students throughout the
              university.  

***

