Title       : General Purpose Routers for the Next Generation Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2001    
File        : a9906704

Award Number: 9906704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1136721            (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry L. Peterson llp@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kai Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Felten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There has been  tremendous pressure over the last several years to push
              functionality from end hosts onto network routers.  Whether one calls the
              resulting systems routers, application gateways, active networks,
proxies, or
              even topology-aware servers,  a general trend was recognized:  the logic that
              decides how to process packets has grown more and more complex over time. It is
              a contention that the potential
for this trend to continue is almost
              unlimited, which suggests the question: what are the important properties for
              routers in the next generation Internet? The projects answer is a new router
              architecture, which they
call a general purpose router (GPR), that supports
              arbitrarily complex forwarding logic.  The GPR architecture has six unique
              features:

    Performance: Provides the throughput required by the next
              generation Internet.

    Extensible: Easily extended to support new
              forwarding functions without compromising performance.

    Scalable: Scales
              to relatively large sizes, on the order of a hundred of Gbps ports.

   
              Open: The hardware and software should be open so anyone can build or extend a
              router.

    Commodity Components: Implemented using commercially available
              components.

    Robustness: Robust enough to tolerate programming mistakes
              and malicious attacks.

The bottom line is that the project recognizes a need
              for routers to move from being closed, special-purpose network devices to being
              open, general-purpose computing/communication systems. The central
              challenge
in making this shift is to simultaneously support increasing complex
              forwarding logic and high performance, while using commercial hardware
              components and commercial operating systems. The GPR architecture
achieves
              this through two key innovations.

     Better integration of the router's
              switching capacity and compute cycles.  The project expects this to      result
              in significantly better scaling properties, and an order of magnitude
              improvement in performance      for packets that require only minimum
              processing cycles.

     A hierarchy of paths through the router, ranging
              from fast/fixed paths implemented entirely in hardware      to
              slow/programmable paths implemented entirely in software, but also including
              intermediate
     paths that exploit the improved integration of cycles and
              switching.

In addition to implementing the GPR architecture---and solving
              the configuration, scheduling, and resource management problems that doing so
              will entail---the project will design and implement several
              novel
applications:

    Edge routers that transition between different
              assumption regions of the Internet. Of particular note, the        project will
              develop router functionality for deeply nested networks that include thin
              devices (e.g.,             embedded systems and low-power devices). The router
              needs to subsume some of the responsibility usually     taken by the end
              node.

    A scalable display system that consists of an array of parallel
              display processors (and associated frame         buffers), each of which is
              responsible for some region of a wall-sized display. The router that
   
              serves as a front-end to this array---i.e., connects it to a graphics
              source--must fragment packets         containing graphics directives and
              forward each fragment to the correct processor.

    An internal firewall
              that implements enclaves and protects hosts within a site from each other.
              Unlike a         firewall that sits at the edge of a site, such a router must
              authenticate users, enforce access control, log     usage, and implement
              intrusion detection.
