Title       : A Study of the Extension of the North Atlantic Current and Pathways of Exchange:
               Phase II - Data Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a9906775

Award Number: 9906775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Thomas Rossby trossby@gso.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Prater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Huai-Min Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1326,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9906775

Rossby

Raw data obtained from RAFOS floats, deployed as part of
              the Atlantic 
Circulation and Climate Experiment, will be processed, quality
              
controlled, and then analyzed.  The processed data will be used: 
(a) to map
              out the paths taken by the waters of the North Atlantic 
Current after it
              passes the Grand Banks, (b) to identify the locations 
of, and processes
              responsible for, exchange across the North Atlantic 
Current, (c) to map out
              the dissolved oxygen field on the density 
surface followed by the floats, and
              (d) to obtain statistics of 
particle displacements in the region.  In
              addition, a short cruise 
will be made to recover the submerged sound sources
              used by the floats 
for navigation.  The scientific tasks are designed to
              illuminate the 
way in which the waters of the subpolar and subtropical North
              Atlantic 
are exchanged and will contribute to developing an understanding of
              
the meridional transport of heat in that ocean. 
              
9908091

Padman/Egbert

In this work, sub-surface current meter data will
              be assimilated into 
two and three-dimensional numerical models of tidal flows
              in the 
Weddell Sea.  Inverse methods will be used to guide improvements of
              
parameterizations of the effects of diurnal vorticity waves and of 
friction
              in the bottom boundary layer.  Since the Weddell Sea is 
close to the critical
              latitudes for the main semi-diurnal tide and 
has weak stratification, the
              bottom boundary layer is thick and the 
tidal flow is relatively barotropic,
              simplifying the modeling task 
and allowing a better characterization of the
              flow by the current 
meters.


