Title       : US-South Africa Cooperative Research: Life History Evolution of Birds in South
               Temperate Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1999      
File        : a9906030

Award Number: 9906030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1066,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9906030
Martin

This award supports a cooperative research project between
              Thomas E. Martin, Montana Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit, University of
              Montana, and Morne A. du Plessis, Percy FitzPatrick Institute of African
              Ornithology, University of Cape Town (UCT), South Africa.  The three-year
              cooperative project centers on the life history evolution of birds in south
              temperate Africa.  It involves a graduate student from the University of
              Montana, Paul Martin, and several graduate students from UCT in the research
              and field studies.  The South African PI will also spend some time at the
              University of Montana.  The Percy FitzPatrick Institute has a long and
              distinguished history of ornithological research and is considered the top
              ornithological research institute in all of Africa.  The US investigator brings
              data and strong familiarity with life history traits of north temperate birds
              and an alternative south temperate (Argentina) system, as well as familiarity
              with statistical approaches to conducting broad comparative analyses of life
              history.  The South African investigator brings strong familiarity with life
              history traits and ecology of birds in southern Africa, allowing important
              insight into the appropriate tests and classification of bird ecology for
              tests.   


This project includes five main objectives:  1) conduct broad
              comparative analyses of life history traits of South Africa birds compared with
              north temperate (North America and Europe) to clarify patterns of differences,
              while controlling for phylogeny and ecology, 2) examine among-continent
              differences in life history traits relative to differences in nest predation
              rates and food habits, 3) conduct broad comparative analyses of life history
              traits of birds within South Africa relative to variation in nest predation and
              predictability of climate and food, 4) examine clutch size of a ubiquitous
              species (Cape Sparrow) across a gradient of climatic and resource
              predictability, and 5) compare species within a single genus (Turdus) among
              South Africa, South America, and North America with respect to nest predation,
              parental activity, and feeding rates to test among the four hypotheses.  The
              joint research project can provide significant new insight into life history
              evolution of south temperate birds and also change general base avian life
              history theory.  Life history traits are the basis of population dynamics in
              ecological time such that an understanding of factors causing variation in life
              history traits can lead to greater understanding of possible conservation
              issues for sustaining bird population.

