Title       : PGE/PG: An Urban Model for Gender Equity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9906925

Award Number: 9906925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nina Hillman nhillman@temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary L. Hill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan A. Jansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerri L. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	During the planning year, the School District of Philadelphia, the Community
              College of Philadelphia (CCP), and the College of Science and Technology at
              Temple University, will collaborate to produce an equity program for girls and
              women in Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology.  Representatives
              from these institutions, from industry, and from local high schools will
              interact to design a program that will intervene at critical stages of the
              students' education - during high school, college and graduate school.  For
              example, summer enrichment programs, academic year activities and summer bridge
              programs will be planned for high school girls.  Programs will be developed for
              college freshmen and sophomore females.  Because many students transfer to
              Temple from CCP as juniors, the high school and the college freshmen and
              sophomore programs will be developed in parallel at the two institutions. 
              Components will be designed to support upper level female undergraduate and
              graduate students.  A seminar series and a mentoring program will address and
              ameliorate the problems of female students.  Committees will oversee the
              development of the program and introduce specific components during the
              planning year.  The overall goal is to produce an intervention program which
              will serve as an urban model for gender equity. 
