Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Unsettling Geopolitics: The Mobilization of
               Politicized Kurdish Identity in Two Refugee Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906948

Award Number: 9906948
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7361               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Roberts geg207@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Refugee communities consist of groups of individuals who form communities
              through their common backgrounds and shared experiences.  Previous research on
              refugee communities has tended to focus on international political dimensions,
              with special emphasis given to the states from which refugees have emanated and
              sometimes to the locales where they have sought refuge.  This state-centric
              emphasis has obscured important problems and issues associated with the social
              processes through which refugees reform their communities in new locales.  This
              doctoral dissertation research project will examine how self-identified Kurdish
              refugees overcome social, cultural, and historical differences and participate
              in a larger Kurdish-identity movement.  The geopolitical implications of the
              Kurdish-identity movement concern current conflicts within and among Turkey,
              Iran, Iraq, and Syria as well as their relations with western states.  This
              project focuses on the processes through which refugees have mobilized a
              politicized Kurdish identity.  Developing concepts from refugee studies,
              anthropology, and geography, a life-course methodology will be used to explain
              how refugees relate their experiences within communities.  Qualitative and
              quantitative methods will provide information about how both individual
              refugees and the refugee community form and nourish a politicized identity
              despite diasporic forces.  A comparative case study of two Kurdish refugee
              communities in Nashville, Tennessee, and London, England, will employ a
              research protocol of in-depth interviews and surveys.  Analyses of the data
              collected using these methods will help explain how communities overcome
              differences among members to mobilize a politicized identity and how they
              relate and map a diasporic Kurdish identity onto international politics.  This
              research will contribute new empirical information to broader research on
              Kurdish issues.  Through its examination of the life-course model and refugees
              as political actors, this research will also contribute to theoretical and
              conceptual work in refugee studies, as well as political geography and critical
              geopolitics.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
              also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

