Title       : Science and Spirituality in A.T. Beck's Cognitive Therapy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9906173

Award Number: 9906173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Harrington ginger_hoffman@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-06173 - Anne Harrington & Rachael Rosner (Harvard University)
"Science
              and Spirituality in A. T. Beck's Cognitive Therapy"

This postdoctoral
              fellowship will enable the co-Principal Invesitiagtor to focus on the history
              of the relationship among religious, scientific and medical impulses in
              twentieth century American psychotherapy. Her research will examine the history
              of Aaron T. Beek's Cognitive Therapy, the most popular form of
              psychotherapeutic practice to emerge in the last thirty years. She will explore
              how cognitive therapy preaches a philosophy of spiritual growth based on the
              virtues of being a rational scientist in one's own mental laboratory while
              offering "scientific proof" that it can reduce symptoms quickly.  The
              Co-Principal Invesitiagtor will also develop a new course on the history of
              psychotherapy that will compare dominant therapeutic techniques with the moral
              treatises that their practitioners offer in the name of science, medicine, and
              mental health, and place these ideas within the broader cultural concerns of
              their time. Finally, she will participate in developing the framework for an
              interdlisciplinary conference on transformative experiences of  pain. The
              conference will bring together neurologists, psychiatrists, and religious
              practitioners in an effort to compare religious and medical philosophies of
              pain and its management. Both of these training projects will allow her to
              learn about the cultural history of psychotherapy that in a manner that extends
              beyond her graduate training in clinical psychology and the history of
              psychology.

