Title       : PGE/LCP: Girls in Engineering, Mathematics and Science (GEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9906200

Award Number: 9906200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jing Li jingli@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Adelson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Carol Singley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Georgia A. Arbuckle-Keil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The GEMS project will open up careers in science, math and engineering to
              capable girls who face the difficulties of inner-city life.   As a result of
              differences in the way girls, particularly girls of color, are treated at home
              and in school; their preferred expressive way of working; and the lack of role
              models in their lives, the following objectives have been set:
          1. 
              Increase the self-confidence of the girls in our intervention.
          2. 
              Build on girls' belief that science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) is a
              good thing and have 	                 them come to believe it is also relevant
              to their lives.
          3.  Increase positive attitudes toward SEM, where
              they are flagging.
          4.  Create the belief that a SEM-related identify
              is compatible with their identities as women.
          5.  Allow girls'
              cognitive style to come into play, while incorporating traditional SEM ways of
              working.           6.  Provide opportunities to participate in SEM
              activities.
          7.  Develop an awareness of the breadth of SEM career
              opportunities.
          8.  Create a school, home and community climate
              conducive to choosing a life in SEM.
     These objectives are addressed
              through a program that creates a no-fail, multi-disciplinary science project on
              a topical problem - cosmetic design.  The project is carried out in the
              laboratories of women science faculty at Rutgers University.  The girls work
              side by side with faculty on real and relevant problems.  They are paid well,
              counseled, and introduced to financially successful women in SEM.  And, to
              produce climate change, their achievement and potential are repeatedly
              acknowledged in front of the various adults in their lives.
     Working with
              post-ninth grade girls, their sisters, their family and community leaders, the
              GEMS intervention focuses on a total of 1,167 participants over three years. 
              

