Title       : PPD: Daughters with Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9906079

Award Number: 9906079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424884             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynda A. Price pricela@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Penny L. Hammrich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   "Daughters with Disabilities" was created to address concerns about girls
              with disabilities in elementary public schools who are widely underserved in
              inclusionary settings and under-educated in the areas of science, math,
              engineering, and technology (SMET).  A critical outcome of such poor SMET
              educational experiences is the negative way that students with disabilities
              perceive science and math--either they have no further interest in these areas
              or they are denied the opportunities to pursue further education because of
              their limited or non-existent knowledge base.  To meet the complex needs of
              such a significant problem, the proposed project builds upon two previously
              successful, National Science Foundation-funded, multi-generational projects. 
              It refines the positive results of both Sisters in Science located at Temple
              University) and Project DO-IT located at the University of Washington) to
              address the needs of females with disabilities who are currently educated in
              the elementary grades of inner-city schools.  Daughters with Disabilities will
              provide a three-year intervention to a total of 120 girls with disabilities,
              their families, 24 teachers, and 6 aides from different schools within the
              North Philadelphia area.  Through the professional development of over 100
              special education teachers both pre-service and already teaching in
              Philadelphia), the utilization of a corps of mentors, and the creation of a
              family education program, the project should have a direct impact on students,
              teachers, parents, and the SMET curriculum.  Specific goals include: (a) To
              enhance the existing SMET curriculum through specific inclusionary activities
              and learning methods shown to increase girls' with disabilities interest and
              achievement in SMET;  b)To increase interest and achievement in SMET among
              elementary school girls with disabilities; (c) To involve Temple University
              undergraduate special education students in practical hands-on experiences at
              selected Philadelphia elementary schools in inclusive settings; (d) To involve
              elementary regular and special education teachers in practical hands-on in
              their home schools; and (e) To increase the knowledge and participation of
              families and caregivers of daughters with disabilities in terms of their
              science, math, and technological education.  The project will achieve the goals
              and objectives through six interrelated components:  Teacher Training;
              Classroom Activities;  Saturday Program; Summer Program; Family Consultation;
              and Mentors.  
     The instructional activities inherent in the Daughters
              with Disabilities model should build critical links for girls with disabilities
              throughout the school, home and community to effect a permanent SMET climate
              change for this growing and often over-looked population.  

