Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Resolution of Spent Liquor Environmental
               Degradation from Straw Pulping with Returning Lignin Biomass to Depleted Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2002   
File        : a9906679

Award Number: 9906679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harrison R. Cooper hcooper@barc-usa.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bountiful Applied Res Corp
	      106 West Second North
	      Bountiful, UT  84010    801/295-2345

NSF Program : X325      AGRICULTURE-US EGYPT S&T PROG
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5944,9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9906679
Cooper

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              by Dr. Harrison Cooper, Bountiful Applied Research Corporation, Bountiful,
              Utah, Dr. William Pan, Washington State University, Pullman, Washington and
              Drs. Adel Kamal Ismael, Central Metallurgical Research and Development
              Institute and M. El-Toni, Department of Soil Science, Ain Shams University,
              Cairo, Egypt. They plan to study the separation of paper mill lignin biomass
              and the utilization of the lignin biomass for soil enrichment and,
              simultaneously, for reduction of the spent liquor pollution problem. Drs.
              Cooper and Ismael will design a small scale lignin separation processing unit. 
              Dr. El-Toni will study the effect of adding the lignin on the physical and
              chemical properties of different types of soils, and will build the testbed for
              testing the resulting material as soil enrichment in agricultural fields. 
              Greenhouse growth test and soil biology tests using lignin biomass additives
              will be carried out with technical support from Dr. Pan.  Based on the results
              of the initial laboratory tests and the greenhouse test results, a pilot plant
              for testing commercial quantities will be designed by the US and Egyptian
              collaborators. 

Scope: The proposed project is based on past accomplishments
              of CMRDI (Egypt) and the US counterparts.  Drs. Cooper and Pan are well-known
              experts in spent liquor treatment and soil treatment research respectively. 
              Dr. Hassan El-Shall, University of Florida, who will be an advisor to the
              project, demonstrated the basic concept of lignin separation. The Egyptian
              counterparts are balanced between process development and soil treatment.  The
              Egyptian and American researchers have also collaborated in the past, and are
              likely to collaborate successfully in this project.  Cooper and El-Shall have
              the expertise of implementing manufacturing related projects, and they will
              bring to the project practical as well as fundamental knowledge.  This project
              is highly relevant and of high priority for Egypt, as it is anticipated that it
              could lead to improvement of agricultural productivity and to a new industry
              for handling industrial waste from the paper industry.  A US graduate student
              is to participate in this project and to gain experience in international
              scientific activities.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting
              collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to
              scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative
              activities.

