Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Seasonality of Leachate Dynamics in Broad-Leaved
               Deciduous Forest Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906545

Award Number: 9906545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9050               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Herwitz sherwitz@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1305,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Research on global change has highlighted many important forms of interaction
              between the atmosphere and biosphere.  One facet that has received relatively
              little attention, however, has been the given to changes in the biogeochemistry
              that altered regimes of precipitation will have on ecosystems.  Among questions
              remaining to be answered are:  How will global change affect element cycling in
              deciduous forests?  What will be the environmental feedbacks of any significant
              changes?  Might there be differences in the influences of co-occurring tree
              species on these element cycles?  Might their influences differ seasonally? 
              Canopy trees dominating broad-leaved deciduous forest ecosystems have been
              assumed to have a limited effect on mid-winter hydrochemistry because of their
              leafless condition.  The woody frames of canopy trees, however, present a wide
              range of bark types that vary in their surface area, texture, roughness, water
              holding capacity, albedo, and leachability.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project will examine canopy structure, woody surfaces, meteorological
              conditions, and winter precipitation inputs to the forest floor in order to
              create a new empirical framework for evaluating the hydrochemical consequences
              of global change in broad-leaved deciduous forest ecosystems.  The proposed
              study will involve laboratory-based determinations of bark water-holding
              capacity, air-drying rates, texture, and morphology; field-based experiments on
              branch inclination angles; photogrammetric analysis of large-scale aerial
              photos and 3-D modeling of branching geometry and total woody surface area of a
              representative sample of canopy trees; continuous recording of canopy-level
              meteorological conditions at the selected field site; hydrochemical analysis of
              water drainage from the selected sample trees on a precipitation-event basis
              and at hourly intervals during rain-on-snow events; and statistical analyses of
              the relationships between leachate chemistry, meteorological conditions, and
              leafless canopy structure.  This project will provide new insights into the
              seasonality of element cycling and how it might be altered by changing climatic
              regimes.  The results will help improve models of biogeochemical cycling and
              will generate methodological advances in the quantification of the influence of
              the leafless above-ground woody frames of trees on forest biogeochemistry.  The
              project will have significant utility in the northeastern U.S., where
              broad-leaved deciduous forest constitutes a large proportion of the vegetative
              cover and nearly 50% of the annual stream discharge originates from snowmelt. 
              In particular, it will help assess whether some tree species, particularly the
              red oak (Quercus rubra), are subject to extreme leaching and possible
              destruction under the mixed precipitation regimes expected in coming decades. 
              As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

