Title       : The Concentration of Urban Poverty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9906165

Award Number: 9906165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward L. Glaeser   (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Kahn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              What determines the extent of concentration in urban areas and why have those
              areas been so attractive to minorities? This project pursues research aimed at
              improving our understanding of the roots of urban agglomeration and the
              concentration of poverty within cities.  First, it examines the determinants of
              industrial agglomeration within the United States, which should ultimately help
              us to understand why cities exist. Urban policy needs to recognize the forces
              that attract both industry and the poor to urban areas. Second, it studies the
              causes and consequences of segregation by ethnicity within cities. Third, it
              determines why there is more redistribution to the poor in big cities. As this
              redistribution may attract the poor to large cities, it may play a role in
              creating pockets of urban poverty.

Theories of urban concentration emphasize
              the role of cities in eliminating transport costs for goods, people and ideas. 
              This project quantifies the relative importance of these forces using the
              Census Bureau's Longitudinal Research Database. In particular, it looks at the
              determinants of new plant birth and employment levels. It explains the level of
              new plant growth (and the steady-state level of employment) in a
              location-industry cell, as a function of the presence of other industries in
              that location. In particular, the project constructs industry-location specific
              variables indicating the presence of industries that produce inputs, consume
              outputs, share ideas and hire the same types of workers. Preliminary work
              suggests that the most important variable in explaining the location of
              industries is that the presence of other industries that use the same labor
              force. To address the endogeneity of the explanatory variables, the interaction
              of state and industry characteristics are used to predict the level of
              employment that is used in constructing the explanatory variables.

The
              project examines the formation and effects of immigrant ghettos. It builds a
              database on ethnic segregation for a large set of ethnicities and cities dating
              back to 1910 (and back to 1890 for the foreign born as a whole). This data can
              be used as a dependent variable to test different theories explaining the
              extent of immigrant segregation. The data may also help us to understand
              whether the negative connection between segregation and outcomes for
              African-Americans in 1990 was true in earlier time periods among different
              ethnicities. A particular focus of this research proposal is to use within
              metropolitan area government fragmentation, the location of employment for
              natives and other variables as sources of identification. Preliminary research
              suggests that ghettos are not bad for their first generation of inhabitants,
              but that among later generations there is a much stronger correlation between
              segregation and negative outcomes for later generations (both for blacks and
              for immigrants). If segregation only does harm over time, then this fact would
              support the idea that ghettos are harmful because they discourage human capital
              accumulation among their younger residents.

The third section of this
              proposal examines why there is more redistribution in larger cities. The
              project considers three hypotheses:   First, cities have more renters (because
              of the nature of the housing stock). Second, cities' fixed resources lessen the
              tendency of the rich to flee high taxes. Third, greater mixing between rich and
              poor in cities may leads to more altruism or to more of a desire to limit crime
              through redistribution. The research focus is on finding exogenous sources of
              variation that determine the level of homeownership, mixing between rich and
              poor and fixed resources in the city.



