Title       : Environmentally Benign Synthesis of Aromatics from Carbohydrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2001       
File        : a9906786

Award Number: 9906786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Frost frostjw@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9104,9223,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Professor John Frost, of the Department of Chemistry at Michigan State
              University, is supported by the Organic Synthesis program for his studies of
              the environmentally benign synthesis of aromatics from carbohydrates.  For
              aromatic targets which are toxic to microbes, Professor Frost develops hybrid
              syntheses, wherein microbial conversion of carbohydrates to nontoxic
              hydroaromatic intermediates is followed by chemical (i.e., nonbiological)
              conversion to the desired aromatic product.  Thus, e.g., E. coli is engineered
              to produce quinic acid, which is then converted in vitro to hydroquinone. 
              Following a related strategy, Professor Frost is exploring the microbial
              conversion of glucose to gallic acid and myo-inosose, as well as the chemical
              steps necessary to convert these intermediates to resorcinol and
              1,2,3,4-tetrahydroxybenzene, respectively.

As the environmental costs of
              obtaining important commodity aromatic compounds from traditional sources
              (e.g., coal tar) or via traditional syntheses have been recognized, a need for
              new synthetic methods for these important compounds has arisen.  With the
              support of the Organic Synthesis Program, Professor John Frost, of the
              Department of Chemistry at Michigan State University, is engineering microbes
              to carry out the conversion of safe and abundantly available feedstocks (e.g.,
              glucose) to desired aromatic products.  In many cases, the desired product is
              toxic to the organisms required to effect the conversion.  In these cases,
              Professor Frost develops "hybrid" syntheses, wherein the microbes are
              engineered to produce a nontoxic intermediate compound which may then be
              converted in the laboratory to the final product.
