Title       : Transitions in Organizational Design: A Study of Product Line Implementation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a9906227

Award Number: 9906227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin P. Charns mcharns@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Young  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this research focuses on a long-standing
              theoretical debate in the field of management around whether large-scale
              organizational change should be managed incrementally through successive stages
              or discontinuously in a single transformation. There have been few systematic
              empirical investigations of this issue. The proposed project will investigate
              this issue within a group of hospital systems (i.e., two or more hospitals
              under common ownership) that are each undergoing a major transition in
              organizational design, specifically, from functional to product-line structures
              for certain services. The central hypothesis is that an incremental transition
              process is associated with greater transition success than is a discontinuous
              transition approach.

The proposed project has the potential to have a
              substantial impact on the state of knowledge regarding organizational, filling
              a void in the literature concerning the relative risks and benefits associated
              with incremental versus discontinuous transition change. This insight is of
              increasing importance as organizations cope with major change.

The partner
              organization is the Industrial Advisory Board (IAB), a consortium of 16
              hospital systems established to support research on managerial and clinical
              issues pertaining to hospital systems. In a pilot study of the hospital
              systems, the research team identified approximately 75 product lines that are
              slated for implementation within the next two years, as the hospital systems
              use redefined product lines as a strategy for reducing service overlap and
              promoting customer service among their hospitals. The timing of the
              implementation of these product lines provides the research team with the
              opportunity to study the transitions in organizational design prospectively
              from a baseline period to the full implementation of the product line.

The
              project will comprise statistical and case study componentswith the primary
              unit of analysis being the product line. For the statistical component of the
              study, each product line will be followed prospectively over a threeyear period
              to assess transition approach relative to several indicators of transition
              success. Transition approach will be operationalized in accordance with a
              well-developed conceptual framework that the project's principal investigator
              previously developed for classifying organizational structures along a
              functional-product-line continuum. The research team will examine several types
              of transition approach based on whether and which intermediate structures are
              used for managing the transition from functional to product-line structure. The
              indicators of transition success will include employee readiness for change,
              employee satisfaction, and degree to which the expected benefits from the
              transition have been realized. For the case study component the research team
              will select six product lines as cases for in-depth investigation. Of the six
              cases, three will be product lines that are slated to be implemented
              incrementally and three will be product lines that are slated to be implemented
              discontinuously. 

This results of this study will carry implications for
              health care change management, for the issue of whether large-scale change is
              better managed incrementally or discontinuously, and for insights into the
              large-scale change process more generally.

