Title       : Dissertation Research: Giovanni Pico Della Mirandola, Disputationes Adversus
               Astrologiam Divinatricem: Texts & Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906612

Award Number: 9906612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Newman wnewman@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This is a dissertation research project that will allow the researcher to spend
              the academic year  working closely with Professor Noel M. Swerdlow at the
              University of Chicago to analyze in detail-and to translate into English-
              Giovanni Pico della Mirandola's (1463-94) extensive (320 page) attack on
              astrology, his Disputationes adversus astrologiam divinatricem (1496).
              Professor Swerdlow is an expert in the highly technical features of
              mathematical astronomy and  astrology. The methods to be employed are primarily
              philological and historico-critical. The researchers will read the text by one
              of the central figures of the Florentine Renaissance in order to come to a
              fully informed, detailed understanding of the full range of argumentation in
              Pico's vehement attack on astrology. Furthermore, they will read the text
              within two of its most important contexts: (1) the contemporary (Quattrocento)
              state of astrology in both court and university, and (2) the history of
              astrology as Pico, a highly skilled humanist, would have received it. This
              detailed reading will form the nucleus of a multifold contextual study. The
              potential import of such an in-depth study of Pico's Disputationes is that the
              scholarly community may thus come to a proper judgement of this important text
              and its influence. It has been judged important in the history of philosophy
              and science for many reasons, yet there still exists no thorough study thereof.
              In fulfilling this desideratum, the dissertation researcher will establish a
              solid foundation both for understanding the important, often misunderstood,
              place of astrology in the history of science during this period, and, in
              particular, for understanding the true import of Pico della Mirandola's role in
              that process. 











