Title       : Dissertation Research: Imagining the Genone: Politics of Breast Cancer Genetics
               in the United States and Great Britain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1999     
File        : a9906183

Award Number: 9906183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Hilgartner shh6@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project will examine the politics regarding
              contemporary molecular genetics and its implications, through a case study of
              political controversies over development of policy and practice for breast
              cancer genetic testing and patenting in the United States and Great Britain.
              The genetic etiology of breast cancer, announced in the 1990s by scientists
              both in the United States and Great Britain, has stimulated active debates
              regarding appropriate testing practices, genetic risk, genetic privacy and
              discrimination, and the ethics of patenting genetic sequences. This project
              will investigate the experiences and interactions of a variety of relevant
              actors throughout contentious political debates over these issues,
              understanding the simultaneous construction of biomedicine and transformation
              of political identities, legitimacy, and expertise. The comparative aspects of
              the study encourages the exploration of national specificity in the development
              of breast cancer genetics, suggesting the relative influences of political
              culture and globalization on the trajectory of contentious politics. Research
              will be conducted through intensive interviewing, participant observation, and
              document analysis. By exploring the simultaneous construction of biomedicine
              and the polity, this dissertation research project  will contribute to emerging
              scholarship in science and technology studies which investigates the
              "co-production" of science and politics. In addition, it will facilitate our
              understanding of the politics of public participation in biomedical
              policymaking, exploring the ways in which legitimacy and expertise are achieved
              in late 20th and 21st centuries. Finally, this project provides a unique
              opportunity to examine the incorporation of genetic knowledge into contemporary
              societies by exploring the voices of the participants in these biomedical
              politics.
