Title       : Creating a Space for Expertise: Criticism and the Public Sphere in Germany,
               1760-1800
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9906127

Award Number: 9906127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83936              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. Broman thbroman@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES 99-06127 - Thomas H. Broman (University of Wisconsin)
"Creating a Space for
              Expertise:  Criticism and the Public Sphere in Germany, 1760-1800"

The goal
              of this project is to study the historical antecedents of the modern concept of
              expertise. What is meant here by "expertise" is a distinctively modern linkage
              between theoretical knowledge and practice, a linkage that licenses the work of
              physicians, engineers, social workers, and a variety of other professional
              experts. The Enlightenment is an obvious place to locate the origins of this
              concept, because Enlightenment ideology featured both an exaltation of
              empirical science as the key to discovering reliable truths about the world and
              the programmatic conviction that such knowledge should be put to work in
              combating prejudice, reforming morals, and creating a better society. Yet the
              concept of expertise that developed out of this ideology is built upon two
              claims that at first glance would seem to be mutually contradictory. On the one
              hand, the scientific knowledge on which expert practices came to be based is
              claimed to be universally accessible to enlightened human reason. But on the
              other hand, experts reserve for themselves alone the right to create, evaluate,
              and proclaim that knowledge. As a result of this peculiar combination, modern
              experts literally represent us (insofar as we are all members of a collective
              "public") when speaking truths about the world.

This project thus seeks to
              explore the historical circumstances in which it first became possible to
              maintain that knowledge was both universal (in the sense of being potentially
              accessible to all people) and privileged. It examines this phenomenon not by
              looking at any particular sciences or the activities of their promoters, but
              instead by analyzing the broader cultural milieu in which such claims for
              universality and privilege first developed. By doing so, the project aims to
              cast light on what it means for something to be called "public knowledge," and
              the context for this investigation will be the development of the public sphere
              in German Central Europe between 1750 and 1800. First described by Jurgen
              Habermas more than 30 years ago as an intermediate zone between the public
              authority of the state and the private realm of civil society, the 1
              8th-century public sphere became a particular center of cultural production,
              one expressing the generalized beliefs of "the public." Needless to say, the
              existence of a "public" in the sense described here is an essential condition
              for the emergence of the kind of representative truth-telling embodied by
              experts.

A distinctive and important feature of this new public sphere was
              the emergence of the peculiarly modern institution of "criticism," a kind of
              literature in which private individuals sought to speak both for and to the
              public by defining objective standards of reason and taste. The project seeks
              to show how criticism was crucial in the creation of science as public
              knowledge, because criticism featured precisely the same combination of
              universality and privileged knowledge, along with the same union of theory and
              practice that scientific experts would later deploy. Moreover, what was
              distinctive about 18th-century criticism was the extent to which it was
              embodied in a new medium: the literary review. This suggests a second line of
              approach to understanding the formation of the German public sphere, which is
              to situate its evolution, and the evolution of critical discourse along with
              it, as part of the history of the periodical press.

The project thus
              combines an analysis of critical discourse and expertise in the German
              periodical press with a study of the changing conditions of the publishing
              business and the market for literature during the second half of the 18th
              century. In proceeding along these two paths, Broman hopes to be able to show
              how criticism, expertise, and ultimately, the authority of science itself
              cannot be adequately understood apart from the changing economic and cultural
              circumstances of middle-class consumption during the 18th century.

