Title       : Pre-College Outreach in Electrical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a9906062

Award Number: 9906062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Bofah   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Efimba  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906062
Momoh
A major activity of the Center for Energy Systems and Control
              (CESAC) is the development of a research center of excellence in support of
              power systems automation and control applications.

A secondary activity of
              the Center includes a summer outreach program to expose high school students
              and junior college students to research activities in expert systems (ES) and
              power systems (PS). A six-week outreach program at the Center's facility
              provides the opportunity for students to engage in learning electrical
              engineering fundamentals and involve them in the Center's sponsored research
              activities. The project gave the Center the opportunity to involve high school
              students in research and engineering education.

Over the years, we have
              attracted more than 50 minority high school students to the program. Several of
              these students are high achievers with very high grade-point-averages and the
              motivation and potential to succeed at the university level. A majority of the
              students selected scored above 1300 on the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and
              have since enrolled in outstanding universities. This is a demonstration of the
              success and impact of the learning experience gained from the program. To
              continue this trend, we are proposing a multi-year educational program for
              pre-college African American students, other minorities and women. To ensure
              future participation of minorities in science, we plan to increase interest in
              the engineering profession, which will remain attractive in the 21st century.
              The program contents include: electrical engineering fundamentals, a variety of
              research project topics spanning the electrical engineering spectrum
              (communications, control, signal processing, power systems, materials science
              and solid state electronics, microwave and antenna), oral and written
              communication skills, and leadership training and topics on the engineering
              profession.

The outreach program will be held during the summer for six
              weeks to include interaction of students, faculty and industry. The program
              will involve sponsoring agencies representative of our various grants as
              keynote speakers and high school student mentors. During the school year, the
              program will allow students to be engaged with research professors at Howard
              University, participate in science fairs hosted by Howard University faculty in
              selected schools. The program will also include selected high school teachers
              who will be involved in technology awareness, problem solving and sharpening of
              their design skills.

Our experience with pre-college African American
              students could be bench-marked against our success story of improving both
              their GPA and SAT scores, providing a positive enabling environment and thus
              enhancing their chances of enrolling in engineering and could be prototyped for
              usage by other schools to achieve similar success.
***


