Title       : Genetics of Maize Mitochondria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9906000

Award Number: 9906000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen J. Newton NewtonK@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A long-term project to elucidate how mutations are generated and recovered in
              plant mitochondria and what effects these mutations have on plant phenotypes
              and cellular function will be continued. An investigation into the effects on
              cellular function of a set of lethal mitochondrial mutations (nonchromosomal)
              stripe, NCS) that are propagated in heteroplasmic maize plants will be
              continued. It has been recently found that two types of nucleus-encoded plant
              mitochondrial stress proteins, alternative oxidase (AOX) and HSP22 are
              dramatically increased in all of the NCS mutants. It is proposed to determine
              at what level this induction occurs and to identify other mitochondrial
              proteins that are differentially regulated in NCS plants. A second objective is
              to learn how the integrity of plant mitochondrial genomes is maintained. The
              genomes exist in vivo as a collection of subgenomes, which result from active
              recombination. Nonetheless, mitochondrial genotypes and their subgenomic
              complements are usually faithfully transmitted from maternal parent to progeny.
              In an exceptional line of maize, P2, it has been found that nitochondrial
              genomes are surprisingly variable and that novel, small subgenomes are
              amplified to high levels. The hypothesis that these small mtDNA circles carry
              origins of replication that allow their amplification will be tested. Two of
              the independently amplified small subgenomes have been found to be maternally
              heritable in crosses, which may help to identify those regions of the
              mitochondrial genome that are critical for the proper segregation and efficient
              replication of mtDNA.

Interest in mitochondria has intensified recently due
              to their central roles in phenomena such as programmed cell death, oxidative
              stress and organellar retrograde regulation. In retrograde regulation, the
              expression of certain nuclear genes is transcriptionally activated in response
              to changes in the metabolic state of organelles. The results of this
              investigation will give further insight into the genomic regulation of
              mitrochondrial function.



