Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Application of VLSI Based Soft Computing to
               Mechatronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1999      
File        : a9906233

Award Number: 9906233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bogdan M. Wilamowski wilam@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5940,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9906233
Wilamowski

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Bogdan Wilamowski, Department of Electrical Engineering at the
              University of Wyoming and Dr. Okyay Kaynak, Department of Electrical
              Engineering, Bogazici (Bosphorus) University, Istanbul, Turkey.  In past work,
              these scientists have demonstrated the use of neural networks in biochemical
              process control, neural and fuzzy architectures in position control of servo
              systems, and intelligent identification of robotic manipulators.  The results
              imply that the use of soft computing techniques lead to a more efficient
              design. The two scientists propose to focus on the soft-computing based
              approaches as methods for designing intelligent identifiers and controllers and
              on chip implementation of devised strategies.  Neuro-fuzzy controllers will be
              implemented in VLSI chips using MOSIS 2micrometer process.  The aim of the
              research is to investigate the real-time and on-chip implementability of
              computationally intelligent architectures from the point of view of
              identification and control of mechatronic systems.   Two objectives are
              identified: to consider different structures of intelligent identifiers and
              controllers, and to implement the control strategies to be developed, using
              dedicated VLSI chips, which can be analog or digital.

Scope:  This award
              will allow collaboration between Turkish and US scientists who have
              complementary capabilities and experience.  The research issues are quite
              relevant and the ideas and techniques that are proposed for addressing them are
              quite interesting.  The project addresses interesting combinations of
              technology with possible advances of technology.  The project draws from the
              previous accomplishments and contributions of the two teams in the areas of
              soft computing, VLSI design, and mechatronics. The two teams have the potential
              to contribute to this area, with significant impact on the industrial
              application of on-chip architectures for advanced applications in mechatronics.
                It is planned to involve graduate students on both sides in this
              international collaboration.  The proposal meets INT objectives for supporting
              international collaboration when there is a potential for mutual benefits. 
              This project is supported 
