Title       : Developing Foundations for Catalyst Design: From Cluster Science to Industrial
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a9906341

Award Number: 9906341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. W. Castleman awc@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 1504,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              In a grant supported by Experimental Physical Chemistry Program under the GOALI
              initiative, A. Welford Castleman of the Pennsylvania State University will
              perform studies that aim to provide a scientific basis for tailoring the design
              of transition metal oxide catalysts which will be effective in the selective
              activation of carbon-carbon and carbon-hydrogen bonds, and to determine the
              properties necessary to promote oxygen-transfer reactions with several classes
              of organic molecules. Guided ion beam tandem mass spectrometry techniques will
              be employed in order to understand the catalytic activity of vanadium, niobium,
              and tantalum oxide cluster ions.  The objectives are to investigate the
              influence of stoichiometry, size, structure, ionization potentials, charge, and
              oxidation state on the transfer of oxygen atoms to various organic molecules as
              well as C-C and C-H bond activation, and to gain insights into the mechanisms
              of these reactions.  Additionally, the structures of metal oxide clusters will
              be probed further using collision-induced dissociation techniques.  Comparisons
              of these results with related condensed phase reactions will lead to improved
              understanding of the interaction of reactant species with active sites of
              catalytic surfaces.  Students from the PI group will pursue related research in
              collaboration with industry scientists from DuPont Central Research and
              Development who have broad experience in solid state chemistry and
              heterogeneous catalysis.  New findings from the gas phase studies will be
              implemented in exploring materials that have promise for development as new
              catalysts. 

A catalyst causes changes in a chemical reaction process, such
              as increasing its rate or causing different end products to be produced, while
              the catalyst itself remains chemically unaltered at the end.  Catalysis
              continues to have an enormous impact on the economy, yet the ability to design
              catalysts that will lead to highly selective formation of desired products with
              minimal environmental effect is still rudimentary. Transition metal oxides are
              becoming increasingly important as catalysts because they enable useful
              reactions and are cost efficient and often environmentally benign. This
              academic/industrial collaboration is expected to provide insights that will
              ultimately lead to the development of improved catalysts. 


