Title       : Workshop on the Integration of Modeling and Control for Automotive Systems, June
               5 - 6, 1999, Santa Barbara, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9906020

Award Number: 9906020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1999        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anna Stefanopoulou   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,9161,AMPP,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Workshop on the integration of Modeling and Control for Automotive Systems

In
              the last two decades control had had an undeniable impact on the improvement of
              automotive systems.  Contol algorithms have aided the sutopmation of the
              manufacturing processes thereby reducing cost and increasing cycle time.  They
              have been the enabling technology in reducing emissions, thus, having a
              tremendous environmental impact on society.  Controls have enabled automotibe
              manufacturers to provide customers with significant performance and safety
              improvements at reasonable costs.  As automotibe systems become a challenging
              task.  The lack of data, the interdisciplinary nature, and the existence of
              multiple layers of modeling and ocntroller details (all the way form
              distributed todiscrete event systems)  make the integration of modeling and
              control a critical step towards system development.

The current control
              analysis and synthesis approach can be made to perform in a satisfactory manner
              on a case by case basis.  The success of these approaches is usually directly
              linked to the resident engineerig expertise and experience available.  However,
              good engineering judgement shoudl be aided by system theoretic concepts and we
              would like to consider more broadly the question of a seamless integration
              between modeling and control design.  This workship will consider  specific
              examples of control problems, spanning severl area of automotive systems, which
              require different levels of modeling accuracy and abstraction: 1) Engine and
              Powertrain Control 2) Vehivle Dynamics and Control and 3) Fault detectionk,
              diagnostics and monitoring and 4) Large Scale systems.
