Title       : PPD: Distance Learning Science Project for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9906123

Award Number: 9906123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439474             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald C. Goodwin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet E. Dickinson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Karen Noble  (Principal Investigator former)
              Judith Podbielski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New Jersey Dept of Educ
	      100 Riverview Executive Plaza
	      Trenton, NJ  08625    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The Marie H.  Katzenbach School for the Deaf has developed the Distance
              Learning Science Project for Deaf and Hard of Hearing Students.  The goal of
              this three-year project is to increase deaf and hard of hearing students'
              interest and aptitude in science.  The project's objectives include increasing
              the degree of interest in science among deaf and hard of hearing students in
              elementary, middle school, and high school programs; decreasing the gap in
              science knowledge between deaf/hard of hearing students and students who can
              hear, and increasing the target population's knowledge of various science
              topics over the life of the project.
     The goal and objectives will be
              achieved with the provision of science enhancement lessons and activities
              integrated with technology.  Science enhancement lessons will be provided to
              deaf/hard of hearing students in several educational programs throughout the
              state via interactive television.  Video-conferencing technology will enable
              the students and teachers to work together from four remote locations at the
              same time.  The teachers from the participating schools planned six ITV science
              lessons per year,  and the lessons follow the state standards for science
              education.  
     During the classes, students will present projects and
              solutions to problems that were assigned to them at the previous class. 
              Between classes, they will communicate with each other about the projects via  
                  e-mail, if they are old enough to have the written language skills.  For
              the first time, educational programs for deaf students across New Jersey will
              be coordinating instruction in a content area.  This is beneficial for the
              students, who tend to move from one program to another throughout their
              educational careers.  In addition to the ITV science classes, students will
              participate in summer science camps, which are viewed as fun and educational
              mechanisms to increase students' interest in science and knowledge about
              scientific topics.  
     The project is expected to increase students'
              interest in science in several ways.  The use of interactive television will
              create excitement in and of itself.  Interest will also be generated for the
              students through the experience of working cooperatively with other deaf/hard
              of hearing students.  Additionally, science is often a neglected area in deaf
              education, because communication skills and basic reading and writing skills
              are viewed as having greater importance for deaf students.  The emphasis on
              science through the enhancement lessons and activities is expected to
              facilitate the achievement of the project's goal.  The project includes a plan
              to collect and analyze data in order to determine if the goal and objectives
              are met.  


