Title       : Underclass Formaton and Ethnicity in Comparative and Historical Perspective: The
               Case of Central and Eastern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1999 
File        : a9906120

Award Number: 9906120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26218              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca J. Emigh emigh@bigstar.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ivan Szelenyi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906120
Rebecca Emigh
Ivan Szelenyi

This project investigates the dynamics
              of two social and historical processes, 1) underclass formation and 2) waves of
              assimilation and dissimilation, by examining the history of several small rural
              communities in Central and Eastern Europe during the past 150 years.  It is
              part of a larger research effort to understand the relation between poverty and
              ethnicity in this region.   The larger project includes a nationally
              representative survey fielded in Bulgaria, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Russia,
              and Slovakia.  The survey is designed to provide estimates of the extent of
              poverty, and also to assess whether certain ethnic groups, and in particular,
              the Roma (Gypsies), are likely to be concentrated in poverty.  Many researchers
              suspect that an underclass is forming among the Roma in this region as a result
              of the recent transition to a market economy.  Although a survey is crucial, it
              reveals little about the temporal processes that create an underclass or that
              produce waves of assimilation and dissimilation

This project, the historical
              component of the research, addresses this omission by studying the long-term
              processes of underclass formation, assimilation and dissimilation by linking
              them to economic systems of capitalism and socialism and to assimilationist
              policies.  Specifically, this project complements the quantitative (survey)
              methodology with community studies, using in-depth interviewing, participant
              observation, and historical, archival research.   This research will contribute
              to the sociological literature on the underclass and assimilation through its
              examination of these theoretical constructs outside the American context in
              which they are usually studied.  Research on the underclass in usually linked
              to African-Americans living in urban ghettos.  In contrast, this project
              considers whether an underclass exists among rural Roma in Central Europe. 
              Similarly, much research on assimilation focuses on the unidirectional process
              of immigrant assimilation in the United States.  Again, in contrast, this
              current project considers the waves of assimilation and dissimilation of
              non-immigrant ethnic minorities in a cross-national context.    


