Title       : Collaborative Research: Economic Analysis of Intellectual Property Protection
               Mechanisms for Research Partnerships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9906140

Award Number: 9906140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas S. Vonortas vonortas@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry R. Hertzfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative research agreements in industry and between industry and
              university partners have grown rapidly since the early 1980s, encouraged by
              numerous factors including the pace of competition and Federal policy.  Members
              of these partnerships try to exploit their complementary resources in order to
              create new or shared technical knowledge.  Each member wishes to profit from
              the relationship; so before entering it, all the members must be assured that
              they will be able to appropriate the results effectively.  The US National
              Cooperative Research Act of 1984 required the parties of a research joint
              venture seeking benefits from its provisions to file notifications with the
              Federal government.  This research will use two data bases developed with
              information from these filings as well as other sources to examine the ways in
              which intellectual property rights affect these complex arrangements.  The
              investigators will use surveys and interviews to collect information about the
              intellectual property protection mechanisms used in a large sample of US-based
              research joint ventures.  The surveys and interviews will cover a variety of
              both private sector (domestic and international) and university partners.  The
              major goal of the project is to understand what protection mechanisms are in
              use and what role they play in these ventures.  Another goal is to move towards
              an understanding of the relative effectiveness of one or another mechanism for
              a particular purpose, including the failure to form a venture or for it to
              reach research completion and the willingness of organizations to engage in
              future ventures.  Results will be useful to participants in research joint
              ventures and to science and technology policy makers.  They will include
              publications and a workshop involving diverse participants.
