Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial Dimensions of Social Movements: A
               Geographic and Historic Network Analysis of the 'Madres de Plaza de Mayo"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906763

Award Number: 9906763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Ettlinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In general, geographic research on collective action and formal analytical
              frameworks for social movement analysis remain divorced.  As a result, it is
              unclear how relations across space and place-based social phenomena are related
              to the way in which social actors engage in collective action and attempt to
              sustain it over time.  This problem is exacerbated by the fact that research on
              social movements as a type of collective action lacks critical synthesis,
              because geographers infrequently use network theory as an analytical framework
              while sociologists and political scientists rarely address geographic issues. 
              This doctoral dissertation research project focuses on an analysis of space and
              place as factors mediating the sustainability and mobilization of social
              movement organizations (SMOs), which are "networks of networks" seeking to
              attain common social goals.  Through a case study of the Madres de Plaza de
              Mayo, a long-standing SMO within the human rights movement in Argentina, the
              doctoral candidate will specify the relationship between change in the
              organizational structure of SMOs and their sustainability and mobilization over
              time, with special attention given to how networks are structured across space.
               The project also will specify the extent to which place-based collective
              rituals mediate the internal dynamics of SMOs and affect their sustainability. 
              The project depends on archival research and ethnographic methods to obtain
              detailed data.  The research will contribute to the geographic literature on
              space and society and to contemporary research on collective action by
              specifying how spatial and place-based relations mediate the outcomes of
              mobilization strategies of social movements and the sustainability of
              collective action.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.

