Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Institutionalization of Status Roles in Task
               Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9906929

Award Number: 9906929
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6478               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Lovaglia michael-lovaglia@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Individuals in the disadvantaged category of a social group encounter resistance
              to influence attempts when they rise to positions of high status in groups. 
              Members of low status groups are expected to maintain their low status, and
              legitimacy problems arise when a member attains a position higher than that
              which her social status would indicate.  Legitimacy theories attempt to explain
              the processes by which individuals in the disadvantaged class of a social
              group. Through increased legitimacy may overcome resistance to influence
              attempts when they rise to high status leadership positions.  However, when
              individuals with the low state of a culturally evaluated characteristic (e.g.
              females in mixed-sex groups) attain high status positions on a legitimate
              basis, problems still may arise.  Results indicate that these individuals may
              possess personal evaluations comparable to those of leaders with the high state
              of the characteristic, but that the group structure itself may be seen as
              illegitimate.  Institutional theory will be incorporated with legitimacy
              theories and expectation states and status characteristics theories to address
              these issues. The investigators argue that when a member in the disadvantaged
              category of a social group rises to a position of high status,
              institutionalization of the group structure, as well as legitimacy of leader
              appointment, are necessary for the structure o inequality itself, as well as
              the leader's position in the structure, to be viewed as legitimate. 

This
              Doctoral Dissertation Improvement research tests theoretically derived
              hypotheses regarding the legitimacy of leader appointment and
              institutionalization of the group structure.  Specifically, experiments will be
              designed to test three hypotheses: (1) When working on a gender-neutral task,
              female group leaders not legitimately appointed to their position will receive
              lower evaluations for their own performances and for the groups they lead than
              will male leaders also not legitimately appointed; (2) When working on a
              gender-neutral task, female group leaders legitimately appointed to their
              position will receive evaluations for their own performances that are just as
              high as those of legitimately appointed male leaders, but will have the groups
              they lead evaluated as less effective; and (3) Female group leaders who have
              attained their position on a legitimate basis in an institutionalized group
              structure will receive evaluations for their own performances, and for those of
              their groups, that are just as high as those received by otherwise comparable
              male leaders also legitimately attaining leadership roles in institutionalized
              structures.  Data will be collected through having both male and female
              undergraduate students complete a series of laboratory experiment.

