Title       : Environmental Justice: Process, Experience, and Acceptance of Policy from an
               Environmental Dispute Resolution Process
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9906771

Award Number: 9906771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248646             (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Allan Lind Allan.Lind@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn A. Maguire  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The research examines how innovative procedures for environmental dispute
              resolution are viewed by the public and how these process perceptions affect
              reactions to the outcome of the dispute resolution process. The research uses
              repeated panel surveys of active participants and of people affected by the
              outcome of an ongoing environmental policy process. The dispute resolution
              process under study is a scientific water quality modeling process that makes
              policies for lowering nutrient pollution levels in North Carolina rivers. The
              research focuses on the cognitive, social, and political factors affecting
              fairness judgments and policy acceptance in three groups: active participants
              in the citizen input process (mostly representatives of environmental and
              industry interest groups and city governments), the general population living
              in areas adjacent to the rivers, and a special group consisting of
              African-American farmers and farm workers in areas near the rivers.

The
              research seeks to fill an important gap in our existing knowledge of the
              psychology of dispute resolution and public policy.  Where then do the process
              perceptions come from and how do the effects of process perceptions merge with
              the effects of pre-existing attitudes and ideologies, and with self-interest
              concerns, to determine whether a policy is accepted or rejected? This is the
              central scientific topic of the proposed research. Answering this question will
              advance our understanding of a key psychological process in law in action, and
              it will suggest ways to improve policy-making processes like the environmental
              dispute resolution process under study here. The proposed research will also
              provide data on the perception of pollution policy and pollution policy-making
              processes by a minority population, and thus will offer guidance to policy
              makers about how to develop policy more acceptable to disadvantaged
              populations.


