Title       : Characteristics of Cloud-Nucleating Aerosols and Their Effects on Cloud
               Microphysical and Radiative Properties in INDOEX
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1999    
File        : a9906903

Award Number: 9906903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia Twohy twohy@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1309,1325,4444,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This project is aimed at understanding how aerosol particles affect cloud
              radiative properties through changes in droplet number concentration and size
              (the so-called "indirect" effect).  It will employ observations of the physical
              and chemical properties of aerosols obtained with airborne instruments during
              the Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX).   Optical particle counters, cloud
              condensation nucleus spectrometers, and electron microscope analysis are the
              principal means of analyzing the aerosol properties.  Characteristics of
              particles sampled both below and above clouds will be compared with residual
              nuclei extracted from cloud droplets to assess which particles act as cloud
              condensation nuclei.  In particular, the relative importance of sulfate,
              sea-salt, soil-dust, and elemental carbon will be evaluated.  The critical
              supersaturation spectra of the ambient particles and residual nuclei will be
              compared as well.  Through a series of case studies, the principal investigator
              will determine whether in-cloud aerosol follow an expected simple adiabatic
              relationship, that is, the particles with the lowest critical supersaturation
              preferentially nucleate cloud droplets.  Air trajectories and aerosol chemical
              measurements will be used to determine the specific role of anthropogenic
              aerosols in affecting cloud properties.  Variations in thermodynamic, aerosol,
              microphysical, and cloud radiative parameters will be studied via multivariate
              techniques in order to ascertain parameter dependence and to help separate
              aerosol effects from dynamic effects on clouds.  

	Support for this project
              is shared by the Atmospheric Chemistry and Physical Meteorology Programs and
              the Water and Energy:  Atmospheric, Vegetative and Earth Interactions (WEAVE)
              Initiative of the Global Change Program. 

