Title       : Gender and Collective Economic Strategies: A Comparative Analysis of Women's
               Producer Groups in Peripheral Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1999  
File        : a9906626

Award Number: 9906626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Oberhauser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research  examines issues relating to gender and development through a
              comparative analysis of women's collective economic strategies in former
              homelands of South Africa and rural Appalachia.  It addresses socio-economic
              aspects of women's participation in cooperatives, networks, and other
              collective activities that generate income for households and are part of
              community-based development strategies. The objectives are:  1) to examine the
              link between historically and culturally specific socio-economic conditions and
              gendered livelihood strategies; 2) to identify the processes through which
              collective economic activities relate to household gender dynamics; 3) to
              address the economic viability of these activities as sustainable
              income-generating activities in rural contexts; and 4) to analyze the
              effectiveness of rural development policies in enhancing these collective
              economic strategies. The research methodology employs a participatory approach
              and feminist ethnography that include focus groups, intensive fieldwork, and
              in-depth interviews.  These methods will reveal the multiple dimensions of
              gendered livelihood strategies in the selected regions, and will point to the
              importance of women's collective economic activities and their intersection
              with household gender relations in developing regions of the Global South and
              North.

The research contributes to our understanding of gender and
              development by focusing on women's collective economic activities and their
              relationship to intra-household gender relations.  The study analyzes and
              compares the social histories and collective economic activities of women in
              two developing regions.  The former homelands of South Africa are attempting to
              overcome generations of severe socio-economic and spatial marginalization
              during the colonial and apartheid eras.  In comparison, Appalachia is a
              peripheral region in an advanced industrial country where exploitative labor
              relations in primary sector activities have contributed to high levels of
              poverty and marginalization. The formation, operation, and socio-economic
              impact of selected women's producer groups in rural areas of South Africa and
              Appalachia are examined.  In South Africa, a sewing group and pottery
              cooperative have been selected as case study organizations.  The Appalachian
              groups include a knitting network and a quilting cooperative based in West
              Virginia.  Household surveys and in-depth interviews will be analyzed using
              descriptive statistics and qualitative methods.  Findings from this research
              will be shared with the selected organizations, academic researchers, and rural
              development agencies.  Analysis of the producer groups will involve the members
              to enhance the collaborative and participatory nature of this project.  

