Title       : PPD: Access to Physics Interactive Video Tutor Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9906159

Award Number: 9906159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence A. Scadden                     
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoff Freed geoff_freed@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The CPB/WGBH National Center for Accessible Media (NCAM) will collaborate
              with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) to make a model
              interactive multimedia physics Web site in development at the MIT Center for
              Advanced Educational Services (CAES) accessible to students who are blind or
              deaf.  
     The Physics Interactive Video Tutor Project (PIVOT) is a
              multi-layered teaching and learning Web environment built around MIT Professor
              Walter Lewin's physics course which will be used by college and high school
              students across the nation studying introductory-level physics.  It is expected
              to serve as a template for additional MIT interactive video-based Web sites. 
              
     Building upon NCAM's ongoing research into Web and multimedia
              accessibility, this project - Access to PIVOT - will identify and address the
              needs of deaf and blind students in the design of the user interface, the
              navigation systems, and the presentation of video, text, illustrations, graphs,
              tables and equations.  The Access to PIVOT Project will allow NCAM to work with
              CAES throughout the development of the Web site to test and interpret current
              Web access guidelines and techniques.  
     NCAM will research solutions,
              build CAES' institutional capability to provide access solutions, document the
              implementation process, and develop and test a set of recommended practices for
              other developers.  Documentation of practical issues include:   needs
              assessment, decision criteria for selecting access solutions, range and 
              interoperability of access tools and related training as well as production
              challenges.  
     Testing and evaluation with blind and deaf users will gauge
              the effectiveness of  results.  Technical advisors will ensure that emerging
              tools and capabilities are integrated into the Project.  Web-based-education
              advisors will provide input into recommended practices and assist in
              dissemination.  Project results will:  
          o	Enable science-focused
              high school and college students who are blind, visually impaired, 	 	deaf or
              hard-of-hearing to participate in an innovative and challenging Web-based
              			introductory physics curriculum.  
          o 	Enable the MIT Center for
              Advanced Educational Services to institutionalize the technical 		capabilities
              developed through this project to apply access solutions to a range of future
              		                  educational products.  
          o 	Provide developers,
              publishers, and distributors of distance-learning and educational 
	multimedia
              with recommended practices and an applied demonstration of access-design
              
	principles for network-delivered multimedia.  
     Recommended practices
              developed from this high-profile, real-world production model will be widely
              evaluated and, ideally, emulated by other Web-based curriculum developers. 
              


