Title       : Problems for a Theory of Lightness Anchoring
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a9906747

Award Number: 9906747
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280045             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Gilchrist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed project is to determine how the human visual system
              computes the black, gray and white values of object surfaces represented in the
              optical image projected onto the retina.  This problem has not yet been solved
              for machine vision.  For example, there is currently no program that can
              determine the surface colors of objects within a video image.  A key part of
              the problem lies in disentangling variations in image intensity that are due to
              light and shadow from those that are due to light and dark gray surfaces.  The
              work proceeds using the method of psychophysics.  Visual images or displays are
              created that, when viewed under controlled conditions, allow a test between
              competing theories or hypotheses.  Ideally, for example, an image might be
              created so that a given target surface within the image should appear white
              according to Theory A but black according to Theory B.  The image is then
              viewed by human observers, who report the appearance of the target surface.
              
Three years ago, the PI proposed a new theory based on the concept of
              anchoring.  According to this theory, a complex image is parsed by the visual
              system into frameworks, or perceptual groups, based on rules of grouping.  For
              any given surface, several lightness (gray scale) values are computed, one for
              each group to which it belongs.  The shade of gray actually perceived for that
              surface is a weighted value of each of these computed values.  The work
              proposed here will extend the theory into a class of illusions that involve
              spatial intensity gradients.  The work will also focus on certain experience
              effects: how the perceived gray value is influenced by prior exposure to
              related scenes.  Finally, a series of experiments will examine how the relative
              area of surfaces influences their perceived gray level, especially in more
              complex images.  The project will also include the creation of a web page
              containing a comprehensive collection of visual illusions in lightness.  This
              publicly accessible collection is likely to be well used by educators and other
              researchers. 
