Title       : The X Chromosome and Human Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2001      
File        : a9906362

Award Number: 9906362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Nachman nachman@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Hammer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary objective of the proposed research is to study the origin of modern
              humans using patterns of DNA sequence variation at four genes experiencing low
              to high amounts of recombination on the X chromosome.  Within the last ten
              years, studies of mitochondrial, Y chromosome, and autosomal genes have been
              used to make inferences about long-term effective population size, age of
              lineages, location of ancestral lineages, pattern and timing of major
              migrations, population expansions, admixtures, and bottlenecks, and the genetic
              affinities of different ethnic groups. However, recent studies in molecular
              population genetics have revealed that many genes in the genome are influenced
              by selection at linked sites and thus do not serve as useful markers for
              tracking population processes. Genes in regions of the genome experiencing the
              highest rates of recombination are likely to be the best candidates for
              evaluating several important parameters of interest in models of human origins,
              including coalescence time and effective population size.

The proposed
              research will explicitly evaluate a continuum of models from the Recent African
              Replacement model to the Multiregional Evolution model using data from the X
              chromosome.  In particular, this research will (1) accurately estimate the time
              to the most recent common ancestor and the effective population size for
              individual geographic regions and for the human species as a whole, (2)
              reconstruct relationships of different geographic groups from patterns of
              genetic variation, and (3) provide a further test of the hypothesis that
              natural selection is acting to reduce genetic variability in genomic regions
              experiencing low rates of recombination.  Variation will be assayed by
              sequencing non-coding DNA in each of two high-recombination genes and two
              low-recombination genes in a global sample of 40 humans and representatives of
              the great apes (Pan troglodytes and Pongo pygmaeus).  For the two
              low-recombination genes, an additional 350 individuals representing many major
              ethnic groups will be surveyed using a mutation detection method (DHPLC) and
              DNA sequencing.

This proposal represents a collaborative effort that
              combines expertise in human evolution and population genetics.  Global surveys
              of X chromosome variation will provide a critical framework for testing
              hypotheses on the origins of anatomically modern human populations and their
              subsequent dispersals throughout the world.  The data generated in this
              research will also provide one of the most detailed pictures of the
structure
              of genetic variation at the nucleotide level in a large worldwide sample and
              will help determine the relative importance of different forces (mutation,
              drift, selection, and recombination) in shaping patterns of DNA sequence
              variation in our species.

