Title       : Dissertation Research: Navigating the Cold War Economy: Corporate Strategy and
               Commercial Innovation, 1945-1975
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9906350

Award Number: 9906350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7510               (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hounshell hounshel@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project addresses the longstanding debate on the
              economic impact of the Cold War by taking a comparative approach and focusing
              on industrial research. It proposes to illuminate the range of technological,
              organizational, and economic outcomes firms with different cultures, core
              technologies, R&D strategies, and levels of dependence on military contracts
              achieved within the Cold War research environment. It focuses on three areas:
              the first explores the extent to which ideas resonant among political,
              military, and scientific leaders during the Cold War concerning the
              relationship between science and technology influenced the content of military
              R&D contracting policies. Considered is the hypothesis, advanced by historians
              of industrial R&D, that a misreading of the contributions of scientific
              research to the major technological breakthroughs of World War 11 led military
              leaders to place undue emphasis on contracting for basic scientific research.
              The second area analyzes corporate strategy and the organization of industrial
              research from the end of the Korean War to the late 1960s at Westinghouse,
              Fairchild, Grumman, Boeing, Sperry, Lockheed, TRW, Rockwell, and Ford. Although
              corporations take center stage in this section, the researcher also examines
              the relationship between the military and industry to decipher the direct and
              indirect military influences on the organization of research within firms. The
              third area deals mostly with industry in the early 1970s. The researcher draws
              conclusions regarding the ability of individual firms to produce commercially
              successful innovations and makes claims regarding the overall impact of the
              Cold War on the United States economy. 
