Title       : Reliability Study of Oxidized Deposited Polysilicon (ODP) Gate Oxide for Silicon
               Carbide Power Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1999      
File        : a9906543

Award Number: 9906543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38898              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Ayers jayers@ee.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A F. Anwar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Faquir C. Jain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906543
Ayers

Silicon carbide (SiC) is a wide-bandgap semiconductor of great
              interest for high-power and high-temperature applications.  In particular, SiC
              metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistors (MOSFET's) are promising for
              high-power, high-temperature applications because of the inherent temperature
              stability of MOSFET's and because of the high quality of the oxide, which is
              SiO2. Of the various MOSFET designs, the U-groove MOSFET (U-MOSFET) is
              particularly well suited for high-power applications due to its high current
              capability.  U-MOSFET's may be fabricated in SiC using epitaxy and ion
              implantation, followed by anisotropic etching to form the U-groove, and then
              thermal oxidation to form the gate oxide.  This approach, although standard in
              Si technology, is problematic in SiC because of the strong anisotropy of the
              thermal oxidation.  It has been shown recently that this problem can be solved
              by the deposition of polycrystalline silicon, followed by thermal oxidation. 
              This two-step process results in gate-quality oxide with uniform thickness over
              U-groove structures.  In addition, the use of oxidized deposited polysilicon
              (ODP) gate oxide provides great flexibility in nitridation of the gate oxide. 
              Initial studies indicate that nitridation of the gate oxide in SiC MOSFET's can
              reduce hot carrier injection and improve reliability.  To date however, there
              have been few studies of the reliability of gate oxides in SiC MOSFET's under
              high-temperature, high-field conditions, and there have been no such studies in
              the case of ODP gate oxide.  The PI's propose to study the reliability of ODP
              gate oxide on SiC under high-stress conditions.

For this study, polysilicon
              will be deposited in a chemical vapor deposition system on {0001} 4H SiC
              wafers.  Polysilicon deposition will be carried out using silane diluted in UHP
              hydrogen, at 700oC.  The polysilicon, approximately 100 nm thick, will be
              oxidized in dry O2  at 1100oC for a time sufficient to consume all of the
              polysilicon.  Metal gates will then be deposited by the evaporation of aluminum
              or the deposition of doped polysilicon.  The PI's will study the reliability of
              the resulting MOS capacitors under high-stress conditions.  The MOS capacitors
              will be held at high field (106-107 V/cm) and high temperature (100-300oC). 
              The PI's will periodically
check the flat band voltage throughout the course
              of the stressing to assess the degradation.  The PI's will also use photo-CV
              measurements to determine the oxide interface state density before and after
              stressing.
***

