Title       : The International Dark-Sky Association: A Resource for Astronomy and for
               Environmental Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9906557

Award Number: 9906557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tomas E. Gergely                        
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151032             (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Crawford crawford@darksky.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Internat Dark Sky Assoc
	      3545 N Stewart
	      Tucson, AZ  85716    520/795-1381

NSF Program : 4650      RADIO SPECTRUM MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT Crawford - AST 99-06557

This proposal seeks a one-time
              organizational development grant which will allow the International Dark Sky
              Association (IDA) to expand its membership base with a targeted strategy that
              is expected to lead to a firm financial basis, ensuring the vitality of the
              organization as it pursues it's goal of fighting light pollution.  IDA seeks to
              preserve dark skies for the benefit of astronomy and society in general,
              through promotion of good outdoor lighting practices.  IDA has been effective
              in over the past decade in developing awareness of the light pollution issue,
              and in devising effective solutions.  IDA now must expand to meet its
              significantly increasing workload, and must create an organizational structure
              to eliminate dependence on volunteers, who carried the work of the organization
              until now.  IDA intends to significantly expand its membership base, to support
              its budget from membership contributions.

The strategy IDA intends to follow
              to achieve its membership goal is to do large mailings to selected groups with
              an interest in astronomy. With the funding sought, IDA will be able to greatly
              expand its outreach efforts and expects to achieve its goals.  IDA has been a
              major factor in protecting U.S. investment in astronomical facilities (optical
              telescopes) and developed an effective working relationship with the business
              and professional lighting communities, by adopting a cooperative win-win
              strategy for ameliorating light pollution, that at the same time results in
              large savings through energy conservation.  The organization expects to be
              strengthened, to continue its battle against light pollution, and in defense of
              U.S. and worldwide optical astronomy facilities. 


