Title       : PGE/LCP: Using Inquiry-Based Learning, Multicultural Education, and
               Sociocultural Constructivism to Enhance Girls' Participation and Academic
               Performance in SMET
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 9,  2002    
File        : a9906339

Award Number: 9906339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $685941             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan J. Brown susanbro@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alberto Rodriguez  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lisa Snow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick B. Scott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cathy Zozakeiwiz  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Even though women's enrollment in postsecondary institutions and graduation
              levels continue to increase, their participation in science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology (SMET) remains alarmingly low.  At the root of this
              problem is the lack of science content knowledge preparation of elementary
              teachers.  Elementary teachers often are only required to take as many as three
              science courses for certification, and they often are not exposed to a variety
              of pedagogical strategies for working effectively with girls in the classroom. 
              These two factors, combined with a broad and superficial elementary science
              curriculum, work against making SMET relevant to students at an early age.   At
              the same time, there is a desperate need to implement innovative and responsive
              intervention programs.  Therefore, the proposed study will build on current
              research on gender inclusive teaching, inquiry-based learning, multicultural
              education, and sociocultural and constructivism to provide an alternate
              framework for enhancing the academic performance and participation of girls in
              SMET.
     Hence, we seek to explore the following research questions:
    
              1.  In what ways does an inquiry-based, sociocultural constructivist, and
              multicultural orientation to teaching enhance cooperating and preservice
              teachers' abilities to work effectively with girls in the elementary
              classroom?
     2.  In what ways does an inquiry-based, sociocultural
              constructivist, and multicultural orientation to teaching enhance girls'
              attitudes toward and academic performance in SMET?
In what ways does an
              inquiry-based, sociocultural constructivist, and multicultural orientation to
              teaching help address the factors that negatively influence upper elementary
              girls' attitudes and academic performance in SMET over a period of three years
              (i.e., grades 4 though 6)?
     To explore these research questions, a
              three-year longitudinal study will be conducted. Three two-week summer
              institutes for 36 elementary teachers.  The first institute will start with
              science, followed by mathematics and science, and then the integration of SMET
              during the third institute.  Gender inclusive, minds-on activities will be
              modeled by the principal investigators in collaboration with three master
              teachers.  Participating teachers will also be responsible for preparing a
              two-week curriculum unit in teams according to the grade level in which they
              teach.  Data on pupil attitudes toward and performance grade level in science
              and mathematics will be gathered via questionnaires, unit pre- and post-
              content knowledge tests, and ethnographic interviews with a focus group.
    
              Preservice teachers will be paired with the teachers who participated in the
              summer workshop to increase the opportunities for professional development. 
              Finally, the cooperating teachers' growth will be followed up as the girls in
              their classrooms progress from grades 4 to 6.  Data will be analyzed using an
              ethnographic approach.  Thus, all participants will be visited regularly using
              an ethnographic approach.  Thus, all participants will be visited regularly by
              the research team, and several in-depth interviews and classroom observations
              will be conducted at key times during the course of the study.  The results of
              this study should increase our understanding of how to effectively prepare
              teachers to teach SMET in gender inclusive and socially relevant ways. 
              Similarly, this study will add insights on how to enhance the academic
              performance and attitude toward science of girls in diverse elementary
              schools.

