Title       : Digestive Specializations for Herbivory in Marine Fishes: Genetic Adaptation and
               Phenotypic Plasticity in Gut Structure and Function in Pricklebacks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9906857

Award Number: 9906857
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Horn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Horn   9906857

The requirements for herbivory in terms of gut structure and
              function remain poorly understood for marine fishes. The impetus for this
              research can be framed as a question: What does it take to be a herbivore? To
              answer this question, feeding experiments and accompanying histological and
              enzymatic analyses at different levels of biological organization will be
              performed. The work involves a two-part investigation addressing genetic
              adaptation and phenotypic plasticity of the digestive system in four related
              species of marine fishes. In the first part of the project, the objective is to
              test whether there are genetically programmed changes in gut structure and
              function that precede an ontogenetic dietary shift from carnivory to herbivory.
              To meet this objective, the activity, location, concentration and gene
              expression of a broad array of digestive and absorptive enzymes will be
              determined in the target fishes that have been fed a consistent animal diet
              during an interval in which two of the species naturally switch from carnivory
              to herbivory and the other two naturally remain carnivorous. In the second part
              of the project, the objective is to assess the degree of phenotypic plasticity
              in gut structure and function shown by carnivorous and herbivorous fishes. To
              meet this objective, gut structure and digestive enzyme adjustments and body
              composition changes will be determined during experiments in which the four
              target species are fed both a plant and an animal diet. The fishes chosen for
              this study are members of adjacent clades in a larger clade of a phylogeny that
              has been proposed for the family (Stichaeidae, pricklebacks) to which these
              species belong. These related taxa are viewed as model species for this type of
              research because all four begin life as carnivores, but two switch to herbivory
              as small juveniles while the other two remain carnivorous throughout life. The
              histological and enzymatic data obtained in the two-part study will be mapped
              as phenotypic traits onto the stichaeid phylogenetic tree using comparative
              biology methods to see whether adaptations for herbivory and the evolutionary
              trajectory of diet change can be inferred for this family of fishes. The
              research has the potential to make a substantial contribution to the
              understanding of gut structure and function in marine fishes and offers a model
              approach that can be applied to other marine systems. The use of an array of
              powerful in situ histochemical and molecular techniques in the context of both
              ontogeny and phylogeny should advance the knowledge of digestive processes
              among marine fishes in general and broaden the perspective on marine vertebrate
              herbivores. The project will also help advance science education and develop
              human resources by involving persons from a full range of academic levels and
              from different gender and ethnic backgrounds. Teaching, training and learning
              will be enhanced by this diversity of involvement and by the acquisition of new
              laboratory equipment.


