Title       : Dissertation Research: Needs Interpretation and the Construction of Gendered
               Citizenships: New Social Welfare Policies in the Netherlands and the United
               States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9906828

Award Number: 9906828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Raka Ray rakaray@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation project analyzes how the state constructs gendered
              citizenship as it interprets the needs of single mothers. The welfare office is
              one of the locations in which citizens meet the state face-to-face. Using the
              concept of "needs interpretation" we show how the state, represented by those
              who implement policy, is implicated in the construction of gendered needs
              associated with women's mothering, work, and care, and how these gendered needs
              constructions form the basis for female citizenship. Recent policy changes in
              the Netherlands and the United States offer the opportunity to analyze how
              welfare states construct the needs of one group of women, single mothers. In
              general, the outcome of the interaction between caseworkers and clients is
              determined by the levels of knowledge, the amount of discretion, and the kinds
              of ideologies held by both caseworkers and clients. At the same time,
              differences in welfare state regimes and in women's labor force participation
              rates will also affect caseworkers' efforts to channel single mothers into the
              labor force. In addition, women's own perceptions of their needs affect their
              interactions with the state as represented by their caseworkers. To understand
              these processes, client-caseworker interactions will be observed and in-depth
              interviews conducted with both clients and caseworkers in each country. This
              will show whether policies that appear to approach the problems of single
              mothers with very similar solutions have different results in the type of
              gendered citizenship ultimately constructed. These observations and interviews
              will focus on how certain needs associated with mothering, work, and care
              become salient while others are ignored and how in this process new bases of
              single mothers' citizenship rights are articulated. 
