Title       : Induction Motor Diagnostics and Advanced Control: Theory and Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9906218

Award Number: 9906218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Loparo kal4@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Wei Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Induction motors have found considerable applications in industry due to their
              reliability, ruggedness and relatively low cost.  Because there is no
              mechanical commutation and no sparks are produced, induction motors have found
              broad applications in volatile environments.  In spite of these advantages, the
              induction motor presents challenging problems in the detection, diagnosis and
              isolation of motor faults and the control of the electrical
              machine.

According to previous studies which have examined the reliability
              of induction motors and their associated failure modes, the three most probable
              failures are: mechanical failures in the rotor shaft bearings, short circuits
              in the stator windings, and rotor bar failures.  There is currently a
              significant need for the development of detection and diagnosis algorithms that
              can monitor, in real-time, the health of an induction motor.

The problem of
              modeling induction motors with a saturating magnetic circuit has always been an
              important subject.  It is well recognized that a linear magnetic circuit
              machine model does not capture all the dynamics of a real machine, especially
              the cross-saturation effects.  Although saturation modeling has been used for
              predicting the transient behavior of the motor, most of the previous work on
              control does not consider the effects of saturation on motor performance.  In
              controller synthesis, the common assumption of the linearity of the magnetic
              circuit is often justified by including the flux magnitude in the outputs to be
              regulated.  During machine transients the flux magnitude can exceed these
              saturation limits and the performance of the machine can be seriously
              compromised.  Also in many variable torque applications, it is desirable to
              operate in the magnetic saturation region to allow the machine to develop
              higher torque.

This proposal outlines a research program focusing on the
              development and evaluation (simulation and experimental) of algorithms for the
              detection and diagnosis of the most common types of motor faults and for the
              design of advanced control algorithms under a wide variety of motor operating
              conditions (e.g. magnetic and actuator saturation) and applications.



