Title       : Multiple-Dye Fluorescent Microspheres and Films-A New Approach for Luminescent
               Solar Concentrators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1999      
File        : a9906282

Award Number: 9906282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce P. Wittmershaus   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1504,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906282
Wittmershaus

This NSF-GOALI proposal provides support for an
              interdisciplinary research collaboration between Penn State Erie-The Behrend
              College and the scientists of Molecular Probes Inc.  The PI's primary objective
              is to use TransFluoSpheres fluorescent microspheres and dyes manufactured by
              Molecular Probes Inc. in luminescent solar concentrators (LSCs) and assess
              their performance in converting sunlight to electricity.  A LSC is a thin, flat
              plate of highly fluorescent material that uses total internal reflection to
              concentrate light at its edges where it is converted to electricity by
              semiconductor solar cell material.  The main advantage of the LSC is its cost. 
              It acts as a cheap, non-directional, area collector of light by focusing 75% of
              the photons it absorbs down to a very small area of expensive semiconductor
              material.

A LSC made with multiple-dye networks will absorb at least four
              times as many of the sun's photons as compared to traditional single-dye LSCs. 
              The dye networks are constructed to optimize resonant excitation energy
              transfer among the dyes, minimizing losses associated with reabsorption of
              emission.  Excitations created on the dyes hop among themselves until they end
              up on the lowest energy level dye molecules which then emit this energy as
              fluorescence within the LSC.  The fluorescent microspheres are unique in that
              95% of the excitations created in the dyes through the absorption of light are
              transferred to the low-energy level dye molecules.  The spheres are 40-nm in
              diameter and contain six or more types of dyes resulting in an absorption
              spectrum that covers the entire visible region from 350 to 720 nm.  They will
              also design and test LSCs composed of a thin-film of plastic containing
              multiple dyes at the proper relative concentrations to create an efficient
              excitation energy transfer network like the spheres.
They will incorporate the
              spheres and multiple-dye thin films into new designs for LSCs.  Light
              concentration at the LSCs' edge will be measured using solar illumination and
              compared with published data for single-dye LSCs.  The optical properties of
              the spheres and thin films will also be further characterized and modeled. 
              Limits on the lifetime of the materials imposed by degradation under
              terrestrial light and temperature conditions will be assessed.
This work will
              be a significant change in the strategy of designing LSCs and lead to an
              expected factor of four improvement in their collection of light, ultimately
              giving a lower cost per kilowatt!  They will increase their understanding of
              the optical characteristics of the spheres and determine the feasibility of
              using multiple-dye thin films to form efficient excitation energy transfer
              networks.  This will lead to better assessments of the potential for using
              these materials in other optical applications, such as lasers, and may assist
              Molecular Probes in improving their fluorescent bioprobes.
***

