Title       : Dissertation Research: Food-Associated Calls in Wild White-Faced Capuchin
               Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1999      
File        : a9906356

Award Number: 9906356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Seyfarth seyfarth@pdych.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dorothy L. Cheney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many animals give distinct vocalizations when feeding or upon discovering food.
              A number of hypotheses attempt to explain the evolution of these calls. One
              hypothesis argues that food calls are simply the involuntary consequence of
              excitement when the caller finds food.  Alternatively, food calls may inform
              others about the type, location, or amount of food that has been discovered.
              The meaning of food calls to others, and hence their presumed function, is
              often inferred by observing the responses of nearby listeners. However, calls
              that elicit the same response may be caused by different underlying mechanisms.
              Call meaning, in this sense, may be different from the signaler's and the
              recipient's perspective. The researchers propose field observations and
              experiments to study the causes of food-calling in wild white-faced capuchin
              monkeys living in Costa Rica. They will investigate how calling is influenced
              by (1) the presence or absence of an audience, (2) food quantity and
              subdivisibility, and (3) foraging context. Prior experience at the study site
              assures that the work can be completed in 12 months and that the experiments
              are feasible. Results will make a significant contribution to our understanding
              of the mechanisms that underlie vocal production in nonhuman primates. These
              data, in turn, will help to formulate theories about the evolution of human
              language.

