Title       : Motor/Alternator and Magnetic Bearing Design for Advanced Flywheel Energy
               Storage Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1999    
File        : a9906607

Award Number: 9906607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gwendolyn C. Owens                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178287             (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth R. Sanders sanders@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The development of cost effective flywheel energy storage technology
              is
proposed.   Flywheel energy storage is an important candidate technology
              for application
in electric drive vehicles, especially in hybrid electric
              vehicles, and in stationary
applications including uninterruptible power
              supplies, distributed energy storage, and 
off-grid power systems as
              potentially used in the developing world.   The distinguishing
advantage of
              flywheel energy storage with respect to the alternatives is its combination
of
              very high power density along with its moderate to respectively high energy
              density.
One scheme for realizing a low-cost flywheel energy storage system,
              to be investigated, relies
on the use of a single high-strength ferromagnetic
              steel structural member that 
suffices as both the energy storage rotor and
              the integrated rotor of an appropriately dimensioned
motor/alternator.  As
              outlined in the proposal, such a scheme can result in a functional
and cost
              effective high-power electrical energy storage reservoir.   The main focus of
              the research
will be on the design, fabrication, and test of prototype
              hardware to prove out this concept.
The effort will focus on the design of
              this integrated motor/alternator, and on the design of 
a suitable active
              magnetic bearing system for this application.  
In particular, an active
              magnetic bearing that incorporates self-sensing where the bearing 
control
              windings are also effectively used for sensing
is proposed.   Existing active
              magnetic bearings suffer from complexity due to the need to
              incorporate
separate dedicated position sensing devices, along with the
              required support hardware and power.
A consequence is in high cost and
              compromised reliability of these magnetic bearing systems. 

