Title       : Assessment of the Toxicity and Endocrine Disruption Potential of Municipal,
               Construction and Demolition, and Industrial Solid Wastes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2001      
File        : a9906060

Award Number: 9906060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $377992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriel Bitton gbitton@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy D. Denslow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy G. Townsend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9906060  Bitton  This is an award to support research on toxicology of leachates
              emerging from landfills containing solid wastes originating from landfills that
              contain municipal and industrial construction and demolition debris.  The
              leachates from three existing landfills will be studied to determine their
              acute toxicity applying procedures developed in research conducted under NSF
              Grant No. BES 91-17267 in which procedures were developed to use microbial
              assays to distinguish between heavy metal and organic chemical toxicity.  In
              this new project, the baseline toxicity of leachates from existing solid waste
              landfills in Alachua, Citrus and Levy Counties in Florida will be studied to
              determine their baseline toxicities, the extent to which these are attributable
              to their content of heavy metals and to determine their potential for endocrine
              disruption.  Leachates will also be produced in laboratory columns simulating
              exposure of solid wastes to rainfall and in batch procedures using buffers,
              deionized water and solvents as eluants.  These leachates will be passed
              through soil columns to determine the toxicity attenuation potential achieved
              by passage through soil.  A recombinant yeast will be used to detect
              environmental estrogens in mixed solid waste and vitellogen produced by fathead
              minnows will be used as a biomarker for assessment of endocrine disruption.
              

Solid wastes from construction and demolition activities are generally
              placed on sites and in landfills that are not lined or otherwise designed or
              constructed to prevent or restrain leachate from contaminating soil and
              groundwater.  Results of this research are likely to provide knowledge that can
              be used to determine the appropriate placement and engineering design of
              landfills to avoid pollution of soil, surface and groundwater by landfill
              leachates.  The work is also expected to validate short-term assays that can be
              used to rapidly detect the potential a solid waste has for toxicity, endocrine
              disruption and other deleterious environmental effects on environmental
              resources.***

