Title       : Demographic and Environmental Change in the Blantyre City Fuelwood Project Area
               in Southern Malawi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a9906409

Award Number: 9906409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92121              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ezekiel Kalipeni kalipeni@staff.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              During the 1980s and 1990s, considerable scholarly attention has been devoted by
              geographers and scientists from many other fields to land-use and environmental
              change in sub-Saharan Africa, with special emphasis on the savanna areas that
              are inhabited by the majority of Africa's people.  The results of these
              empirical studies have challenged previous assumptions regarding population
              growth and environmental change, the resiliency and "patchiness" of savanna
              ecologies, and the capacity of local institutions to regulate resource use. 
              Population growth has been found to be only one factor influencing
              environmental change, with other factors like differences in natural
              environmental conditions, market access, social institutions, land tenure,
              technology, and policy also playing important roles in a complex set of
              processes.  This project adds to this body of knowledge through the conduct of
              a detailed study of demographic and environmental change in a peri-urban area
              of the City of Blantyre in Malawi where a fuelwood plantation was began in
              1986.  The objectives of the study are fourfold.  First the study will analyze
              land-cover and land-use changes over a 50-year period using aerial photographs
              from 1948, 1968, 1982, and 1992 and satellite images from 1985 and 1995. 
              Second, the study will analyze population dynamics in this area, focusing on
              population growth, population distribution, fertility, mortality, and migration
              as well as on how these demographic processes have changed over time.  Third,
              the study will assess the impact of the city of Blantyre on environmental and
              demographic changes in this area through its demand for fuelwood resources,
              livestock, and agricultural produce.  Finally, the study will evaluate the
              impact of the Blantyre City Fuelwood Project on the lives of the local people
              in terms of land pressures, land acquisition, resource use, and employment
              generation and will document the views of the villagers with regard to the
              proposed transfer of the plantations from the government to local control. 
              These objectives will be achieved in a two-year study that integrates remotely
              sensed data with ground-based observations of land-use practices and changes
              and demographic and household characteristics of communities within the project
              area.  Using a political ecology framework, this study will evaluate the ways
              that the colonial context, contemporary international context, and national,
              regional, and local interests have all combined to create artificial land
              scarcities, conflict, and environmental change in an ecologically fragile and
              marginal area.  This research will contribute significantly to current
              theoretical debates on the relationship between environment, population, and
              other regional, national, and international factors, and it will develop
              mathematical models of the complex dynamics of demographic and natural
              environmental change in a densely settled, semi-urban area of southern
              Africa.

