Title       : PGE/LCP: Girls in the System (Sustaining Youth in Science, Technology,
               Engineering & Mathematics)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9906152

Award Number: 9906152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $819216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marta Civil civil@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Poulton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arlene Quiroz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katrina L. Mangin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Supapan Seraphin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Girls in the SYSTEM (Sustaining Youth in Science, Technology, Engineering &
              Mathematics)
A.  Project Summary.  Five departments of the University of
              Arizona and the Sahuaro Girl Scout Council have forged a partnership to create
              a three-year project to improve science, technology, engineering and
              mathematics (STEM) education for girls in grades 3-8, especially Mexican
              American, Native American and economically underprivileged girls in southern
              Arizona.  The partnership connects two groups with significant experience
              working with girls and minorities as well as with educators in STEM and
              represents a crucial linking of informal and formal education for this target
              population.  It adopts a holistic model connecting the educational system with
              its broader social context.  The project builds on research and past efforts in
              three significant ways:  by emphasizing home and community connections; by
              uniting university educators, inservice teachers, preservice teachers, and
              Girls Scout troop leaders; and by linking the following program components:
1)
               After-School and Summer Programs are designed to stimulate and nurture girls'
              interests in using methods of inquiry to enhance their understandings of STEM. 
              They will take place at sites established by the Sahuaro Girl Scout Council. 
              While after-school programs will be for girls exclusively, mixed gender
              settings will be incorporated into summer programs to allow all participants,
              youth and educators, to benefit from interacting in a gender equitable context.
               Both programs will engage youth in the use of challenging, hands-on activities
              that support and expand their abilities to solve problems using the tools of
              scientific investigation and their natural curiosity about how things work. 
              Inservice and preservice teachers (formal educators), Girls Scout troop leaders
              (informal educators) will facilitate the after-school and summer programs
              collaboratively.
2)  Professional Development Workshops will be offered for
              formal and informal educators.  These will provide opportunities for work with
              innovative educational resources that will increase participants' knowledge of
              STEM and provide instructional ideas for their work with youth.  The workshops
              will foster collaboration and promote mentoring relationships between these
              groups of educators.  They will also focus on issues of equity in STEM, on uses
              of alternative pedagogies, and on educational bridges between home, school and
              careers.
3)  Workshops for Parents and other family members will serve to
              strengthen their roles as legitimate partners in the education of their
              children, especially of their daughters.  The workshops will actively engage
              family members in STEM activities and apprise them of ways of supporting the
              academic preparation of their children.  In addition, discussions and career
              panel presentations will inform parents of the long-term implications and
              benefits of succeeding in STEM and of the institutional and societal obstacles
              that minority children often face in participating in STEM.
4)  Leadership
              Development Opportunities will be offered to adult participants to allow them
              to take leadership in extending the project's impact.  Mini-grants and equity
              internships will enable them to develop activities such as study groups,
              mother-daughter STEM events, and presentations to other interested community
              groups.
5)  Research created by means of the project evaluation will add to
              the sparse knowledge base on STEM education with Mexican American and Native
              American girls.

