Title       : Modeling and Experimentation of Power Magnetic Components at Temperature Units
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2002   
File        : a9906254

Award Number: 9906254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299935             (Estimated)
Investigator: Khai D. Ngo kdtn@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loc Vu-Quoc  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Modeling and Experimentation of Power Magnetic Components at Temperature
              Limits
With the availability of semiconductor devices that operate at
              temperatures up to 300'C, there is a growing need in the formulation of a
              design paradigm for power converters in high-temperature, high-power-density
              applications.  Since Power Magnetic Components (POMADES) are an integral part
              of power converters, their engineering for temperatures that are as high as
              possible, or "temperature limits," is an essential part of the said
              paradigm.
Thus, an interdisciplinary research program is proposed that will
              take a refreshing look at core material and component modeling, simulation,
              configurations, experimental measurements, and design optimization.  The
              proposed work is "refreshing" in that temperature will be of first-order
              importance, and will not be conveniently neglected.  The results are expected
              to be useful for not only high-, but also low-temperature magnetic
              designs.
The core materials will be modeled by temperature-dependent
              "measured-core models" that characterize both the intrinsic magnetic properties
              and the geometry/dimensional effects.  Temperature will be emphasized by
              temperature-induced, field-dependent functions that modify the applied magnetic
              fields, thereby reshaping the static hysteresis loops as temperature changes.
              The frequency and geometry dependencies of the hysteresis phenomenon will be
              modeled by filters, or by the equivalent circuits that result from
              finite-element discretization of Maxwell's equations and from model-reduction
              techniques.
POMAC configurations will be identified that are suitable for
              high-temperature operation.  The effectiveness of "matrix" configurations,
              planar configurations, "hybrid cores," and "heat spreaders" in distributing the
              electromagnetic and thermal variables uniformly will be investigated as means
              to extend the temperature limits.
POMAC models will be developed for efficient
              coupled nonlinear electro-magneto-thermal simulation of POMACs with the other
              converter components.  The models can predict flux and temperature
              nonuniformities due to frequency-, geometry-, and self-heating effects that,
              when coupled with the degradation of material parameters near temperature
              limits, ultimately lead to thermal runaway.  A POMAC model will comprise
              coupled electrical and thermal subcircuits representing electrical and thermal
              substructures of weakly nonuniform distribution of flux and temperature.  The
              subcircuit topology will be the high-order (in the geometry and frequency
              sense) generalization of the measured-core model.  The subcircuit components
              are extracted from the electrical and thermal finite-element matrices by
              substructuring and model-reduction techniques.
Experimentally-measured data
              for the core materials and POMACs at temperature limits and in the
              multimegahertz frequency range will be obtained and published.  These data are
              not widely available and difficult to find in the literature.
The
              temperature-sensitive design optimization will start with the derivation of
              analytical relationships between the set of performance parameters (e.g.
              temperature limits, power density, efficiency, and bandwidth) and the set of
              input parameters (e.g.,   temperature, dimensions, and excitation waveshapes)
              using the multiple response surface methodology.  Design guidelines,
              performance boundaries, and design trade-offs unique to operation near
              temperature limits will be established.




