Title       : Multi-Modal Communication: Signal Variation, Interaction Between Modes, and
               Relationship to Fitness Benefits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a9906446

Award Number: 9906446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114999             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Uetz GEORGE.UETZ@UC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Animals use multiple modes of communication (e.g., sounds, visual and/or
              chemical cues) to recognize members of their own species and discriminate them
              from others. The research goal is to understand the role of multi-modal
              signaling in an invertebrate animal model (spiders). As invertebrates have a
              limited behavioral repertoire and very little learning ability, species
              recognition in spiders is innate and based on simple cues. It is therefore
              possible to experiment with specific aspects of multi-modal signals, and gain
              insights about the recognition "program" encoded within their simple nervous
              system. Video / audio digitization and playback experiments will examine the
              relationship between visual and vibration signals produced by (male) "senders"
              and the information they convey to (female) "receivers".  In addition, field
              studies will determine how the
environment affects transmission of different
              signal modes. 

 Results will allow a better understanding of mechanisms
              involved in animal communication, and their adaptive value. The research will
              also contribute to growing knowledge about ecologically important but
              poorly-understood invertebrate predators. Additionally, this research involves
              training students in the use of a powerful computer-assisted technique that
              could be applied to a variety of research questions in animal behavior,
              neurobiology and other fields (image recognition, artificial intelligence).


