Title       : Spirits, Serpents & Skills: Science at the Margins in the Age of Darwin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1999 
File        : a9906085

Award Number: 9906085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael M. Sokal                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40954              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherrie L. Lyons   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As part of this project the investigator is continuing the research and writing
              required to produce a book tentatively titled Spirits. Serpents, and Skulls:
              Science at the Margins in the Age of Darwin, being prepared under contract from
              Johns Hopkins University Press as part of its new series: Introductory Studies
              in the History of Science. The press has initiated this series because very
              little has been written at an introductory level in the history of science. We
              live in a culture where science permeates virtually every aspect of our lives.
              However, most people are woefully ignorant of what distinguishes science from
              other types of knowledge and they lack any sense of the historical development
              of scientific ideas. This project uses three historical case studies --
              phrenology, spiritualism, and sea serpents -- to address these issues within
              the context of Darwin's theory of evolution. It also will illustrate how
              history is useful for understanding the present by exploring questions that
              these earlier episodes raise for present day research.

Professionals within
              the discipline need to make an effort to have their work reach a broader
              audience. This book will contribute to the education of students and the
              general public by providing highly entertaining and accessible material to
              discuss a variety of important questions concerning the theory, practice, and
              content of science. However, this work is not merely to make accessible what is
              already known. There are several aspects of the project which are quite
              original. First, to use evolutionary theory as the connecting link for these 3
              examples of marginal science is a novel idea that will further our
              understanding of the Victorian era as well as of the nature of scientific
              practice. Furthermore, the treatment of evolution differs from earlier studies
              that do not usually see natural selection as a marginal science. The research
              on sea serpents is original and this project will allow the author to write up
              those results. While most scholars have dealt with one specific example of
              "pseudo-science," the comparative approach will allow the author to explore in
              depth the interest in marginal sciences as a 19th century phenomena. Finally,
              to explore the relevance of these historical episodes for present day research
              is an original idea and will contribute significantly to the ongoing
              discussions about the nature of science and society.

