Title       : Primitive Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  2000  
File        : a9906439

Award Number: 9906439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Marchalonis dianah@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel F. Schluter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The combinatorial immune response of vertebrates is a complex and precisely
              regulated defense system that builds upon universal mechanisms regulating cell
              activation and division, but incorporates the unique feature of recombination
              of gene segments to generate the variability which enables recognition of 
              diverse antigens.  In previous grants the recombinase activating gene (RAFG 1)
              and the  immunoglobulin genes of carcharhine sharks have been cloned and
              characterized by these investigators.  The immunoglobulin genes specifying
              shark l light chains and m and w heavy chains have been analyzed in terms of
              the diversity of their variable regions, the sequence and phylogenetic
              relationships among the constant regions, and the organization of the gene
              segments.   The arrangement of immunoglobulin genes in sharks differs from that
              of mammals in that each light chain or heavy chain gene is an individual self
              contained cluster unlinked to any of the others.  These investigators have
              cloned and sequenced the RAG 1 gene and found it homologous to counterparts in
              higher vertebrates and the microbial integrases.  These results, in the context
              of studies on the activity of the mammalian RAG1/RAG2 proteins in
              recombination, support the hypothesis that the combinatorial immune response of
              jawed vertebrates was the result of horizontal transfer of genes enabling site
              specific recombination of the immunoglobulin gene segments to occur ("big bang"
              hypotheses).  This project will focus upon the isolation and cloning of the
              shark RAG2 gene, the determination of its gene sequence and phylogenetic
              relationships, and the assessment of its functional activity.  Then RAG1 and
              RAG2 will be cloned into eucaryotic expression constructs and tested in vitro
              transient expression assays for RAG activity.    They will try to determine
              whether these RAG proteins increase junctional diversity, like RAGs in higher
              vertebrates.   The results of this study will provide fundamental information
              on the evolutionary origins and functional properties of the genes facilitating
              the emergence of the combinatorial immune system of vertebrates.

