Title       : Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Effect of Cultural Perception on
               Archaeological Site Location Pattening: A Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta, Alaska Case
               Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9906804

Award Number: 9906804
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11958              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline L. Funk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Effect of Cultural Perception on Archaeological Site Location Patterning:
              The Yukon-Kuksokwim Delta Region of Alaska.

This project will investigate
              the role of subsistence and extra-subsistence factors on late 19th
              century-early 20th century Cup'ik site selection on the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta
              of Alaska.  This project differs from past hunter-gatherer site location
              studies by including both archaeological and oral historical data.  Subsistence
              efficiency and landscape-based behavioral models are more effectively tested
              with subsistence and extra-subsistence factors like conflict, religion,
              politics, and personal preference.  A total cultural perception is utilized
              rather than just a strongly materialist archaeological record, which enhances
              and improves model testing and further model development.  Variables measuring
              and defining factors involved in site location selection will be coded from
              existing oral histories and site reports collected by the Bureau of Indian
              Affairs, and from a regional satellite image based GIS developed for this
              study.  Multivariate statistics will identify relationships or lack thereof
              between factors and archaeological sites.  This process will result in an
              understanding of what aspects of site location were important to Cup'iks c.
              1900.  It will define a cultural perception of the landscape specific to the
              time and place.  For archaeology as a whole, the project will increase our
              ability to explain and predict hunter-gatherer site location selection
              processes and site location patterns throughout time and space.


