Title       : Scientists and the Making of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a9906202

Award Number: 9906202
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kai-Henrik Barth khb3@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports a two-year NSF Science and Technology Studies Postdoctoral
              Fellowship.  This fellowship is being carried out in the Program in Science,
              Technology, and International Affairs (STIA) in the School of Foreign Service
              at Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.  The primary objectivies of this
              project are professional development of the researcher in the discipline of
              science studies and the continuation of a research project into the role of
              scientists in international relations.                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        The Professional development
              objective is bein carried out through a mentoring arrangement between the
              researcher and  Charles Weiss, Director of STIA.  In addition, the researcher
              is attending advanced courses given in the School of Foreign Service, primarily
              on international relations and foreign policy.  Writing is a major component of
              the project.  The researcher is seeking out constructive feedback on his
              writing from his mentor and other faculty at the School of Foreign Services.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                The research project uses methodologies developed in history
              of recent science (archival and library research and oral history interviews
              with participants) and is informed by theories of international relations and
              practices of foreign policy making.  The long-term objective of the research
              project is to provide a detailed historical study of how individual
              scienctists, primarily from the United States and Europe, shaped the
              political-technical content of amajor international agreement, the
              Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, over a period of four decades.  Political
              scientists have studeied the role of experts in various branches of the
              government, but less so the avenues used by scientists to bring scientific and
              technical expertise to bear on specific problems in international relations. 
              The suggested coupling of science studies and political science will advance
              the dialog between science studies practitioners, political scientists, policy
              makers and scientists.  This research has historical, sociological and
              political dimensions, which make it particularly well suited to the Science and
              Technology Studies Program.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
