Title       : Application Driven Evaluation, Design, and Implementation of Network Services
               and Resource Sharing Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a9906855

Award Number: 9906855
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $983750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roch Guerin guerin@ee.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Magda El Zarki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this proposal is on problems that arise in the context of QoS
              enabled networks and their use by applications.  In particular, the main theme
              of the proposal, is the development of a greater
synergy between potential
              users of network QoS capabilities, i.e., applications, and the design and
              implementations of those QoS capabilities within the network.  In order to
              accomplish such a goal, work will be carried out along the following three
              major axes:

1. Use and selection of network QoS services and parameters by
              applications. The goal here is to identify performance parameters that are of
              most significance to applications, and translate that knowledge into
              {\em
utility} curves that can then be used by both applications to select the
              appropriate network service, and by the network to make intelligent decisions
              on how to best handle an application's traffic in case of resources contention.
               This includes not only assessing sensitivity to traditional QoS parameters
              such as bandwidth, loss, delay, and jitter of different types of applications
              traffic, e.g., transactions, audio, video, etc., but also considering more
              complex scenarios involving applications with multiple traffic streams
              which
might involve different (dynamic) resource sharing rules depending on
              the availability of network resources.

2. Algorithms for performance
              monitoring, resource sharing, and dynamic resource allocation in support of
              both network and applications requirements.  The goal here is to design and
              evaluate specific network level
mechanisms in support of applications
              requirements for dynamic sharing of resources and service monitoring.  For
              example, access to a ``high quality'' service by certain traffic streams might
              be predicated on the presence or absence of other streams.  Devising and
              assessing mechanisms allowing the specification and implementation of such
              functionality can greatly improve the ability of networks to deliver services
              that are useful to applications.  The challenges are not only to design
              mechanisms capable of supporting applications requirements, but also to
              integrate them with existing network services and capabilities.  For example,
              it may require coupling between services above and beyond what is currently
              supported, e.g., ensure small delay to an audio stream, but only as long as a
              given floor rate can be guaranteed to data transfers.

3. Design and
              implementation of programmability in network devices in support of applications
              requirements and new service models.  The goal of this last dimension of the
              proposal is to investigate the possibility of supporting applications needs and
              some of the above associated mechanisms, by leveraging some of the
              programmability that is being made available in a number of new network
              devices.  The benefits of such an approach, if feasible, are that it can foster
              incremental deployment as well as facilitate the introduction of new
              capabilities if and when required by new applications.  The challenges are to
              identify the appropriate trade-off between functionality and the implementation
              constraints that the technology imposes.
 
The investigation of the above
              topics will be carried out through both experimental and analytical efforts. 
              Experimentation will take place in the context of a newly established lab
              devoted to multimedia and
networking, that includes end-systems as sources of
              application traffic, and networking equipment made available by several
              vendors.  Furthermore, work on the design and implementation of new
              mechanisms
to better support application service requirements, will be done in
              close collaboration with equipment vendors so as to facilitate their
              incorporation and testing on the available platforms.  Finally, participation
              in the QBone Internet2 testbed will allow us to carry out end-to-end
              experiments that would not be feasible with only a local testbed.  In
              particular, the QBone environment provides a representative sample of the type
              of network QoS services that will be initially available, and the experiments
              that will be carried out over
it will offer the opportunity to investigate not
              only how applications should use them, but also to identify related problems
              that may arise in their initial deployment.

