Title       : MII: Planning for a Research Program in Intelligent Mobile Information Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1999  
File        : a9906589

Award Number: 9906589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jung H. Kim kim@ncat.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Lebby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Earnest Sherrod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Winser E. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2886,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9906589
Kim, Jung H. 
Alexander, Winser E.
Lebby, Gary
Sherrod, Earnest
              
North Carolina  A & T State University

Planning for a Research Program in
              Intelligent Mobile Information Systems

This planning MII award will
              contribute to strengthen the development of a continuing MII proposal at NCAT
              State University by:
Increasing participation of minority students in research
              activities to stimulate students' interest in advanced degrees in intelligent
              mobile information systems
Strengthening instructional and research
              capabilities of the department
Establishing  substantial links with other
              institutions and labs
Planning for the development of a successful MII
              continuing proposal utilizing the strengths in both EE and CIS
              departments

The award will also be used to initiate the development of a
              degree in Computer Engineering.  The proposal identified the following research
              projects where efforts will be made to continue involving and retaining more
              students:
Intelligent Video Coding for Heterogeneous Networks
High
              Performance Special Purpose Computer System
Teleoperation over Heterogeneous
              Networks

While increasing the participation of women and minorities in
              graduate education, the project will facilitate, enhance, and intensify
              research in CISE areas.  Through this effort, NCAT is expected to develop
              further its computer engineering research capabilities involving minority
              students in greater numbers, paving the way for the conferring of more doctoral
              degrees to under-represented groups, particularly African Americans and women
              in Computer Information Science and Engineering.  It is hoped that through
              these efforts, the nation might find a successful model that will help in
              building a better racially and ethnically balanced technological enterprise for
              the benefit of its present and future generations.


