Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dynamics in Montane Grasslands: The Invasion of
               an Exotic Species in Rocky Mountain National Park
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1999      
File        : a9906617

Award Number: 9906617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nina S. Lam                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan W. Beatty susan.beatty@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1305,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The National Park Service and other conservation-oriented organizations
              historically have tried to maintain park land and wilderness areas in their
              natural conditions, but the invasion of exotic species often has altered
              indigenous plant communities.  Nitrogen-fixing plants alter biogeochemical
              processes and facilitate future exotic invasions.  This doctoral dissertation
              research project addresses spatial and resource competitive effects of an
              exotic species, yellow sweet clover (Melitotus officinalis), in montane
              grasslands in Rocky Mountain National Park.  Preliminary analyses show that M.
              officinalis invasion spreads into native communities and induces an altered
              species composition from lowered nutrient availability and soil microclimate
              changes.  Continued research will focus on the hypotheses that native species
              will benefit from prescribed burning and nitrogen manipulations while M.
              officinalis spread and density will decrease.  Research methods to be used in
              this project include sampling soil and vegetation in replicate disturbed sites
              of invaded and non-invaded patches.  Preliminary results show that M.
              officinalis expanded past original mapped boundaries throughout the season, and
              species composition is different between patches.  Soil analysis shows lower
              nitrogen availability, net mineralization, and soil moisture in patches
              occupied by M. officinalis.  Historical aerial photographs, global positioning
              systems, and geographic information systems will be used to map exotic
              invasion.  Field methods during the latter stages of the project will
              incorporate prescribed burning in several sites and nitrogen manipulations
              along patch edges.  This project will provide new insights into the processes
              of biological invasions and altered chemical processes.  In addition to
              generating fundamental knowledge about these biogeographic and biogeochemical
              processes, this project will provide practical information for land managers,
              especially as it relates to the role that prescribed fires and nitrogen
              manipulations may play in the preservation of natural vegetation communities. 
              As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will
              provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

