Title       : Ballistic Electron Emission Luminescence and Microscopy for Complementary
               Optical and Electronic Characterization of Buried III-V Semiconductor
               Heterostructures on the Local Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9906047

Award Number: 9906047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkatesh Narayanamurti venky@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906047
Narayanamurti

To improve the performance of quantum devices, there
              is an increasing demand for nanometer-scale characterization of semiconductor
              structures.  Under prior NSF support, The PI's have pioneered the use of the
              Ballistic electron emission microscopy (BEEM) as a powerful new low energy
              electron microscopy for lateral imaging and spectroscopy (also with nm
              resolution) for buried structures placed up to 10 nm below the surface.

They
              now propose a novel variant of BEEM by adding the capability of simultaneous
              BEEM-induced luminescence (BEEL) to probe novel optoelectronic quantum
              heterostructures based on arsenides, nitrides, phosphides, and
              antimonides.

A combination of BEEM and photons offers distinct advantages. 
              First, by detecting photons emitted from a BEEM, sensitive optical techniques
              may be used for detection and analysis.  Photons thus represent a particularly
              rich, additional channel of information to study semiconductor
              heterostructures.  Second, by exciting the photon emission with BEEM, a
              well-defined source is used.  Its lateral extension is of atomic dimensions (~
              few nm) and its distance from the sample, a crucial factor in any near-field
              technique, may be controlled with picometer precision.  Third, a comparative
              analysis of BEEM and BEEL would allow simultaneous spatial mapping of both
              optical and electronic properties of buried semiconductor structures with high
              spatial resolution and to study their correlation.

The optical and transport
              properties of the buried semiconductor structures will be studied by using the
              integrated BEEM/BEEL system, wherein we will use a tunneling-electron beam from
              the tip of BEEM as a local excitation source of BEEL.  In this way, in addition
              to BEEM current, they will record BEEL spectra as well as maps of BEEL as a
              function of lateral position of the tip.  To collect effectively the
              luminescence signal while conserving a good thermal and electrical isolation of
              the tip-to-sample zone, they propose to use high numerical-aperture fibers
              spaced close to the sample.  In addition, the use of a metal-coated optical
              fiber as a STM tip will allow us to take an advantage of the combined NSOM and
              BEEM measurements.  Optional photoexcitation of the structure will also allow
              them to study spatially-resolved photoluminescence (PL) and PL excitation as
              well as the BEEM current photomodulation.

Such studies using BEEM/BBEEL have
              never been done before.  Through such studies, they expect to advance their
              understanding of carrier transport and recombination dynamics in
              technologically important quantum structures such as AlGaN/GaN and GaInP/GaAs
              quantum wells as well as InP and GaSb self-assembled quantum dots, of the
              effect of ordering in spontaneously ordered GaInP2, alloys, and of the
              nano-scaled defects and dislocations in GaN.
***









