Title       : Advanced Gate Dielectrics for Silicon Carbide Metal Oxide Semiconductor
               Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9906255

Award Number: 9906255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Veena Misra vmisra@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906255
Misra

Silicon carbide is an attractive material for high power, high
              frequency and high temperature applications.  The ability of SiC to grow
              insulating SiO2 layers by thermal oxidation has been used in the fabrication of
              metal oxide semiconductor, MOS, devices such as field effect transistors, FETs.
               Significant research has been conducted on the SiC/SiO2 interface, but to
              date, i) a high density of interface states and fixed oxide charge and ii) poor
              reliability limit the functionality of SiC FET devices.  Additionally,
              differences have been observed in the interface state densities between the 6H
              and 4H polytypes that are not understood, but may be related to differences
              between the band structures of these two polytypes, or alternatively to
              differences in the way suboxide, SiOx, bonding in the thermally grown oxide
              lines up with the interface band structure. The electric field in the SiO2
              layer is higher than the peak field in the semiconductor by the ratio of
              dielectric constants.  Since SiC devices are operated at very high electric
              fields, the gate dielectric field can become precariously high resulting in
              reliability problems.

This proposal will investigate several areas that are
              currently challenging the successful development of high performance SiC MOS
              devices.  First, an atomic level understanding of the interfacial properties of
              SiO2 and SiC and its effect on the channel mobility must be obtained through
              electrical and analytical techniques.  The disparate behavior between the 6H
              and 4H SiC polytypes is not understood and needs to be explored at the atomic
              level.  Additionally, the implementation of advanced dielectrics on SiC to
              improve reliability problems must also be considered.  SiC devices are operated
              at higher fields than Si devices.  Therefore, a dielectric with a higher
              dielectric constant than SiO2 will experience a lower electric field.  This
              warrants the investigation of high-K dielectrics such as Si3N4,A12O3, Ta2O5,
              TiO2 and ZrSiO4, etc.  Many of these dielectrics are already being aggressively
              studied for their potential implementation on Si.

This program address the
              interfacial issues discussed above by applying remote plasma-assisted
              processing and rapid thermal processing to the formation of SiC-dielectric
              interfaces.  This includes interfacial nitridation and implementation of
              alternative high-K dielectrics.  The program will combine advanced analytical
              approaches to interface characterization, and as for Si device technology
              establish important links between
electrical behavior and atomic scale
              structure and bonding.
***

