Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rural Tourism Development in Kotzebue, Alaska
               and the Production of Place, Memory, and Corporate Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2000   
File        : a9906923

Award Number: 9906923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Roberts geg207@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl Raitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 5221      ARCTIC SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ROBERTS, RAITZ, and KURTZ. The doctoral dissertation study is concerned with the
              effects of political, economic, and cultural change associated with tourism
              development in rural Alaska. The research examines how places have been
              represented, the kinds of organizations that have been developed to promote
              tourism, and the ways in which tourism and its promotion have created
              collective memories of people and places. It focuses on the case of tourism
              promotion in Kotzebue, Alaska, and asks three inter-related research questions:
              (1) How has traditional and rural Alaska been represented in tourism products,
              performances, advertising, and development? (2) How and why did key groups in
              tourism and rural development adopt corporate forms of social organization? and
              (3) How do practices of shared or social memory (oral and written) construct
              and reproduce social groups and social identities in the context of tourism
              development? Drawing from archival research and extensive interviews from the
              first stage of the study, this stage uses more intensive, field-based methods
              including oral history and organizational ethnography. The results of this
              research will provide material to support the development of more integrative
              planning processes between urban and rural tourism organizations, as well as
              contribute to literature in historical-cultural geography and development
              theory.
