Title       : A Terabit IP Router with Advanced QoS Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9906673

Award Number: 9906673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $454202             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Jonathan Chao chao@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Internet is widely considered as the most reachable platform of
              next-generation information infrastructure.  Although IP/DWDM (internet
              protocol over dense wavelength division multiplexing) technology has been
              demonstrated to transport 1 terabit/s bandwidth over a single fiber, the
              capability of routing IP packets at 1 terabit/s still remains to be seen. 
              Furthermore, in order to provide different
quality-of-service (QoS)
              requirements for the Next Generation Internet (NGI), IETF has suggested the
              Internet Integrated Services (IIS) with resource ReSerVation signaling protocol
              (RSVP).  Although several
algorithms have been proposed to guarantee the
              stringent delay bound for the guarantee service flows, how to implement them at
              the aggregate rate of terabit/s remains challenging.

This proposal tackles
              the problem by designing a large-capacity switch fabric for a terabit IP router
              and tightly controlling packet delay at the input and output ports of the
              router.  The proposed terabit IP
switch router consists of multiple routing
              modules (RMs) that are interconnected by a fast switch fabric. Each RM forwards
              arriving packets independently, thus allowing the router to scale flexibly up
              to terabit/s.  With the application of the following innovations, supporting
              the IIS at terabit/s is conceivably achievable.

First, a novel dual round
              robin (DRR) arbitration scheme is proposed to provide statistically bounded
              delay at the input ports of a nonblocking input-output buffered crossbar packet
              switch with a moderate speedup.  The DRR is a distributed switch control
              scheme, in which input selection and output contention resolution are
              separatedly handled by two independent sets of round-robin arbiters.  The
              switch is used to provide high speed interconnection among RM's.  By using
              bit-slice technique with multiple switch planes, the switch operation speed is
              reduced and can be implemented with low-cost CMOS technology.

Second, a
              novel token tunneling mechanism is proposed to implement the DRR scheme at
              terabit/s.  It is shown that with state-of-the-art 0.25-micron CMOS technology,
              the arbitration time can be as small as
10 ns for a 256x256 Tb/s packet
              switch. This scheme can also be extended to handle multiple-priority traffic. 
              To demonstrate the feasibility of the concept, an application specific
              integrated circuit (ASIC) that implements the DRR scheme will be
              prototyped.

Finally, packet fair queuing (PFQ) has been proven capable of
              providing delay bound guarantee for the IIS.  It will be used at the output
              ports of the router.  Arrival packets are usually time stamped based on their
              committed rates.  However, time stamp's computation and sorting always pose a
              great challenge for high speed networks, especially with hundreds of thousands
              of flows that need to be supported.  Therefore, a novel RAM-based searching
              engine (RSE) is proposed to implement the PFQ scheduler at 10 Gb/s for each
              output
port at low cost by using off-shelf parts while supporting hundreds of
              thousands of flows.

Furthermore, due to the heterogeneous networking
              environment in the Internet, hierarchical packet scheduling is required to
              accommodate different service classes and multiple Internet Service
              Providers
(ISP's).  The shaper-scheduler scheme has been proven capable of
              providing tight delay bound in the hierarchical packet scheduling environment. 
              Unfortunately, the scheme is very complicated and has not
been shown feasible
              at high speed and at low cost, especially for packet media.  Therefore, a
              general shaper-scheduler is proposed for both ATM and packet networks.  The
              concept of the RSE will be extended
to a two-dimensional RSE (2-D RSE) that
              implements the general shaper-scheduler.  To demonstrate the feasibility of the
              concept, a 2-D RSE will also be prototyped.

All the prototypes and the
              developed technologies will be made transferable to the industry in order to
              expedite the deployment of the terabit IP routers in the NGI.
