Title       : PGE/PG: Techbridge Planning Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9906215

Award Number: 9906215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Etta Heber eheber@cosc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Kekelis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yolanda Peeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chabot Space & Sci Center
	      10000 Skyline Blvd
	      Oakland, CA  94619    510/336-7300

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 The Chabot Observatory & Science Center (COSC), located in Oakland,
              California, will work closely with a Planning and Advisory Council of
              educational organizations in the San Francisco Bay Area.  The goal of this work
              will be to plan a multi-year collaboration aimed at increasing the involvement
              of middle and high school girls in academic and extracurricular activities
              relating to technology.
   Planning will be done in collaboration with the
              Oakland Unified School District (OUSD), California State University,  Hayward
              (CSUH), Community Resources for Science, Lawrence Livermore National
              Laboratories and the Autodesk Foundation.
   The goal of the project to be
              planned - tentatively named Techbridge - will be to create a learning
              environment that is likely to succeed in getting girls interested in
              technology.  The program will use a variety of strategies to create or
              reinforce support systems across the girls' daily experience and will include
              the girls' teachers, parents, counselors, as well as role models and mentors
              from industry.
   Special attention will be paid to collecting, analyzing, 
              and applying to the program, data regarding the influence of culture on girls'
              involvement in technology.  In Oakland, one of the most diverse cities in the
              Nation,  this issue is critically important, as it is in urban centers
              nationwide.
   The core activity for the students will be after-school clubs
              at each of the participating middle and high schools.  Girls in each club will
              work with a team of two teachers from their school.  Each club will choose a
              project that uses various applications of technology to help address a need or
              answer questions related to the community.
   COSC will conduct intensive
              training for the teachers at the participating schools, and training for and
              interaction with school counselors.  Special focus will be given to enhancing a
              Career Explorations and Technology course required of all ninth graders in
              OUSD.

