Title       : Dissertation Research: Perceptions of Nature, Expressions of Nation: An
               Environmental History of Estonia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a9906930

Award Number: 9906930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Herbert J. Ellison   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project is designed to illustrate the intricate nexus
              between the natural and built worlds, cultural and national constructs, and
              historical memory by examining, through a case study,  the role that
              conservation-based civic societies and activities played in defining Estonia's
              relationship to the natural world.  Estonia's independence movement was sparked
              by Moscow's plans to expand environmentally disastrous phosphate mines in the
              republic. In turn, the nation's drive for independence and Estonians' concern
              about severe environmental degradation in their republic had enormous
              implications for the entire Soviet Union. Instead of joining other Soviet
              republics in voicing disgust at Moscow's "ecological illiteracy," Estonia
              assumed the role of vanguard in seeking environmental, economic and political
              concessions from the Kremlin. This study makes three contributions to
              environmental history. First, the research fills a gap in the existing
              historical and environmental literature. Because of the logistical difficulty
              in dealing with the numerous and difficult languages used historically in the
              Baltic states, English language environmental histories of the former Soviet
              Union  are almost entirely Russo-centric. Western scholars have placed
              Estonia's environmental movement in the framework of a larger, all-Soviet or
              pan-East European phenomenon. Moreover, Indigenous Estonian (and
              Russian-Estonian) scholars have neglected the broader topic; they emphasize
              narrow and temporally limited aspects of Estonia's environmental history.
              Second, the project shows that environmental (or conservationist) sensibilities
              began not in or immediately before Gorbachev's glasnost era but earlier, during
              the previous century when the Estonian nation was developing and defining its
              national consciousness. By drawing attention to a longer developed
              environmental ethic, the project intends to show that Estonia's
              conservation-based civic institutions had, over time, successfully linked the
              concept of nation with that of territory and environment. The scientific
              expertise which helped buttress attempts to protect Estonia's embattled natural
              world by extension served to protect the Estonian nation as well. Finally, this
              study will assist scholars studying themes as diverse as industrial
              colonialism, population transfers, folklore and civil society, and provide
              important information for future cross-cultural and international research into
              human interaction with the natural and constructed world.

