Title       : The Integrative Control of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance in Birds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  2001       
File        : a9906431

Award Number: 9906431
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eldon J. Braun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906431
Braun
In mammals (humans) the kidney is the only organ that functions
              to maintain the composition of plasma constant.  It is necessary to maintain
              the composition of the plasma for the cells of the body to function in a normal
              manner.  In birds, the situation with respect to the regulation of the
              composition of the plasma is slightly different.  This is mainly because birds
              do not have a urinary bladder in which to store urine until it can be
              conveniently voided and birds excrete nitrogen as uric acid and not as urea as
              is the case for mammals.  Why is this difference between birds and mammals of
              interest?  Several reasons or justifications can be given for gaining a better
              understanding of kidney function in birds.  First, birds (domestic fowl) are of
              a significant economic importance and second, human health insights can be
              gained from studies on birds.  The research in this proposal is to address how
              birds regulate their plasma glucose concentration, how birds excrete large
              amount of nitrogen as uric acid without forming kidney stones, and how birds
              can conserve body water by producing urine in which the solutes are in a
              greater concentration than in the plasma.  The plasma glucose concentration in
              humans is normally regulated very closely (normal is 80-100 mg%).  If this
              concentration increases to 120-150 mg% and stays at these levels for a
              prolonged time, type II contrary, birds (domestic) fowl have plasma glucose
              concentrations of about 350 mg% as a normal circumstance.  Despite these
              concentrations, they show no symptoms of type II diabetes.  A portion of the
              research on this proposal will be directed toward understanding how birds live
              with these high plasma glucose concentrations.  Answer(s) to this question may
              help in understanding why humans develop type II diabetes.  Birds excrete 75%
              of their nitrogen as uric acid.  Why is this of interest?  Uric acid is almost
              insoluble in water and precipitates from solutions at very low concentrations. 
              If the concentration in human urine exceeds the solubility limits of uric acid,
              crystals will form.  These will lead to kidney stone formation.  Birds have
              very high concentrations of uric acid in their urine, but do not form kidney
              stones.  A portion of the research on this proposal will be directed toward
              understanding this difference.  Birds have much simpler mechanism (but similar
              to mammals) to concentrate the urine to conserve body water.  Because the
              system is less complicated in birds, it is much easier to study and manipulate.
               Results from these studies should lead to a better understanding of how the
              system functions in mammals (humans).  Taken as whole, the proposed research
              should provide better information on kidney function not only in birds, but
              also in mammals (humans).

