Title       : Workshop on Electric Energy Systems and Sustainability. To be Held April 2000,
               at Georgia Institute of Technology Campus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9906964

Award Number: 9906964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38346              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miroslav M. Begovic miroslav@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ajeet Rohatgi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carol Carmichael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to organize the Workshop on Sustainability in Energy Systems in
              Atlanta, which would have multifaceted objectives.  The objective of the
              workshop is to heighten the awareness of the need to foster and encourage
              scientific and technological research to support a sustainable society.  This
              workshop is intended to explore the relationship between current
              university-based educational and research programs in energy technologies and
              the visions set forth by both public and private sector energy organizations on
              energy needs,  the sources and amounts of energy, and of the future.

As part
              of the workshop preparation, the investigators and the advisory board will
              develop a generic scenario, synthesized from several leading reports on future
              energy resources and needs, for distribution to the workshop participants.  The
              participants will represent interest from the energy research community as well
              as the energy industry.  The participants will be asked to develop and present
              papers reflecting on the scenario from their particular areas of expertise. 
              These reflections will include consideration of the critical issues and
              bottlenecks associated with developing and delivering the diverse energy
              sources envisioned in the scenarios, including consideration of the
              technological aspects, the educational/workforce needs, and issues associated
              with the markets of these energy sources. 
.

The workshop participants will
              be selected to represent the major elements of the U.S. energy R&D portfolio
              (energy end-use efficiency, and nuclear energy, fossil fuel, and renewable
              energy technologies), and the market-related issues in the energy industry. 
              With  respect to energy end-use efficiency, the workshop will include
              consideration  of buildings, industry and transportation.

