Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Borderlands Justice: Women's Leadership in the
               Colonias of Dona Ana County, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 1,  1999   
File        : a9906691

Award Number: 9906691
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gillian P. Hart hart@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Local communities throughout the world are feeling the effects of global capital
              on their regional economies and political systems, but relatively little
              attention has focused on how regionally subordinate communities respond to the
              changes that accompany their rapid integration into a global capitalist system.
               The colonias of the U.S.-Mexico border provide a distinctive yet somewhat
              representative glimpse of these processes in action.  Colonias are rural,
              unincorporated, unregulated subdivisions of U.S. cities.  They typically have
              substandard housing and lack access to fundamental necessities like safe clean
              water, waste-water treatment systems, and electricity.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will examine two major questions:  What are the
              particular political and economic processes of the border region that lead to
              growth in the colonias and create the conditions of resource deprivation that
              colonia residents experience?  How do people living in the colonias organize in
              order to address and deal with these problems?  To answer these questions, a
              capable doctoral student is conducting intensive research in the 37 colonias of
              Dona Ana County in south central New Mexico.  Longitudinal methods will be used
              to document the evolution of relations between the colonias and broader
              socioeconomic and political forces in the region as a whole, using secondary
              sources like the records and reports of the colonias development council, the
              Dona Ana County colonias commission, the Catholic church, and local government
              units.  During the second phase of the project, the student will rely heavily
              on ethnographic methods as she focuses on questions of community organization. 
              Surveys of a broad sample of colonia residents and in-depth interviews with
              long-standing residents will illuminate interactions between the people and
              institutions in the colonias and the non-local factors that are reshaping the
              communities, with special attention given to social dynamics within the
              colonias and how regional and larger-scale processes are experienced,
              interpreted, and acted upon in daily activities.  Also under examination during
              this phase of the project will be the organizations formed by colonia residents
              to address a diverse set of issues and the roles that women play as leaders of
              these organizations and other community groups.  In addition to clarifying the
              social processes at work in these rapidly evolving communities, this project
              will contribute to a range of theoretical perspectives, including critical
              human geography theories associated with the meanings of places created by
              local residents, feminist theories that examine how daily actions, place, and
              life experiences intersect to produce personal identifies, and environmental
              justice theories dealing with environmental and resource inequalities.  As a
              Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
              support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent
              research career.

