Title       : Temporal Trends in Species Abundance and Community Structure of Pelagic Seabirds
               in the Eastern Tropical Pacific, with Implications for Tuna Commensalism and
               Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a9906832

Award Number: 9906832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69742              (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry B. Spear htharvey@ix.netcom.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Au  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa T. Ballance  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H.T. Harvey & Associates
	      3150 Almaden Expressway
	      San Jose, CA  95118    408/448-9450

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A regime shift (beginning in the late 1970's) in ecosystem dynamics was
              documented for temperate and subpolar portions of the North Pacific.  However,
              the temporal shifts were inconsistent (increasing vs. decreasing abundance)
              and, particularly in the subarctic, the interpretation of results are uncertain
              because large fisheries have exerted maximum pressure on middle and upper
              trophic-levels (e.g. anchovy, sardine, herring, pollock, halibut, salmon).  In
              the tropical Pacific, however, large-scale commercial fishing is confined to
              tuna that are at the top of the trophic pyramid.  A tropical study could,
              therefore, be especially informative and would likely provide insights towards
              the interpretation of inconsistencies in the temperate and subpolar systems. 
              The investigators will analyze a data set spanning 13 years that will provide
              baseline statistics on ecosystem dynamics in the eastern tropical Pacific
              during a decade when ocean warming was strong (1990's) and when yellowfin tuna
              were abundant.  The indicators of change will be pelagic seabirds, which have
              been and will continue to be surveyed systematically during approximately 240
              days of observations along a 35,500 km cruise-track from two NMFS research
              vessels.  The PIs will examine temporal abundance of nine seabird species of
              two foraging guilds: four tuna-dependent piscivores (the tuna drive mesopelagic
              prey to the surface where epipelagic predators can exploit them) and five
              tuna-independent species, including four planktivores and one scavenger.  The
              authors will explore two hypotheses: 1) temporal trends occurred among members
              of both feeding guilds, and 2) temporal trends were stronger among the
              tuna-dependent species.  The analyses will be conducted using new statistical
              software developed for seabird survey data by S. T. Buckland, Research Unit for
              Wildlife Population Assessment, University of St. Andrews, Scotland. 
              Generalized additive models vastly improves precision and the ability to detect
              temporal trends in abundance estimated from at-sea survey data.  The results
              potentially will have implications on possible large-scale, ecosystem effects
              (e.g. ocean warming), and/or smaller-scale effects (e.g. fishing) on the
              abundance/behavior of yellowfin tuna.  Patterns in the abundance and community
              structure of commensal and non-commensal seabirds will provide further insights
              on community dynamics of both groups.
