Title       : Dissertation Research: Data, Theories, and Scientific Modeling: Discovery of the
               Antarctic Ozone 'Hole'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9906266

Award Number: 9906266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10272              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick Suppe   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research project is an historical and philosophical
              investigation of the discovery of the Antarctic ozone "hole', that seeks to
              establish the claim that  ~Scientific models, not theories, are epidemically
              foundational in science. The researcher intends to produce a comprehensive and
              objective history of the discovery of the Antarctic ozone "hole" by conducting
              oral history interviews with the key participants. This project relates to two
              other sections of the dissertation.  It will provide a concrete context for
              reassessing, refining, and perhaps challenging some of the findings from the
              two other sections, as well as reveal the epistemic model dependency of
              theories and epistemic autonomy of modeling. The two other sections of the
              dissertation, not directly supported by this project focus on an
              epistemological analysis of non-heuristic, model-based scientific knowledge.
              The claims and findings being developed and defended challenge many accepted
              and influential philosophical positions regarding theories and scientific
              modeling. The first part examines the use of dimensional analysis in
              articulating the connections between abstract theories structure and physical
              systems. These connections are established by fitting models to data via
              dimensional analysis. This fitting is neither heuristic nor analogical; thus,
              demonstrating that models can function non-heuristically in the production of
              theoretical knowledge. The second part systematically demonstrates that models
              and modeling are intrinsic to the nature and collection of data both in
              contemporary remote-sensing contexts and in more traditional controlled
              laboratory experimentation. These issues are treated through a detailed
              analysis of atmospheric modeling central to controversies surrounding global
              warming. Important results have already been generated, including: (i) The
              central issue of much experimental work and computer simulation is
              differentiating real effects in data form artifacts produced by effect
              irrelevant to phenomena of interest. (ii) Scientific modeling often provides
              the only effective means for making these determinations. (iii) The epistemic
              continuities between modeling and experimental design are such that if
              skeptical attacks on modeling were correct, then all traditional scientific
              experimental practice and observation would be equally incapable of yielding
              reliable knowledge claims about the world. (iv) Scientific modeling is
              typically nonheuristic and epistemically creative. 


