Title       : Patterns and Mechanisms of Variability in the Physiological State of Bacteria in
               Marine Pelagic Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1999  
File        : a9906734

Award Number: 9906734
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $328427             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc E. Frischer frischer@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Verity  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Frischer 9906734

Bacteria are thought to be second only to phytoplankton in
              their role of transforming organic carbon in aquatic ecosystems. In open ocean
              waters, the biomass of bacteria has been reported to exceed that of all other
              living plankton, and even in continental shelf and coastal waters it is
              significant compared to other plankton. However, these estimates are all
              derived from the assumption that all DAPI-stained cells are metabolically
              active cells. This hypothesis no longer appears tenable: a large fraction of
              apparent bacteria are either inactive, moribund, or dead. Such a conclusion
              threatens to precipitate another paradigm shift in conceptual models of
              ecosystem function. At the very least, it would imply that, at a given time,
              comparatively few bacteria in situ are growing (and respiring) much faster than
              previously thought, and that a substantial fraction of DAPI-stained bacteria
              either exhibit low activity or are operationally a component of detritus.

A
              novel combination of a fluorescent stain and molecular probes has been
              developed which quantitatively identify those cells with compromised membranes,
              and those cells containing sufficient rRNA to be considered metabolically
              active. While neither approach might be considered sufficient to specify active
              from inactive, moribund, or dead cells, together they comprise a powerful tool
              to investigate the relative importance of these cell types in situ, and to
              postulate which sources of bacterial mortality or stimulation may be important
              at a given time and place. Recent and continuing studies have thoroughly
              evaluated and confirmed the applicability of the vital stain and probe (VSP)
              method to quantitatively and unambiguously discriminate among living,
              nonliving, and low activity cells. In a related but separate study, a
              quantitative technique also has been developed to determine concentrations of
              detritus, operationally defined as suspended nonliving POC. These efforts
              include newly developed image analysis protocols and algorithms to recognize
              and enumerate the different groups of VSP cells, and also free vs. attached
              bacteria.

Here, mechanistic studies will investigate the effects of
              environmental parameters on patterns of VSP staining of bacteria; conduct
              seasonal transects to determine the physiological status of natural bacterial
              communities across a productivity and detritus gradient; and measure the
              time-dependent response of natural communities and associated detritus to
              upwelling-induced phytoplankton blooms on the outer U.S. southeastern
              continental shelf. Of special interest are evaluating the biological
              significance (if any) and the triggers of shifts in the fraction of
              metabolically active populations. Ultimately, the significance may not lie in
              whether it is 40% vs. 60% of a community which is active, but whether specific
              functional groups are active or slow growing, e.g. nitrate reducers. To address
              such issues, the questions posed here must first be answered. Moreover, the
              results will provide a unique field dataset to evaluate current conceptual
              models of the role of bacteria in transformations between DOC, detritus, and
              bacteria.

