Title       : Focused Ion Beam Fabrication of Optical Storage Structures Using Biphotonic
               Stimulation in Rare-Earth Doped Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9906984

Award Number: 9906984
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Steckl a.steckl@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred R. Beyette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9906984
Steckl

This proposal to NSF discusses a high density archival
              optical memory structure using biphotonic upconversion photoemission from
              rare-earth-doped semiconductors (such as GaN) and insulators (especially heavy
              metal fluoride glasses such as ZBLAN). We plan to utilize focused ion beam
              (FIB) techniques as the means for densely "writing" the memory with localized
              packets of rare earth (RE) species. We will use two lasers of different photon
              energy to perform selective "reading" of the data through the two-step,
              two-energy upconversion process in certain rare earth ions (such as Pr, Er,
              Tm). We have obtained preliminary results on the critical ingredients of our
              proposed approach: (1) fabrication of FIB sources for RE implantation; (2) FIB
              implantation of Pr into GaN and evidence of strong photoemission; (3) FIB
              milling of microcavities in ZBLAN; (4) biphotonic emission from ZBLAN; (5)
              fabrication and characterization of a monolithically integrated CMOS based
              photodetector/receiver array that provides a tunable optical power threshold
              and is highly sensitive to low power optical signals. Further, we have
              constructed an optical storage media characterization system that allows us to
              evaluate the viability of RE-doped samples generated for optical storage
              applications. In addition to allowing visual inspection of RE doped samples
              under various optical excitation schemes, the characterization system we have
              developed provides the capability to perform optical characterization
              (spectroscopic and optical power measurements) on single/multiple data bits.
              Finally, the characterization system incorporates the CMOS photoreceiver array
              into a pseudo read-head assembly that allows for bit-oriented, word-oriented or
              page-oriented reading of an RE-doped optical storage media.

Our preliminary
              results indicate the feasibility of the overall optical memory concept which we
              have developed. In the work proposed here, we plan to investigate the limits of
              the FIB write process for obtaining maximum bit storage density and approaches
              for obtaining the highest signal-to noise ratio in the biphotonic read
              operation. To evaluate the memory performance parameters (such as data rate,
              access time, bit error rate, bit-cross-talk and page-cross-talk), we plan to
              design, fabricate and characterize storage media and detection structures
              containing arrays of 103 bits.


