Title       : PPD: Reaching New Audiences with New Media: Opening the Door to Science and Math
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2001     
File        : a9906134

Award Number: 9906134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Gilbert gilbert@tltgroup.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman R. Coombs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TLT Group
	      One Dupont Circle, NW, Suite 360
	      Washington, DC  200361110    202/293-6440

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   The main thrust of this project is to build new materials on the foundation
              of information that EASI has compiled and disseminated in previous NSF grant
              projects.  In addition to the new materials, EASI has identified critical new
              audiences that must be reached if individuals with disabilities are going to be
              integrated into the science, mathematics, engineering and technology fields. 
              To most effectively deliver EASI's message and information the project is
              relying on innovative multimedia techniques to disseminate the materials.
    
              Specifically, EASI is creating a modular array of materials that will include
              SMET information relevant to K-12 audiences, post-secondary education and the
              business community.  While EASI has focused primarily on the educational aspect
              of SMET in past years, EASI believes and is aware of accessibility issues and
              requirements that are critical to reach the business community and make them
              aware of the potential of individuals with disabilities and issues and
              requirements.  Additionally, EASI wants to take a first step toward helping
              individuals with disabilities and issues and requirements.  Additionally, EASI
              wants to take a first step toward helping individuals with disabilities enter
              the workplace by establishing an intern program as one aspect of this
              project.
     To get the widest dissemination in the most cost-effective
              manner, EASI will use the Internet, live presentations and print media to
              disseminate these materials.  EASI has been experimenting with innovative uses
              of multimedia, including Web broadcasts, on-line courses,  on-line discussion
              lists, audiotapes and videotapes.  All of these methods have shown impressive
              results.
     While EASI is doing the primary work of this project, the
              administrator of the grant is the TLT (Teaching, Learning and Technology)
              Group.  A non-profit corporation, the TLT Group is an affiliate of AAHE
              (American Association for Higher Education).  AAHE was the administrator of
              previous EASI/NSF grants.  The TLT Group's mission is to provide materials and
              services that motivate and enable institutions to improve teaching and learning
              with technology while helping them cope with ongoing change.  The TLT Group has
              a network of over 350 TLT Roundtable Groups which are comprised of technical
              support staff, faculty, librarians, and administrators.  Many of these people
              are part of EASI's targeted new audiences.

