Title       : GOALI: Development and Evaluation of Innovative FRP Braided Fabric for
               Strengthening Infrastructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9906404

Award Number: 9906404
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vijaya Gopu                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nabil F. Grace nabil@ltu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mathew M. Boone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Technolog Univ
	      21000 Ten Mile Road
	      Southfield, MI  480751051    313/356-0200

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0109000   Structural Technology                   
              0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS 9906404
PI:  Nabil F. Grace
Development and Evaluation of Innovative FRP
              Braided Fabric for Strengthening
Infrastructures

The use of fiber
              reinforced polymer (FRP) sheets and strips as strengthening
materials for
              concrete structures has been gaining the interest of many
researchers and a
              few contractors during the last two decades. However, the
lack of ductility in
              these materials and the corresponding catastrophic
failures of strengthened
              structures reported in several research investigations
have contributed to the
              lack of confidence in composite materials for
structural engineering and the
              subsequent delay in using them for the
strengthening/stiffening of concrete
              structures in the United States. It has
become impossible to convince
              practicing structural engineers to recommend the
use of these materials to
              their clients. This is to be expected, since
structural engineers are very
              conservative and are accustomed to structures
that dissipate considerable
              energy before failure. Since ductility, combined
with the safety of occupants,
              is the basic ingredient of any successful
strengthening/stiffening project,
              only a handful of contractors has considered
the use of FRP materials. As a
              result, the use of currently available FRP
materials in strengthening or
              stiffening applications in industrial facilities
and highway bridges has been
              very limited in the United States.

To solve this problem, an innovative
              design of new FRP sheets needs to be
introduced and evaluated in both
              laboratory and field. This will require
extensive collaboration among: (1) FRP
              fabricators (i.e., composite industry
that includes both producers of carbon,
              aramid, and glass fibers and epoxy
adhesives), (2) contractors (construction
              industry), (3) academia, and (4) end
users (structural engineers). The
              proposed study will be conducted with
collaboration among Lawrence
              Technological University (LTU), DFI Pultruded
Composites (DR), Baker Concrete
              Technologies Ind. (BCT), and Ohio Department of
Transportation (ODOT).

The
              study will consist of four phases. The first phase will address
              the
development of an innovative threeaxis braided FRP fabric that will
              be
fabricated using a combination of carbon, aramid and glass fibers oriented
              in
three different directions. These sheets will differ from the
              currently
available, ineffective unidirectional and woven single fiber-type
              sheets, which
have been evaluated at LTU and found to lack the necessary
              energyabsorbing
capability. The developed fabrics will provide ductile rather
              than brittle
failure of strengthened structures. The interlocking mechanisms
              between the
braided carbon, aramid, and glass fibers in the three axes will
              ensure
redistribution of the flexural and shear loads. This phase will also
              include
the determination and optimization of the mechanical properties of the
              braided
sheets and a selected epoxy adhesive. This phase will be completed by
              DFI and
LTU.

The second phase will deal with the construction,
              instrumentation and
strengthening of simple, continuous, and cantilever test
              beams. The developed
FRP braided fabric and the selected epoxy adhesive will
              be used for
strengthening these beams. This phase will be completed by
              collaboration
between the FRP producer, LTU, and the contractor. In the third
              phase, the
strengthened test beams will be transported to the Structural
              Testing Center
(STC) at LTU and the research team will conduct various
              environmental/loading
tests. During phase four, results from the first three
              phases will be deployed
into a practical application in the state of Ohio by
              ODOT.

This collaboration will be extended to teaching and seminar
              activities. The FRP
producer, strengthening contractor, and state engineers
              will be guest lecturers
at LTU. The university research team and the
              industrial partners will provide
seminars at the annual meetings of the
              Associated General Contractors of
America (AGC) and at meetings of the Great
              Lakes DOTs Consortium. Collaboration
between university and industry will
              result in the development of an innovative
FRP material for strengthening
              deficient concrete structures. The level of
confidence achieved by these
              activities win lead to the widespread use of this
stateofthe art technology.
