Title       : The Late Pleistocene Glacial And Sea Level History of Wrangel Island, Northeast
               Siberia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a9906702

Award Number: 9906702
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453295             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Anderson pata@u.washinton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Brigham-Grette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-9906702

The extent and configuration of the Arctic ice sheet
              during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) is one of the critical missing pieces in
              Quaternary history.  The extent and chronology of glaciation in the Arctic has
              played a significant role in shaping the modern distribution and composition of
              modern high latitude flora and fauna.  No ice sheet has been more controversial
              than the one proposed to cover the East Siberian Sea.  The presence of a
              marine-based East Siberian Ice Sheet (ESIS) during the late Quaternary has been
              suggested by some glaciologists and has been used in paleoclimate models. 
              However, the glacial geology along the proposed ice sheet's eastern margin has
              only been superficially investigated.  Wrangel Island is the key region for
              such an investigation.  Confirmation of the late Quaternary conditions of the
              East Siberian Sea would aid paleoclimate modeling efforts and greatly improve
              our understanding of differences in ice extent between the eastern and western
              Russian Arctic.

The Principal Investigators will study the glacial history
              of Wrangel Island to provide the first field evidence to test the following
              hypotheses: 1) Wrangel Island was covered by an ice sheet covered during the
              LGM or earlier; 2) Wrangel Island was uncovered, but lay in the peripheral
              depression of an ESIS; or 3) Wrangel Island remained unglaciated, except
              perhaps for limited alpine glaciation.  These hypotheses will be tested by
              providing the first radiometric sea-level and glacial chronologies for this
              region by using radiocarbon, gas chromatography amino acid, 10Be, 26A1, and
              36C1 cosmogenic isotope dating.  Palynological analysis to assess variations
              will be used to interpret Late Quaternary vegetation and inferred climates. 
              This research should contribute a significantly to a growing database of Late
              Quaternary paleoenvironmental studies in central, western and northeast
              Siberia.  This research will fufill the Russian-American Initiative on
              Shelf-Land Environments in the Arctic (RAISE) goals and  will also meet the
              needs of other international programs, such as Quaternary Environment of the
              Eurasian North (QUEEN)and Circum-Arctic Paleo-Environments (CAPE).



