Title       : US-Tanzania Dissertation Enhancement: Viewing Stonetowns from the Countryside:
               An Archaeological Approach to Swahili Urban Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1999      
File        : a9906345

Award Number: 9906345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alice W. Leeds                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1999     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Adria LaViolette ajl4h@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0115000   Historical Sites                        
Program Ref : 0000,5928,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906345
LaViolette

This dissertation enhancement grant supports a US
              graduate student, Mr. Jeffrey Fleisher, working under the guidance of Professor
              Adria LaViolette, of the Department of Anthropology at the University of
              Virginia, to conduct an archaeological survey in three regions of Pemba Island,
              Tanzania, to collect information for the development of a regional approach to
              the urbanization process of Swahili stonetowns. 

During the ninth to the
              fifteenth centuries AD many small East African Swahili coastal villages grew
              into large-scale towns with stone architecture and, as commercial activities
              with Muslin merchants in the Indian Ocean trade system increased, these
              stonetowns developed into commercial centers.  Agricultural products and craft
              items from surrounding settlements were traded at these urban centers, but
              little is known about the role that the surrounding settlements had in the
              development of the stonetowns.  Traditional models of urbanism identify the
              urban center as the centralized point for political and economic activities,
              and they also define the more important functions that these centers had in
              relation to the functions of the surrounding countryside communities.  Contrary
              to these traditional models, Mr. Fleisher hypothesizes that the smaller
              settlements surrounding the Swahili stonetowns played an equally important role
              in the process of the region's urban development.  He will conduct an
              archaeological survey and perform test excavations at a number of countryside
              settlement sites to gather data on their local and regional settlement and
              development patterns.  The resulting information will be analyzed to determine:
              1) if the traditional models of urbanism, which were developed in other parts
              of the world, are applicable for this region, and 2) what type of systematic
              relationship existed between the stonetowns and their surrounding settlements. 
              Dr. Bertram Mapunda, of the Department of History at the University of Dar es
              Salaam, and Mr. H. H. Omar, Director of the Zanzibar Department of Archives,
              Museums and Antiquities, will provide guidance on this project to Mr. Fleisher.
               

The results are expected to increase the current knowledge about
              Subsaharan Africa urban systems and the development of Swahili society.  This
              project will also support an international research experience very early in
              the career of an outstanding graduate student.  This project is being jointly
              funded by the Division of International Programs and the Division of Behavioral
              and Cognitive Sciences.

