Title       : PPD: Bridges: High School and Community College Demonstration Model to Increase
               Students with Disabilities Accessibility to Careers in Science, Mathematics,
               Engineering, and Tech
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a9906043

Award Number: 9906043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $449867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret Lamb mlamb@holt.k12.mi.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holt Public Schools
	      1784 Aurelius Road
	      Holt, MI  488421997    517/694-2162

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science and mathematics faculty from Holt High School (HHS) and Lansing
              Community College (LCC), service agency providers, and businesses will work
              collaboratively to develop a model to increase students with disabilities'
              accessibility to careers in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
              (SMET).  The Bridges Project is a comprehensive model to develop the linkages
              between these institutions and agencies that support students with disabilities
              in their transition to post-secondary education.  The model is designed to
              prepare students with disabilities for the transition to a community college by
              providing them with appropriate experiences and support including: providing
              high school mentorship experiences in SMET, strengthening their self-advocacy
              skills, grounding them in the use of assistive technology, providing them with
              a precollege workshop to facilitate a successful transition to college, linking
              them with an adult mentor with disabilities in their career area to support
              them in their studies, and making college classrooms/labs good learning
              environments.  The model has several major components to expand and develop
              these bridges.  The methods employed to create this model are as follows.  


                  The existing HHS Mentorship Program will be expanded to a seventh hour
              after school to allow students with interests in careers in scientific areas to
              explore opportunities in these fields in workplace settings.  The mentorship
              will assist students in developing skills in interviewing, self-advocacy,
              working in a professional environment, and developing a focus for their future.
               A Collaborative Inquiry Team (CIT) of HHS and LCC faculty in science/math,
              special education teachers, LCC disabilities counselors will be initiated to
              increase awareness and understanding of disabilities and to discuss curriculum,
              assessment, teaching and learning strategies and accommodations for students
              with disabilities including assistive technology.  The collaboration will take
              several forms: monthly meetings, E-mail, a Bridges Web Page, and intense summer
              collaboration.  Through these exchanges members of the CIT will increase their
              awareness of curriculum between the institutions, teaching methods, alternative
              assessments, and accommodations for students with disabilities and incorporate
              them in their practice.  As the collaboration progresses CIT members will
              develop the content for workshops for all college faculty about strategies to
              accommodate students with disabilities, assistive technology, and elements of
              the legal mandates, IDEA and ADA.  CIT members will mentor other faculty in
              science/math in the use of these practices as they teach students with
              disabilities.  

     Several methods to support students with disabilities
              in post secondary settings will be employed.  HHS will incorporate evaluation
              and training of students with disabilities in the use of assistive technology
              within its Self-Determination class.  HHS faculty will be trained in the use of
              assistive technology as well.  LCC math/science faculty will receive similar
              training and with the support of the Disabilities Services Office develop a
              workshop for all LCC faculties.  Students with disabilities will complete a
              pre-college workshop to assist them in their transition by reviewing with them
              the learning strategies and study skills necessary for college success,
              practicing their self-advocacy skills with college faculty, and refreshing
              their skills in the use of assistive technology.  A plan for ongoing support
              will be the Bridges Adult Mentorship Program; a connection for the student with
              an adult mentor with a disability employed in SMET careers.  The adult mentors
              will offer college students support to sustain their efforts in achieving their
              goals.  


