Title       : Structural, Electrical and Optical Properties of Defects in GaN-based Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  2003  
File        : a9906077

Award Number: 9906077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124512             (Estimated)
Investigator: Devki N. Talwar talwar@grove.iup.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana U of Pennsylvania
	      
	      Indiana, PA  15705    412/357-2100

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9906077
Talwar

Recent breakthroughs in group III-nitride based super bright
              blue-green light emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes, and the prospects of
              high temperature (- 500 0C), high field, high-frequency electronics, have
              spurred a great deal of scientific interest in the basic properties of GaN,
              A1N, InN, their alloys, quantum wells (QWs) and superlattice (SL) structures. 
              These photonic devices are critically important for optical fiber communication
              systems, optical computing , optical interconnects; data transmission and
              signal processing.  To exploit fully the potential of these technologically
              important materials, controllable doping is an obvious necessity.  Despite
              numerous experimental efforts made in recent years, there is still much
              controversy and mystery surrounding the identification and characterization of
              intrinsic defects, especially their association with compensation mechanisms in
              doped group III-nitrides.  Both hydrogen and native defects are known to play
              important role as compensating centers in GaN.  Infrared spectroscopy can
              provide information about the incorporation of hydrogen and/or intrinsic
              defects forming complexes with the dopants in n- and p-type materials.  In
              III-V semiconductors (e.g., GaAs), distinct vibrational modes observed earlier
              by Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy provided invaluable
              information in establishing the site selectivity of amphoteric (e.g., silicon,
              carbon, etc.) impurities, and complex (e.g., SiGa- VGGa, BeGa,- AsGa, As-H
              etc.) defect centers.  By involving undergraduate students in this project, we
              will focus m three major tasks: (i) Identifying the presence of native defects
              and their interactions with impurities in n- and p-type GaN, A1N and AlxGa1-x,N
              alloys using local vibrational mode spectroscopy. (ii) Performing Group theory
              and realistic model calculations based m Green's function formalism to
              facilitate the FT-IR spectroscopic investigations. (iii) Studying the
              electronic properties of QWs, and SLs for device applications.
              ***












