Title       : Fragile Chromosome Instability and Cell Cycle Checkpoint Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0222193

Award Number: 0222193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted A. Weinert tweinert@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Checkpoints were first identified as regulatory controls that stop the cell
              cycle after DNA damage. Such arrests of the cell cycle allow time for efficient
              replication and repair.  Checkpoint genes are those that cause these arrests
              after DNA damage; checkpoint mutants fail to do so and either exhibit genome
              instability and/or die.   The mechanisms by which wild-type checkpoint genes
              ensure genome stability are still poorly understood, mainly for two reasons. 
              First, individual checkpoint genes have roles in multiple checkpoints (e.g.,
              one gene is essential for arrest during both DNA replication and chromosome
              segregation) and can have roles in other aspects of DNA metabolism as well
              (e.g., dNTP synthesis, stability of DNA replication forks, telomere synthesis).
               Second, genome instability is itself a complex process involving the gain or
              loss of whole chromosomes, and novel, sometimes complex chromosomal
              rearrangements. To understand how checkpoint genes stabilize a genome, the
              investigator has developed a model of chromosome instability termed "fragile
              site instability." This instability can involve DNA breaks and recombination in
              a defined chromosomal region (a fragile site), the formation of multiply
              rearranged chromosomes, and a high frequency of aberrations in checkpoint
              mutants. Recent data from the investigator's laboratory suggest that  fragile
              site instability may be linked to defects in DNA replication. This project is
              designed to reveal how instability is linked to specific DNA sequences in the
              fragile site, to checkpoint gene dysfunctions, and to DNA replication.  

The
              multiple links between checkpoint gene function and genome stability are
              important to understand because perturbations of genome stability have profound
              effects on the functioning of all organisms.  Thus this project may lead to
              insights that will benefit all of society.  In addition, the investigator will
              continue his educational activities, which in the past have included mentoring
              individuals from the level of high school students to postdoctoral fellows.

