Title       : U.S.-Slovenia Mathematics Research on Some Varieties Defined by Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0222145

Award Number: 0222145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27178              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. A. Sethuraman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ Corp, Northridge Fdn
	      18111 Nordhoff Street
	      Northridge, CA  913308309    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5999,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This US-Slovenian mathematics project between B. A. Sethuraman of the California
              State University, Northridge, and his partner, Tomaz Kosir of the University of
              Ljubljana, examines concrete and computational problems concerned with
              commuting sets of matrices.  Together they intend to study varieties that are a
              generalization of determinantal varieties with some emphasis on determinantal
              varieties of invariant subspaces and varieties of commuting matrices. These are
              fundamental questions associated with geometric properties of matrices that
              have relevance to graphing.

The joint research plan employs a mix of
              classical algebraic geometry, computational algebra, combinatorial commutative
              algebra and representations theory. Junior researchers from both universities
              will participate in portions of the research.  This collaboration builds upon
              initial work by Sethuraman and Kosir on commuting triples of matrices and
              utilizes complementary strengths of the U.S. side in algebra and Slovenian
              expertise in matrix and operator theory.  Results should lead to refined models
              for using linear algebra in numerical computations. 

This mathematics
              research project fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
              knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Central Europe to
              combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence. 
