Title       : The Role of Ecosystem Dynamics on the Global Ocean Carbon Cycle: A JGOFS
               Model-Data Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0222033

Award Number: 0222033
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430008             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Doney doney@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,1389,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to better quantify the role of marine ecosystem dynamics on
              the global ocean carbon cycle, focusing in particular on air-sea CO2 exchange,
              net community production, and vertical export. The research is motivated by two
              related hypotheses: multi-nutrient limitation (N, P, Si, Fe) modulates
              phytoplankton biomass and primary production, community structure, and biogenic
              carbon export, community structure governs the elemental composition of the
              exported dissolved and particulate material, major determinants of subsurface
              biogeochemical transport, remineralization, and sequestration.  In this project
              a carefully designed set of numerical experiments will be run using a global
              3-D coupled ecological-biogeochemical-physical model. The project directly
              builds upon recent progress and specific findings/questions from a global mixed
              layer ecosystem model that includes explicit iron limitation and community
              structure, a full depth 3-D ocean carbon cycle model, and historical hind-cast
              simulations (1958-1997) of ocean physical circulation Specifically, the goals
              of the activity are to: 
o Complete development of a next generation, global
              3-D ecological-biogeochemical-physical model that includes multi-nutrient
              limitation and explicit geochemical functional groups (picoplankton, diatoms,
              Trichodesmium, and coccolithophores).
o Evaluate and iteratively improve on
              the simulated upper ocean ecosystem dynamics against regional JGOFS data sets,
              large-scale surface pCO2 and nutrient fields, and satellite ocean color data
              using retrospective, historical simulations for the period 1988-2000.
o Assess
              the skill of the resulting model in replicating the full depth, equilibrium
              distributions of carbon, oxygen and nutrients against the WOCE/JGOFS global
              survey data.
o Test the ecological and biogeochemical impact of dust
              deposition, calcification, nitrogen fixation, and silica production by
              selective modifications to the base coupled solution.

The study directly
              addresses the overall goal of the U.S. JGOFS Synthesis and Modeling Project
              (SMP), to synthesize present knowledge into global numerical models that can be
              used for prediction, as well as two of the major research trajectories
              highlighted in the SMP program announcement: "global and regional studies that
              link together the biological, physical, and chemical components of the marine
              carbon cycle" and "synthesis and modeling efforts that effectively combine
              field data sets and diagnostic and prognostic (forward) models".

