Title       : The Aerosol Monitoring Project: Student/Teacher/Scientist Atmospheric Science
               for the 21st Century
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0222380

Award Number: 0222380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501251             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Brooks dbrooks@mcs.drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Forrest M. Mims  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara Ledley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pieternel F. Levelt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Stockman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.  This
              proposal will continue to support existing protocols, and conduct scientific
              research with GLOBE data.  The project will continue to support the protocol
              for the measurement of Atmospheric Aerosol Optical Thickness (AOT), which is
              based on an inexpensive hand-held sun photometer, and/or sky-color cards. 
              Measurements of AOT will introduce students to the connections between air
              pollution, natural events such as dust storms and forest fires, variations in
              surface insolation, and incidences of asthma.  More advanced students can use
              the data in studies of Beer's law for radiative transfer.  These measurements
              will enhance data from extremely sparse networks of ground-based AOT
              observations.  
Reducing the uncertainties in the global radiative transfer
              effects of the aerosols s currently one of the highest scientific priorities of
              the climate studies community.  Local and global environmental conditions are
              affected by the presence of atmospheric haze layers.  Visibility is a major
              parameter in environmental quality in its own right and haze layers affect the
              surface radiative transfer balance of Earth as well as influencing optical
              remote sensing measurements which are a major source on information for study
              of global environmental change.  In addition, presence of high amounts of
              aerosols is thought to aggravate certain bronchial conditions, such as asthma.
              Students will be contributing quantitative measurements to the study of haze
              layers.
