Title       : CAREER: Studies of Investor Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0222107

Award Number: 0222107
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrance Odean odean@haas.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Increasingly, households are investing in common stock-from 1995 to 1998 the
              number of households investing directly in equities grew by over 30 per cent.
              At the same time many investors are eschewing professional advice--from 1995
              through mid 2000, investors opened 12.5 million online brokerage accounts. The
              importance of self-directed investing will only grow in future years as more
              and more households are handed responsibility for their own retirement
              investments through defined contribution plans and, possibly, through
              discretionary personal social security accounts. Individual's trading decisions
              affect not only their own welfare but, through their influence on market
              prices, the welfare of others. Yet little is known about what motivates the
              trading decisions of individual investors. The goal of my research is to
              increase our understanding of individual investors and of their influence on
              markets. I have obtained from various brokerage houses anonymous trading
              records for over one million individual investors. With these records, I can
              document how investors behave in real life investment situations and I can test
              theories of investor behavior. For example, I can test the hypothesis that
              investment success leads many investors to become overconfident. Based on the
              trading records in my databases, I plan to develop a computer simulation of
              financial markets in which individual investors interact with institutional
              investors and market-makers. The individual investors in this simulation will
              follow rules estimated from the databases. This simulation will model how the
              trading of individual investors changes stock prices and how this process
              affects investor wealth. I will also run experiments that test whether access
              to more information leads investors to become overconfident and, as a result,
              to trade excessively. Finally, I will survey investors to see whether
              aggressive trading by individual investors is more often the result of
              unrealistically optimistic beliefs than high tolerance for risk. In addition to
              increasing academic understanding of individual investors, these studies will
              provide guidance for investor education efforts.
