Title       : Exploratory Research On Engineering The Service Sector: Collaborative Research:
               Research on Designing Vaccine Formularies for Childhood Immunization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0222597

Award Number: 0222597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon H. Jacobson shj@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Childhood vaccination has become the single greatest defense against infectious
              diseases among children in the United States.  Moreover, biotechnology
              breakthroughs are making it possible for vaccine manufacturers to develop
              vaccine antigens for numerous diseases.  One unplanned consequence of such
              innovations is that the Recommended Childhood Immunization Schedule (as set
              forth by the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices) has become
              sufficiently crowded that the prospect of adding additional vaccines (hence
              additional injections) to this schedule may not be well received by either
              health-care providers or parents/guardians.  This has prompted vaccine
              manufacturers to develop vaccines products that combine several antigens into a
              single injection.  Such vaccines, termed combination vaccines, permit new
              vaccines to be added to the schedule without placing additional burdens on
              parents/guardians, nor requiring children to endure an unacceptable number of
              injections during single clinic visits.  Such innovations have also created a
              combinatorial explosion of choices for health-care providers that will continue
              to escalate and expand as additional vaccines are added to the immunization
              schedule and as new combination vaccines gain approved for distribution.  The
              goals of this project are to design operations research models that capture all
              the vaccines that are presently in the recommended childhood immunization
              schedule, as well as vaccines that may enter the schedule over the next decade,
              to formulate and analyze optimization models that can be used to determine the
              maximal price at which new combination vaccine products provide good value to
              the health-care consumer, and to perform sensitivity analysis to determine the
              impact of new vaccines on the optimal vaccine formularies and vaccine
              prices.

The results of this research provide a systematic approach to
              compare and evaluate existing and new pediatric vaccines within the recommended
              childhood immunization schedule.  This, in turn, will provide a vehicle upon
              which opportunities for new vaccines and vaccine combinations can be evaluated
              using operations research models, hence has the potential to enhance
              immunization rates given the set of vaccine choices available.  Moreover, the
              tools developed will provide a mechanism by which health-care providers and
              consumers can assess the economic value of such vaccines, hence facilitating
              the application of market principles within the pediatric vaccine industry. 
              This in turn may also serve to put downward pressure on the prices of such
              vaccines, an issue of significant national concern.  This research will be
              conducted in collaboration with personnel within the National Immunization
              Program at the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
