Title       : High-Risk Survey For The Earliest Agriculture In North China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0222742

Award Number: 0222742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23140              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Bettinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	The invention of agriculture is one of humankind's greatest achievements and
              archaeology's greatest challenges. Despite great strides in archaeological
              understanding, archaeologists still do not fully grasp why the first
              experiments with agriculture began so late in time (10,000 BP) and in only a
              handful of centers (Near East, Mesoamerica, South America, North China, South
              Asia, Africa). Of this handful, the North China center is the least known and
              most likely to shed new light on these questions. The problem in North China is
              that the archaeological hunter-gatherers whose knowledge of plants laid the
              foundation for agriculture are well removed in time and space from the oldest
              presently known agricultural cultures (Cishan, Peiligang, and Dadiwan), which
              are too highly developed to represent the first stages of agriculture. The
              transitional groups that connect the two, North China's earliest
              agriculturalists, are missing. For the Dadiwan culture (7000 BP) in western
              North China, the antecedent hunter-gatherer complex is found 250 miles (400 km)
              due north, in the Helan-Tengger sequence (12,700 - 10,000 BP) documented in
              surveys and excavations by a team of Chinese (Chen Fahu) and US scholars (R.
              Bettinger, R. Elston, P. J. Brantingham, and D. B. Madsen) have been conducting
              in Nei Mongol Autonomous Region and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region since 1989.
              The research suggests that early Holocene plant intensification began in the
              Helan-Tengger study area but that the earliest agricultural experiments were
              somewhat further south, toward Dadiwan. These probably began during a warm-wet
              episode about 9300 BP that encouraged northern hunter-gatherers to intensify
              plant use and experiment with plant propagation in a limited way to augment
              more favored food sources, mainly game. A severe, cold-dry climatic reversal
              documented around 9000 BP forced this pattern further south, to the Dadiwan
              area, where agriculture became established on a small scale and then expanded
              dramatically when climate turned warmer and wetter around 8000 BP. Plainly, the
              early agricultural sites that connect the hunter-gatherer Helan-Tengger complex
              in the North to the developed agricultural Dadiwan complex in the South must
              lie in the area between. The proposed survey will use substantial vehicle
              travel to locate, and foot travel to reach, likely site locations in this
              intervening area. Archaeological charcoal suitable for radiocarbon dating will
              be obtained from sites whose stone tools and ceramics place them within the
              Helan-Tengger to Dadiwan gap. Our research team of US and PRC scholars has
              extensive experience with this sort of survey north of the Yellow River but
              none in the proposed study area to its south, where site locations should be
              different and perhaps more difficult to detect. Success in finding and dating
              these sites is not assured but would surely be of great significance. It would
              articulate the first continuous record of the transition from hunting and
              gathering to agriculture in China - and in so doing document this first
              critical step in the development of one of the world's greatest civilizations.
