Title       : Morphing Airfoils Using Smart Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0222462

Award Number: 0222462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55574              (Estimated)
Investigator: Farhan Gandhi fgandhi@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,9237,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The fixed- or rotary-wings of aerospace vehicles comprise of airfoil sections
              with carefully designed profiles that are optimum for a certain design flight
              condition, or represent a compromise with acceptable performance over some
              range of conditions.  The ability of an airfoil section to morph or change its
              profile, as required, can provide future aerospace vehicles with tremendously
              improved efficiency and versatility.  Morphing airfoil sections would allow a
              single aircraft to be viable for very low-speed loiter/surveillance and
              high-speed combat missions; or allow a helicopter in high-speed cruise to have
              a high figure of merit even though the outboard regions of the blades encounter
              compressibility effects on the advancing side and are close to stall on the
              retreating side, in every rotor revolution.  However, airfoil sections are
              conventionally designed to be rigid, and must remain so under aerodynamic
              pressure distributions, even while morphing under actuation loads.  This
              represents a considerable challenge.

In the present project, an innovative
              smart-material based actuation scheme is proposed in conjunction with special
              skins that are ultra-flexible in extension yet have significant flexural
              rigidity.  The actuation scheme comprises of an array of linkages or
              "vertebrae" (with both active and passive members) connected to the upper and
              lower skins of the airfoil section.  In each linkage, extension of the upper
              active members produces stretching of the upper skin, while contraction of the
              lower active members produces shrinking of the lower skin, and together they
              produce a rotation of the passive member.  Progressively larger rotations of
              the successive linkages in the array result in a camber of the airfoil section.
               Leading-edge droop of the airfoil section is produced in a similar manner. 
              Skins that are highly flexible in extension and compression and can accommodate
              large elastic strains will be required to achieve significant profile changes. 
              Yet it is required that the skins be flexurally stiff so sections between
              supports do not deform under aerodynamic surface pressures.  Such skins are to
              be designed using Shape Memory Alloys or Flexible Matrix Composites, in
              conjunction with innovative geometric configuration.

A finite element
              analysis of the airfoil section with spar, flexible skin and linkages
              (comprising of active and passive members), will be developed as part of this
              project.  Using design optimization, the geometry of the linkages and the
              properties of the skin that produce both target as well as maximum profile
              changes will be determined.  Design constraints will include actuator
              saturation limits, maximum strains on the skin, and rigidity under aerodynamic
              loading.  Both Shape Memory Alloy actuators (for maximum actuation strain
              capabilities) as well as piezoelectric actuators (for high-frequency
              capabilities required for helicopters) will be examined.  For high-frequency
              applications, amplification of actuation inputs due to structural resonance
              will be considered.

