Title       : VISUALIZATION: Efficient Out-of-Core Isosurface Extraction from Large Datasets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0222819

Award Number: 0222819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy S. Newman tnewman@cs.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Isosurface extraction and rendering is a useful and popular method for exploring
              volume datasets.
While many studies of extraction techniques have been
              presented, few researchers have considered how to perform isosurface extraction
              from very large datasets in a way that utilizes parallel computation while also
              effectively managing memory access. For out-of-core datasets (i.e., those too
              large to be processed entirely in main memory), delays from access of secondary
              storage must be minimized if high performance is to be achieved.
In this
              project, an investigation of new techniques for parallel, out-of-core
              isosurface extraction are conducted. The work seeks to exploit multiple types
              of parallelism, effectively organize memory access to minimize access
              penalties, and to effectively manage inter-process communication.           A
              hallmark of the workis that it focuses on total system performance rather than
              attempting to only maximize intermediary measures of a single aspect of
              performance. One primary target platform for testing of the techniques is
              cluster computation environments comprised of commodity CPUs.
Intellectual
              Merit.                                                                         
                                                                                The proposed
              activity can benefit multiple disciplines. Many scientific and engineering
              enterprises generate and/or wish to use large datasets. Some finance and
              consumer applications also desire to effectively utilize large collections of
              business data. Discovery of trends, phenomena, and structures in those datasets
              can be aided by more efficient visualization. In particular, for large datasets
              too large to be processed in-core, the time to compute a visualization is
              likely to be very high due to the relatively slow access times of the secondary
              storage. Reduction of these times by resource (memory, CPU, and
              communication)-effective processing will increase productivity among scientific
              visualization users and consumers.                                             
                                                               In addition, reduction of
              processing times may make tractable the consideration of certain very large
              problems. The proposed activity builds upon prior work of the PI and of the
              other experiences with parallel out-of-core isosurface extraction.   The PI has
              access to the necessary computer resources to complete the work, including
              access to cluster computers at three sites and to supercomputers at three other
              sites.
Due to the impact of the proposed activity on visualization methods
              that are used across the scientific community, society at large is likely to
              benefit via new knowledge discovery by the
discipline science that this
              project aids. In addition, the proposed work will be beneficial in managing and
              understanding the increasing body of data being collected about scientific,
              engineering, and business phenomena.                                           
                                                                         The project's
              results will be disseminated via publication in
the open literature, in
              conferences, and on the web. Through the PI's partnerships with NASA, NIH, and
              other researchers, the results of the work have a high probability of producing
              an impact in multiple disciplines. The project will also aid undergraduate and
              graduate student training and development via (1) PI-mentoring of the graduate
              student supported on the project, (2) presentation, discussion, and analysis of
              results at a regular research forum, and (3) integration of research findings
              in graduate computer graphics/visualization courses taught by the PI. 

