Title       : Digestibility of Ice Algae and Phytoplankton: The potential Impacts of Changing
               Food Supply to the Arctic Benthos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0222408

Award Number: 0222408
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Yi Sun   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0222408
Yi-Sun

Sea ice is a dominant feature of marine ecosystems in the
              Arctic. Its presence impacts Arctic marine ecosystems, especially on the
              shelves where benthic and pelagic systems are extensively coupled. If the
              extent and thickness of sea ice continue to decline, a shift is predicted in
              the type of algal material reaching the benthos (from ice algae to
              phytoplankton), which will potentially impact the food requirements of the
              benthos. Several pieces of evidence show that both types of ice algae
              (below-ice ice algae dominated by Melosira arctica and within-ice ice algae
              dominated by Nitzchia frigida) presently reach the benthos in significant
              quantities. This research effort will investigate the digestibility of ice
              algae and phytoplankton-derived organic matter by the Arctic macrobenthos. From
              the perspective of a macrofaunal organism, digestibility includes three
              separate components: 1) selection (is encountered organic material ingested or
              rejected?); 2) absorption (is ingested organic material absorbed during passage
              through the gut, or does it get egested in the feces?); and 3) assimilation (is
              absorbed organic material assimilated into biomass?). Assessment of long-term
              assimilation of the various types of algae (within-ice ice algae; below-ice ice
              algae; and phytoplankton) will be conducted by determining lipid biomarkers and
              their isotopic ratios, and by determining CHN and protein signatures of
              organisms collected during all aspects of the work in both Norway and Kotzebue,
              Alaska. Assessment of short-term absorption will first use the ash-ratio method
              in a whole-core delivery experiment. Following the whole-core experiments,
              dominant taxa from each trophic group will be identified and used in a
              comparison of absorption efficiencies as calculated by the ash-ratio method,
              and carbon retention efficiencies as calculated using a pulse-chase radiotracer
              approach. Finally, the group plans to repeat the dominant taxa absorption
              efficiency experiments in both Svalbard, Norway at the Ny Aalesund lab and in
              Kotzebue Sound, Alaska. This proposed project compliments, and will derive
              synergistic benefits from two projects funded by the Norwegian Research Council
              in Norway.
