Title       : GLOBE Soil Moisture Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0222771

Award Number: 0222771
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $488955             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Washburne jwash@hwr.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Ferre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bart Nijssen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.  This
              proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support
              for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research
              with GLOBE data.  This proposal will the support and development of support the
              current set of GLOBE soil moisture protocols and learning activities.
Soil
              moisture data collected by GLOBE students represents a unique and valuable
              resource to Earth scientists.  The GLOBE student data have the potential to
              become the first readily accessible, long-term, and consistent record of
              near-surface soil moisture available on a global basis.  This soil moisture
              data can be used to validate satellite microwave-derived soil moisture
              estimates and to validate this component in GCM and mesoscale models.  The
              prospect for direct validation of microwave data is limited by the current
              launch schedule, but there is much that can be done comparing these
              observations to seasonal patterns in forward models of microwave soil response.
               The area of weather and climate model initialization, updating, and validation
              holds more short-term promise, since the current parameterization of soil
              moisture is crude.  Improving the representation of land-surface hydrology is a
              major focus of this research.
