Title       : VISUALIZATION: Effective Visualizations for Complex 3- and 4-Dimensional Flow
               Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0222903

Award Number: 0222903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger A. Crawfis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Han-Wei Shen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raghu K. Machiraju  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Despite many advances in the visualization community over the past
              decade,
effective and efficient representations for three-dimensional flow
              fields are still elusive.
Many techniques show promise, but do not represent a
              complete picture of
the flow.
This project  consists of a systematic
              investigation of the current
techniques, their advantages and disadvantages,
              research and analysis of combined techniques which complement each other, and
              research into new techniques.
Cognitive analysis and user studies will be
              undertaken to investigate existing research. Many of these techniques,
              including those of the PIs, proposed a method of representing or rendering a
              flow
field, with little selfexamination of the limitations towards garnering a
              true understanding of the flow
field.
Several of these techniques have
              obvious limitations, but present an improvement over
the dearth of any good
              techniques for three-dimensional flow visualization. By
combining several
              techniques appropriately, more improvements can be
made. 
Are these
              improvements sufficient? What combinations work and which ones do not?
These
              questions will be investigated and quantified in this research.
Finally, we
              will ask: How can new techniques be developed that will overcome some of
              these
limitations?Our subjective understanding of the field allows us to
              propose several
avenues of investigation. These include an-isotropic volume
              renderings, embedded
with flow differentiators; schematic texture algorithms
              for opaque and semi-transparent stream
surfaces; level-of-detail models for
              representing the flow; multi-resolution representation
of underlying features;
              and new representations that provide a more meaningful context
for the
              flow.
This research will greatly aid computational scientists across many
              disciplines: computational fluid dynamics scientists, environment scientists,
              atmospheric scientists, computational geological scientists and biomedical
              researchers.
A primary component of their research is the investigation or
              simulation of natural phenomena.
This phenomena is generally dynamic, leading
              to complex and interesting flow fields. For
three-dimensional computations,
              effective tools to understand, represent and convey these
flows are lacking.
              This research will provide a firm foundation for research in this area, as well
              as lead to new algorithms offering a much clearer representation for flows.


