Title       : Chemical Expansion of Mixed Conducting Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0222001

Award Number: 0222001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166575             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart B. Adler stuadler@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0074539
Adler

Ceramics used in high-temperature applications must match
              closely in coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) to avoid excessive stress
              associated with strain differences over large changes in temperature. 
              Electrochemical ceramics (used as ion-transport membranes or in solid oxide
              fuel cells) present yet an additional challenge.  These materials not only
              expand with temperature, but also with changes in chemical oxidation state. 
              The majority of expansion at high temperatures in these materials may result
              from chemical rather than thermal effects.  Yet today there is little knowledge
              or understanding of chemical expansion, or its consequences and technological
              applications. This project will enlarge our understanding of expansion in
              ceramics to include these chemical effects.  A new continuum theory that
              defines expansion thermodynamically in terms of temperature and oxygen content
              will be presented and then an experimental study of expansion in several mixed
              conducting oxides as a function of cation stoichiometry, temperature, and
              oxygen partial pressure will be performed.  By examining this data in the
              framework of the theory, a more complete and general understanding of expansion
              in ceramics will be gained, as well as into how expansion relates to electronic
              and defect structure.  As a secondary goal, new experimental techniques will be
              developed involving non-equilibrium expansion for directly measuring oxygen
              surface exchange kinetics and chemical diffusion.  The material systems under
              study include lanthanum-strontium-cobalt-iron-oxide (LSCF) and
              strontium-iron-cobalt-oxide (SFC).  LSCF is of direct relevance to solid-oxide
              fuel cells and electrically driven air separation, while SFC is of particular
              interest to workers developing dense membranes for partial oxidation of methane
              to syngas.  LSCF is also a good model material system because its defect
              thermodynamics are well understood, and its cation composition covers an
              enormous range of defect and electronic structure (both ionic and electronic).
              

Electrochemical ceramics are of importance in a broad spectrum of
              applications, including fuels processing, electricity production, and air
              separation. A full understanding of expansion in is critical to advancing
              knowledge and application of electrochemical ceramics. This project will also
              provide a framework for approaching chemical expansion in all solids, thus
              extending the impact of it much further. 

