Title       : Conference on the Behavioral Neurobiology of Bird Song
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0222728

Award Number: 0222728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: H.Philip Zeigler hzeigler@hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1191,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The topic of this conference is the neurobiology of bird song.  Many features of
              bird song have made it a useful model for research on important problems in
              behavioral neurobiology and have engaged the attention of researchers on
              species-typical behavior, communication, behavioral development, central
              sensory processing, motor learning, sensorimotor control, neurogenesis, and
              neuronal plasticity.  Recent developments involving anatomical,
              neurophysiological, neuroendocrine, molecular, and behavioral techniques have
              further increased interest in the song system.  Because many features of the
              bird song system also apply to vertebrate brains, studies of birdsong
              neurobiology have had a major impact on neuroscience research and fundamentally
              altered concepts of brain function. There has been no conference devoted to
              this topic during the past decade.

A Conference on the Behavioral
              Neurobiology of Bird Song will take place at Hunter College, New York City, on
              December 12-14 th , 2002. The Conference's objectives are (a) to provide a
              venue for interaction among several generations of researchers, including both
              domestic and foreign workers, (b) to present a program of sufficient breadth to
              reflect major current issues and indicate future research directions, (c) to
              provide materials for a published volume on the topic, (d) to facilitate
              participation of and communication among a group of new, young and promising
              researchers within the birdsong community and (e) to increase ethnic and gender
              diversity within this important field of neuroscience,
Conference participants
              include individuals who have made some of
the most exciting advances in the
              field during the past few years and who are in
the middle of highly productive
              careers. Individuals currently at early stages of their careers, who are likely
              to make significant future contributions to the field will also be
              participants. The interactions of several generations of excellent researchers
              are expected to help advance discovery in this field and enhance the training
              and education of the younger researchers. A volume based upon Conference
              proceedings will be published, and will have a significant long-term impact
              upon a broader scientific community. 

