Title       : Scientific Support for the GLOBE Land Cover Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0222375

Award Number: 0222375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $641000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell G. Congalton russ.congalton@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mimi L. Becker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Congalton
In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning
              and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.  This
              proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support
              for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research
              with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the current set of GLOBE land
              cover/biology protocols.
This project will modify existing protocols, develop
              and test new ones, and review GLOBE data submitted to the archive.  The project
              will support the overall training and outreach activities of the program,
              fostering student-scientist partnerships.  The scientific issue addressed by
              this proposal is the need to integrate reference data collection and accuracy
              assessment (i.e. validation) into land cover data sets generated from remotely
              sensed data.  Other GLOBE protocols provide data that are currently collected
              by other sources around the world (e.g. temperature, precipitation), however,
              no other source of regional, continental, much less global validation data is
              currently being collected anywhere except by GLOBE students.  This land
              cover/biology investigation has the double benefit of allowing student to
              experience the process of science while providing for a unique and valuable
              validation data set for use by the remote sensing community.  This project is
              collaborating with NASA's Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS)
              team to provide the calibration and validation data for this NASA Earth
              Observing System sensor in order to generate regional land cover maps
              worldwide.  The team is also collaborating with city planners of Auburn, ME,
              the University of Waikato and the New Zealand Ministry of the Environment's
              LENZ project. Students will work primarily with Landsat data, as well as
              learning how to use geographic information systems (GIS) to answer scientific
              questions about land cover mapping.
%%%
In response to an Announcement of
              Opportunity for the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
              Program (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of
              linking scientists and schoolchildren in a global information network with the
              ultimate goal of better understanding Earth's environment and changes that take
              place within it.  This proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE
              Program needs: support for existing protocols, development of new protocols,
              and scientific research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the
              current set of GLOBE land cover/biology protocols.
This project will modify
              existing protocols, develop and test new ones, and review GLOBE data submitted
              to the archive.  The project will support the overall training and outreach
              activities of the program, fostering student-scientist partnerships.  The
              scientific issue addressed by this proposal is the need to integrate reference
              data collection and accuracy assessment (i.e. validation) into land cover data
              sets generated from remotely sensed data.  Other GLOBE protocols provide data
              that are currently collected by other sources around the world (e.g.
              temperature, precipitation), however, no other source of regional, continental,
              much less global validation data is currently being collected anywhere except
              by GLOBE students.  This land cover/biology investigation has the double
              benefit of allowing student to experience the process of science while
              providing for a unique and valuable validation data set for use by the remote
              sensing community.  This project is collaborating with NASA's Moderate
              Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS) team to provide the calibration
              and validation data for this NASA Earth Observing System sensor in order to
              generate regional land cover maps worldwide.  The team is also collaborating
              with city planners of Auburn, ME, the University of Waikato and the New Zealand
              Ministry of the Environment's LENZ project. Students will work primarily with
              Landsat data, as well as learning how to use geographic information systems
              (GIS) to answer scientific questions about land cover mapping
