Title       : Conference:Progress and Directions in Olfactory System Development, Tucson, AZ
               January 18-20, 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0222427

Award Number: 0222427
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne A. Oland lao@neurobio.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1185,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dates:  January 18, 2003-January 20, 2003.
Location:  Tucson, AZ at the Westin
              LaPaloma under the auspices of the University of Arizona

Until recently,
              understanding of the organization and development of the primary olfactory
              pathway lagged far behind understanding of developmental processes in the
              visual and auditory systems.  In the last half decade, however, technical and
              conceptual breakthroughs have allowed astonishing progress toward understand
              the olfactory pathway.  The proposed conference will provide a timely
              accounting of the current status of research in olfactory system development. 
              It is designed with three objectives: (1) to identify critical puzzles of
              olfactory system development that must be solved: (2) to highlight promising
              approaches to solving these puzzles; and (3) to provide direction for essential
              research in the next few years. The conference thus will be a working
              conference, using as its primary mechanism a series of discussion sessions
              whose moderators and panels will reflect the field's long-standing and
              productive use of model systems from across the animal kingdom.  

Seven
              2-hour discussion sessions are planned, six of which will focus on the
              following questions: (1) what processes initiate the formation of the olfactory
              periphery and the olfactory bulb, the first olfactory processing center in the
              brain; (2) what molecular patterns govern the formation of the olfactory
              periphery; (3) how do olfactory receptors and their support cells develop and
              mature and how malleable is that process; (4) how do olfactory receptor axons
              find their target region in the developing brain; (5) how are glomeruli formed;
              and (6) how does behavior influence the circuitry of the olfactory bulb.  The
              seventh session will be a summary session, with a focus on future directions. 
              The conference is intended mainly for members of the broad olfactory community,
              at all levels including trainees, support for whom is the focus of the current
              proposal.  Several participants whose primary research areas lie in other
              sensory systems but whose interests lie in related developmental questions also
              will be invited.

Our overriding goal is to emerge with a firm sense of where
              the field is and where it needs to go, in so doing, setting the stage for
              future research initiatives that will take the field more rapidly toward
              revealing the mechanisms underlying olfactory system development. A subsidiary
              goal is to spark new collaborative interactions among people in the field.  We
              expect that the trainees who will be involved will come away with a much
              stronger understanding of the critical issues facing the field. They also will
              have the opportunity to help define the experimental directions needed to
              resolve those issues.

By constructing a venue to facilitate extended
              discussion, we expect to forge a broader understanding of the implications and
              limitations of the current research, to cross-fertilize ideas, to set the stage
              for new collaborations, and to identify necessary avenues for new research.


