Title       : National Workshop on Future Sensing Systems to be held August 26-28, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0222392

Award Number: 0222392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven D. Glaser glaser@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K J. Pister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A National Workshop on Future Sensing Systems
Summary and Objectives
Recent
              technological advancements in material science, micro fabrication of MEMS,
              and
bioengineered systems, have made the dream of inexpensive, powerful,
              ubiquitous sensing a
readily achievable reality. With ubiquitous sensing comes
              extreme amounts of data, when the end
user actually wants information
              (decisions and answers). Integration of distributed computing
and extremely
              dispersed networking with new sensor technologies and wireless
              communications
innovations, has the potential to overcome barriers of time,
              scale, materials and environment.
Sensor informatics has not been seen as
              fundamental to the sensor community to date, although
all experts polled for
              this document agreed it is central to real-time usability.
We propose a
              National Workshop on future Sensing Systems - a vehicle to start researchers
              on
the road to integrating the possibilities being developed by the many
              interests working in the
common space. The workshop will focus on exposing
              future abilities of various disciplines
working on new sensor science to other
              researchers possibly doing similar or complimentary
work in their local space.
              Integration of industrial research and application development will
provide
              that pull and an avenue to large-scale, inexpensive production. An example is
              the current
availability of rugged, highly accurate, MEMS accelerometers due
              to their application as
automotive air-bag triggers. It is hoped, for
              instance, that the medical researchers will become
aware of advanced imaging
              technologies developed by DARPA to image non-metallic structural
pieces, and
              can become an improvement on existing bio-imaging techniques. We hope to
              push
the community to (1) move from merely providing data to providing
              information and answers; (2)
build road maps for long-term research; (3) build
              broad partnerships; and (4) address educational
needs.
These opportunities
              and problems are common to many agencies of Government, as well as
industry
              and academia, and is to be sponsored by Sensors Technology, NSF Division of
              Civil and
Mechanical Systems, with co-sponsorship from Dynamic Systems and
              Control (CMS), DARPA,
NIH, DOE, NIST, NASA, AFOSR, ONR, ARO, ARL, and NRL. We
              are expecting over 100
attendees, with 70 of them university researchers for
              whom all expenses will be covered by this
proposal. The hard deliverable to
              NSF will be a workshop report which will serve as the leading
edge for future
              of sensor-oriented research at the Civil and Mechanical Systems Division,
              NSF.
The report will be written by the co-PIs (Glaser and Pister) with
              extensive guidance and input
from the steering committee and participants. The
              report will be presented to NSF by 15 January,
2003.
