Title       : Agrobacterium Regulation of Plant Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0222335

Award Number: 0222335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick P. Dennis                       
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $479716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene W. Nester gnester@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Luca Comai  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              

Genetic transformation of plants by Agrobacterium tumefaciens is the only
              documented case of gene transfer to eukaryotes in nature. As such, this system
              has attracted a great deal of attention from a broad scientific audience
              concerned with its biology, its use in unraveling complex problems in plant
              genetics and its biotechnological applications in creating transgenic plants.
              Recent findings have broadened the possible applications of Agrobacterium as a
              vector for the transfer of DNA to fungi, oomycetes and animals. Using cDNA-AFLP
              analysis, our laboratory demonstrated that Agrobacterium and E.coli alter the
              expression of plant defense and stress response genes of Ageratum conyzoides
              cells in culture. However, Agrobacterium also induced a gene encoding a
              nodulin-like protein which was not altered by E.coli suggesting that
              Agrobacterium can induce specific host genes. The project expands on these
              observations and will study global expression in cell cultures of the model
              plant Arabidopsis thaliana using high density microarray technology. Cell
              cultures of Arabidopsis will be cocultivated for 24 hours with E.coli as well
              as transfer proficient Agrobacterium and mutants blocked at different major
              steps in the infection process. Comparing the genes expressed using microarrays
              will reveal these genes that are specifically altered by Agrobacterium.
              Comparing the alterations in gene expression induced by the transfer proficient
              strain with the mutants will begin to identify genetic factors responsible for
              these alterations. The effects observed using the first set of mutants will be
              further refined by using additional mutants blocked at single steps in the
              infection process. The results of these experiments should provide insight into
              the unique genetic factors of the near symbiont Agrobacterium which provides
              its ability to overcome host defenses and ultimately lead to the transfer of
              DNA to a remarkably wide range of plants and other eukaryotic cells.

