Title       : Understanding Environmental Variability and Change through Modeling Soil
               Processes.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0222748

Award Number: 0222748
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elissa R. Levine elissa@ltpmail.gsfc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan J. Riha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA-Goddard Space Flight
	      
	      Greenbelt, MD  20771    /   -

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding the Earth's environment and changes that take place within it. 
              This proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs:
              support for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific
              research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the current set of GLOBE
              soil measurement protocols, with the cooperation of  the USDA, Cornell
              University, ISRIC (The Netherlands).  The project will use GLOBE
              student-collected data to derive and validate algorithms for physical and
              chemical soil/plant/atmospheric process simulation models, including the
              General Purpose Simulation Model of the Earth Atmosphere System (GAPS).  The
              GLOBE soil data will be used to determine baseline estimates of soil quality
              within various ecosystems and land use scenarios.  Seasonal measurements of
              surface soil characteristics will assess regional changes in soil quality. 
              This proposal will also support the development of materials for education that
              will include soil science in the context of Earth Systems Science.  Scientists,
              students, and the general public will be able to better understand the role of
              living soil in ecosystems and their role in the care of our natural resources.
