Title       : Collaborative Research: CMG--Anti-Turbulence, Horizontal Convection and
               Thermalence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0222109

Award Number: 0222109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil J. Balmforth njb@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1266,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Horizontal convection refers to horizontal motions in a fluid slab caused by
              spatial gradients of fluid density. Rather surprisingly, theoretical arguments
              show that nonuniform heating or cooling at the top surface of a fluid layer is
              ineffective in driving the circulation. More specifically, if the only force
              acting on the fluid is nonuniform surface heating, and if the kinematic
              viscosity and thermal diffusivity are allowed to approach zero with their ratio
              fixed, then it can be shown that the energy dissipation per unit mass,
              determined by integrating over the whole volume of the fluid, goes to zero.
              Because no energy dissipation implies no turbulence, this is sometimes called
              the "anti-turbulence theorem." This result is counterintuitive. In fact, it has
              been thought that the main features of the global-scale ocean circulation might
              be accounted for by the pole-to-equator temperature gradient, but the
              anti-turbulence theorem seems to imply that differential heating of the surface
              cannot by itself drive the circulation. This proposal is motivated by the need
              to understand the physical processes that account for the anti-turbulence
              theorem and other purely mathematical constraints on horizontal convection.
              Implications of these constraints are that fluid motions on the smallest scales
              must be closely coupled to larger-scale motions as part of a linked, multiscale
              system. The goal is to relate the improved understanding of horizontal
              convection to the problem of ocean circulation. The approach consists of a
              combination of analytical and numerical techniques such as upper bound theory,
              numerical computation of equilibrium solutions using continuation methods,
              linear stability analysis of these equilibria, multiscale asymptotic methods,
              and direct numerical simulation. The work will contribute to improved modeling
              of the ocean circulation and hence climate. It is supported jointly by the
              Division of Ocean Sciences and the Division of Mathematical Sciences through
              the NSF Program, Research Collaborations between the Mathematical Sciences and
              the Geosciences (CMG).
