Title       : Ion Driven Air Flow For Microscale Cooling Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0222553

Award Number: 0222553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh V. Garimella sureshg@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Integrated circuit technology continues to progress in the direction of higher
              device density and with it, a higher density of waste heat that must be removed
              in order to maintain the electronics below their desired operating
              temperatures.  In the majority of applications, including personal computers
              and workstations, cellular phones, hand-held electronics, and automotive
              applications, economic and other practical considerations restrict thermal
              management solutions to air-cooled systems.  Air cooling technology is often
              the limiting factor in determining the size and performance of electronic
              products, and novel concepts to improve air cooling capabilities are much
              needed.
The goal of the proposed work is to produce ion driven air flow at the
              microscale, integrated within micro-featured heat generating surfaces.  It is
              the aim of this work to fill a technological gap in microscale convective
              cooling by developing a pump that is itself truly at the microscale.   The key
              advancement proposed in this work is the generation of unipolar ions in air.  A
              single ion species can be accelerated in an electric field, efficiently
              creating fluid motion.  Preliminary calculations of the heat transfer rates
              achievable using ion driven pumping of air through microchannels show that as
              much as 40 W/cm2 of heat rejection is possible by this technique.  This cooling
              rate compares favorably to those in many liquid-cooled applications and would
              provide an air-cooling alternative to meet the needs of future semiconductor
              devices. Funding is being provided by the Thermal Transport and Thermal
              Processing Program of the Chemical and Transport Systems Division.

