Title       : NEAR: NEtwork of Autonomous Robots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0222927

Award Number: 0222927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453799             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Vijay Kumar Kumar@cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Ostrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project addresses the development of a NEtwork ofAutonomous Robots
              (NEAR) with sensors and wireless network cardswith the goal of developing a
              distributed implementation of arobotic assistant. The key applications of
              NEARinclude: (a) transportation and retrieval of objects in asemi-structured
              environment; (b) organization and reconfiguration ofsensors for observations in
              dynamically changing environments; and (c) coordinated motion of multiple
              vehicles for cooperative manipulationor for efficient group locomotion. The
              NEAR robot network isalways "near" the human user, interacting with the user,
              andaugmenting her skills, providing a natural synergism.Our focus in this
              project is to leverage advances in automation andaugmentation and steer them in
              the direction of autonomy for servicerobotics. We will develop a network of
              simple mobile robots serving ahuman being. Each robot has some basic sensing
              capability (vision inour case) and the ability to communicate with other
              mobilerobots. Robots can be programmed to exhibit simple behaviors:controllers
              and estimators and policies that couplessensing/perception at a very low level.
               The ability to use multiplerobots enables autonomy without increasing the
              complexity ofindividual robot behaviors but by instead exploiting the
              distributedexecution of these behaviors in a network. Since the human
              isexplicitly involved in programming and commanding the robots, it ispossible
              to exploit this natural synergy by allowing humans toinfluence the assembly of
              the behaviors and the organization of theteam in a top-down fashion.
