Title       : Collaborative Research: CMG Research: Statistical Seismic Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0222270

Award Number: 0222270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Levander alan@esci.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William W. Symes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Collaborative Research: CMG Research: Statistical Seismic Imaging

A.
              Levander, W.W. Symes, S. Minkoff

Both the crystalline crust and the shallow
              near surface (< 100m depth) environment are complex, mechanically heterogeneous
              regions, often having spatial distributions of mechanical properties that are
              distinctly different from the relatively smoothly layered sedimentary column.
              Exploration seismology is currently one of the most important means of
              exploring the subsurface: for petroleum in the sedimentary column, for
              geotechnical/environmental purposes in the shallow subsurface, and for
              understanding of tectonic processes in the crystalline crust.  Reflection
              seismology was developed by the petroleum industry to explore the sedimentary
              column, i.e., the medium is layered, the preponderance of energy is singly
              scattered, and scales are dichotomous. Its applications in both the
              near-surface environment and the deep crust have been very successful but also
              present problems not usually encountered in petroleum exploration.  The near
              surface is subjected to chemical and mechanical weathering processes that
              produce a highly heterogeneous, nonlayered medium. Mechanical properties can
              vary by an order of magnitude within a few wavelengths due to compaction,
              chemical alteration, and the presence or absence of water. The crystalline
              crust, although lacking order of magnitude changes in mechanical properties,
              has a spatially complex, often self-affine (fractal) distribution of seismic
              velocity and density heterogeneities. For the relatively long path propagation
              in the crust, the wavefield often falls in a strong scattering regime in which
              linear imaging systems will produce mediocre or nonsensical results.

This
              research program makes first steps toward a complementary imaging paradigm for
              complex media, termed statistical seismic imaging, in which statistical
              properties of the subsurface are mapped using statistical properties of the
              seismic wavefield.  As this is an extremely large topic, the proposal scope
              will be limited to a few areas of endeavor. The investigations will explore (1)
              effective models relating subwavelength scale heterogeneity to macro-scale
              propagation effects (effective mechanical properties, velocity, attenuation,
              dispersion, etc), (2) the extent to which multiple reflection and refraction
              can be differentiated and their effects on traditional seismic imaging, and (3)
              the identification of the onset of strong scattering.  The research involves a
              high level of software development and computational effort, including 3D
              seismic simulation and nonlinear inversion for material properties and
              statistics. No single discipline possesses the tools to make significant
              progress on statistical seismic imaging: expertise in geophysics, applied math,
              and high performance computing are needed.  The principal investigators have
              expertise in these areas.  The research has the potential of improving
              societally important environmental/geotechnical investigations as well as more
              fundamental research on the structure and tectonics of the Earth's crust.
