Title       : CMG Research: Collaborative Research: Models of Sub-Grid Scale Turbulence in
               Earth's Core and the Geodynamo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0222334

Award Number: 0222334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $534583             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Roberts roberts@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0222334
Paul H. Roberts 

Earth's dynamo, which is responsible for the
              geomagnetic field, is a geosystem involving a broad range of interacting
              scales, a complex geometry and a rich variety of physical processes. Numerical
              simulations resolve only the largest-scale features; most parameterizations of
              the smaller, subgrid scale processes simulate dissipative processes only, and
              are incapable of simulating non-dissipative processes which affect transfers of
              energy among differing spatial scales.  Exceptions to this statement are the
              recently developed similarity and Navier-Stokes-alpha models. Core dynamics is
              strongly affected by the action of the Coriolis and Lorentz forces, making the
              fields both anisotropic and non-local.  Recent studies have provided valuable
              insight into these processes, which will help motivate generalized models that
              accurately account for these forces.  This project will develop better
              parameterizations of subgrid processes in Earth's core by incorporating into
              the similarity and Navier-Stokes-alpha models, knowledge of the structure of
              the small-scale fields. The project will involve a combination of numerical
              simulation and theoretical analysis employing not only simplified models that
              isolate physical processes and analytical issues, but also realistic geodynamo
              models. The research will be undertaken by a group of mathematicians and
              geoscientists from US institutions and from abroad under the supervision of a
              management group.  The project will foster interactions between members of the
              dynamo collective, and it is expected that further collaborations will result
              from the annual workshops that will be organized and partially supported by the
              project.  It is anticipated that improved parameterization of subgrid processes
              in rotating magnetoconvection will interest all who wish to study magnetism and
              dynamos in other planets and in stars.  It is believed that many of these
              people will wish to participate in the planned workshops. An improved numerical
              model of the geodynamo will be of interest to a second group of geoscientists
              and mathematicians who seek to quantify the structure, dynamics and history of
              the interior of our planet.
-- 


