Title       : Makapansgat Interdisciplinary Paleoecology Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0222176

Award Number: 0222176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matt Sponheimer msponheimer@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   With National Science Foundation support Dr. Matt Sponheimer and his
              colleagues will investigate the ecology of the early human ancestor
              Australopithecus africanus and associated mammals from Makapansgat Limeworks,
              South Africa. The team brings together specialists in biogeochemistry, dental
              microwear, and ecomorphology to provide a more complete picture of the
              ecological background for human evolution. No single method of paleoecological
              research can provide a complete picture of an animal's ecology, as they all
              have intrinsic strengths and weaknesses. By using a variety of techniques in
              tandem, however, it may be possible to utilize their respective strengths,
              while partially overcoming their limitations. To this end, this team will
              examine the paleoecology of the Makapansgat fauna using dental microwear,
              cranial and postcranial morphology, carbon isotope, oxygen isotope, and
              elemental analyses. The initial phase of this project will be a large-scale
              modern collection and sampling program in South Africa and Kenya. This will
              provide the necessary background for interpreting data from fossil specimens.
              Once the modern specimens have been analyzed, the team will apply these
              techniques to the three million-year-old fossils from Makapansgat. The team
              will focus on the following questions: 1) What habitats did our early ancestors
              prefer; 2) What did our early ancestors eat; and 3) How much competition did
              they have for these resources. While this project is ultimately intended to
              provide information about the ecology of Australopithecus africanus and its
              associated fauna, it will also make important contributions to all of the
              individual subfields utilized, as the team will analyze a larger and more
              diverse African fauna than previous efforts. This research is important for
              several reasons. It will provide data on early human diets and habitats of
              long-standing interest to archaeologists and physical anthropologists.
              Moreover, it will provide a sound multidisciplinary basis from which the
              ecology of other extinct animals can investigated. This will shed new light on
              the ecological background of mammalian evolution in Africa.



