Title       : Intelligent Robotic Tools and Telepresence Environment for Off-Pump (Beating
               Heart) Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0222743

Award Number: 0222743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Junku Yuh                               
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $519775             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Shankar Sastry sastry@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop intelligent robotic tools and a telepresence
              environment for performing off-pump  coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)
              surgery.  In this context, off-pump CABG surgery means that the surgery  is
              done while heart is still beating instead of using a cardiopulmonary bypass
              machine and stopping the  heart to perform heart surgery.  Although on-pump
              open heart surgery has been refined over the last 30  years and is now a common
              and successful procedure it remains highly invasive and fraught  with potential
              complications.  Due to the complications resulting from using cardiopulmonary 
              bypass machine, performing CABG off-pump is highly desirable.  However,
              off-pump CABG surgery  can be potentially performed for only a small proportion
              (~10%) of all CABG surgeries due  to technological limitations.  Use of
              intelligent robotics technology promises an alternative and  superior way of
              performing off-pump CABG surgery.  The intelligent telerobotic tools that will
              be  developed in this project will actively track and cancel the relative
              motion between the surgical  instruments and the heart by Active Relative
              Motion Cancelling (ARMC), allowing CABG surgeries to be  performed on a beating
              heart with technical perfection equal to traditional on pump procedures.  
              

A major focus of the research will be on developing complementary sensing
              systems,  and algorithms for intelligent and model based fusing of information
              supplied form different systems  for superior performance, and model based
              confidence evaluation to detect and handle variations  in heart rhythm and
              arrythmias.  The sensory systems that will be studied include sonomicrometry, 
              vision, whisker, force/torque, and MEMS based inertia sensors.  

