Title       : Collaborative Research: CMG: Microstructural Controls on Transport Processes in
               Geophysical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0222312

Award Number: 0222312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hajo Eicken   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A combination of mathematical and numerical modeling, laboratory experiments,
              field experiments, and three-dimensional data visualization techniques will be
              applied to the problem of determining the influence of the microscale pore
              structure of sea-ice on the macroscopic thermodynamic and fluid transport
              properties of such ice.  The work represents a collaboration between a
              mathematician, a glaciologist and a computer scientist.  A variety of
              mathematical approaches, including both lattice and continuum percolation
              representations, to modeling the bulk properties of irregular three-dimensional
              media will be applied to ice with varying degrees of connectivity between
              microscale brine inclusions.  Field and lab experiments, including MRI and
              X-ray imaging of ice samples, will be combined with modern three-dimensional
              rendering of the resulting data to provide quantitative and qualitative
              information about the variability of such connectivity, particularly as a
              function of ice temperature.  Model predictions of macroscopic permeability and
              thermal conductivity will be compared to experimentally measured transport
              properties.  Through a collaboration with Dr. J. Fry at Victoria University,
              New Zealand, and student research projects, the models developed for transport
              in sea-ice will be extended to fluid migration through rock and the diffusion
              of gas through glacial firn.  The latter is an important factor in the
              interpretation of paleo-atmospheric composition from bubbles trapped in
              ice-cores.  The project also includes a substantial amount of training and
              outreach, with field work for graduate and undergraduate students, and
              classroom demonstrations and experiments in elementary and secondary schools.
