Title       : Collaborative Research: The Effect of Racial, Economic, and Institutional
               Characteristics on Home Mortgage Lending to Underserved Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2002      
File        : a0222355

Award Number: 0222355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reynold F. Nesiba nesiba@inst.augie.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augustana College
	      29th and Summit
	      Sioux Falls, SD  57197    605/274-0770

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research would extend NSF-funded research on home mortgage lending. 
              Despite high levels of inequality in home ownership across races, ethnic
              groups, and neighborhoods in the United States, recent trends among minorities
              and low-income groups reveal record high levels of home ownership.  In aiming
              to understand this development, this project examines how the race and income
              of both individuals and neighborhoods affect home mortgage lending to
              underserved neighborhoods over the last decade.  It also gives special
              attention to the institutional factors responsible for changes in lending and
              the ability of minority and low-income groups to purchase homes.  On one hand,
              banking deregulation may have increased competition in ways that serve all
              income groups, and new performance guidelines under the Community Reinvestment
              Act may have prompted lenders covered by the law to do more for underserved
              markets.  On the other hand, institutional factors may have had less positive
              effects:  the rapid changes in the home mortgage lending industry may have
              resulted in the use of less favorable loan terms, inadequate consumer
              protection, and financing of poor quality housing. 

	To address these
              issues, this project analyzes the consequences of institutional changes in home
              mortgage lending using nation-wide data from 1992-2001 from the Home Mortgage
              Disclosure Act.  It measures characteristics of the mortgage applicants and
              lenders, the requested loan amount and the outcome of the request, and the
              census characteristics of the neighborhood of the housing.  The analysis then
              describes changes over time in the loans made to minority and low-income
              groups, and in the determinants of the decision to deny a loan application.  By
              extending the previous work of the investigator on Indiana to the nation as a
              whole, and using an under-studied data source, the project contributes to our
              understanding of how housing inequality emerges and has changed in recent
              years.  

	This project extends the original research with a more intensive
              analysis of the interesting case of South Dakota.  Unlike most areas studied in
              mortgage discrimination research, South Dakota is primarily rural, has a lower
              level of national bank penetration than usual, and a distinct minority (Native
              Americans, 8.3% of the population).  The smaller state-level scope, as compared
              to the nationwide data in the original research, will also permit the PI to
              undertake a more detailed institutional analysis than would be possible at a
              national level.  In addition to the broad categories of institutional type used
              in the national study, the more intensive South Dakota research can undertake a
              more inductive analysis by directly comparing the more limited number of
              lenders (97 in 2000) on various dimensions of community reinvestment
              performance.

