Title       : CMG Research: Emerging Mathematical Strategies for Stochastic Modeling and
               Predictability to Climate Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0222133

Award Number: 0222133
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $668505             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Majda   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Kleeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The climate system involves a huge range of interacting spatial and
temporal
              scales.  Development of tools to further understanding of this
very complex
              system and its predictability is the major focus of this
project. 
              Theoretically rigorous methods allowing for the stochastic
modeling of the
              system have been demonstrated by the investigators in
simple dynamical
              systems.  We extend these to the more complex but
practical systems underlying
              climate.  Additionally an entirely new
perspective on dynamical predictability
              has been derived by the
investigators using information theory.  This will be
              applied to the
problems of atmospheric and climate prediction and will also
              enable the
development of rigorous reliability measures for dynamical
              predictions
in general chaotic systems.

These investigations enable us to
              gain a much clearer understanding
of the complex system underlying the Earth's
              climate.  Such an
understanding will be of great benefit in interpreting
              results from
societally important projections of future climate change. 
              Further we
anticipate the development of tools which will enable us to
              reliably
decide when a particular prediction (climate or weather) is likely to
              be
useful and when it is not likely to have any use.   This ability has
              important 
practical implications for policy makers dealing with fundamentally
              
uncertain systems. 
