Title       : Conference on Plant Proteomes: Structure, Changes, Interactions, and Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0222075

Award Number: 0222075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marit Nilsen-Hamilton marit@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1145,1166,1168,1329,9109,9178,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Considering the recent advances in plant genome analysis and functional
              genomics, proteomics research in plant systems requires integration of research
              activities from different fields.  The symposium entitled "Plant Proteomes:
              Structure, Changes, Interactions and Functions"  is designed as a "fusion
              conference" to initiate and foster interactions between proteomics researchers
              who are using computational and experimental approaches and plant scientists
              who are adopting, or who plan to adopt, proteomics technology in their
              research.  To our knowledge, this symposium, to be held June 20-23, 2002, is
              the first to be devoted specifically to proteomics of plants.  Speakers have
              been invited to present the results of their investigations of different
              aspects of proteomics and plant processes.  The list of invited speakers
              includes a balance among different areas, backgrounds, career stages and
              genders.  Each speaker will present cutting-edge research on the structure,
              function and interactions of proteins encoded by plant genomes; structural
              genomics; high-throughput analysis of protein functions, abundance and
              interactions; computational analysis of genome information to predict function
              and interactions; and functional analysis of gene families.  The talks will
              cover many areas of plant biology, molecular physiology, enzymes and catalysis,
              signal transduction, metabolism, cell biology, and responses to abiotic and
              biotic stress conditions.
The design of the symposium program is intended to:
              1) foster collaborations between participants and speakers; 2) integrate
              research advances with education at the undergraduate, graduate, and
              postdoctoral levels; and 3) bring new ideas, new methods, and materials to
              researchers who are working in different fields.   Therefore, this conference
              is inherently different from typical small conferences in which a group of
              researchers in one area meets regularly.  This is a fusion conference where
              investigators in different areas of research will meet and discuss topics of
              mutual interest in the fast moving area of functional genomics.
Attention to
              the educational impact has been given in the selection of speakers and during
              program development.  In addition to the participation of students and
              postdoctoral researchers, special events during the conference will address
              educational challenges during the post-genomic era.  Systematic and focused
              interactions with historically black institutions and undergraduate research
              experience programs will foster the attention of under-represented and
              under-served students.

