Title       : Mobile Infospaces: Mapping Information to Neuropsychological Patterns of
               Human-Spatial Cognition to Support Wearable, Augmented-Reality Interface Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0222831

Award Number: 0222831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary P. Harper                          
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $706527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank A. Biocca Biocca@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Owen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a systematic process of mapping Augmented Reality
              information organization to the human brain's prodigious capacity for spatial
              cognition. Fundamental to human thinking and utilizing much of the brain's
              resources is spatial cognition: a matrix for mental imagery manipulation,
              mathematical reasoning, spatial mental models of time, certain aspects of
              language organization, and memory organization. A neuropsychological human
              factors route to AR interface design may produce a solid basis for systematic
              theory, research, and guidelines for the design of mobile, AR interfaces. To
              accomplish this the research will: (1) extend neurological and behavioral
              research on human spatial cognition to systematically map egocentric (i.e.,
              body centered) spatial perception and object manipulation in AR systems; (2)
              add new capabilities to the METLAB's ImageTclAR toolkit in support of this
              project and spatial AR interface design, and (3) develop multi-user mobile AR
              prototypes with both body and environmentally stabilized components using new
              hybrid tracking techniques based on visual tracking and ShapeTape sensors.  It
              will also systematically conduct Human Computer Interaction experiments to
              evaluate and confirm the effect of new Mobile Infospaces interface techniques
              on: information object search and perception, tool and data object semantics,
              ease of object manipulation and procedural performance, memory for the location
              and properties of data tools and objects, group navigation, situational
              awareness, and cognitive maps of the environment.  Finally, the project will
              organize and systematize findings and interface design experience into Mobile
              Infospaces AR Design Guidelines.

The new models and methods developed for AR
              system design will impact mobile AR research and development in two main ways. 
              For research, it will provide a empirically validated theoretical foundation
              for augmented reality design using a neuropsychological and behaviorally valid
              human factors model of spatial cognition in information displays.  For
              interface design, it will provide information display guidelines and ImageTclAR
              interface development tools that can establish parameters for optimizing the
              placement of tools, organization of menus and data, and clustering of
              procedures for mobile, augmented-reality and immersive virtual reality users.

