Title       : OCEPT II Follow-On Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0222552

Award Number: 0222552
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Camille L. Wainwright wainwric@pacificu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pacific University
	      2034 College Way
	      Forest Grove, OR  971161753    503/357-6151

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Oregon Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers (OCEPT)
              is a statewide collaborative established to improve the mathematics and science
              preparation of future teachers in Oregon and increase the diversity of the
              population of students preparing to be teachers. It has involved over 500
              science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (STEM) and Education faculty
              and administrators, academic advisors, and K-12 teachers, from virtually all of
              the 34 institutions of higher education in the state, as well as numerous
              school districts. More than 200 courses and programs have been developed and/or
              significantly impacted. Reported changes include using more diverse teaching
              and assessment strategies, adoption of standards-based instructional
              techniques, and inclusion of opportunities for related teaching experiences
              with K-12 students. OCEPT-influenced classrooms are more interactive,
              incorporate greater use of technology, conceptual development and more of a
              focus on scientific inquiry and/or mathematics problem solving. The OCEPT II
              Follow-On project is conducting a comprehensive summative evaluation to provide
              evidence of the impact of OCEPT on faculty, preservice students, institutions,
              and new teachers. An "Outcomes Research Study " is the primary vehicle for
              providing evidence about new teachers and STEM faculty who taught them. Through
              this study, novice teachers are observed and interviewed over a 2-to-3 year
              time span, and OCEPT faculty who have taught these teachers are observed and
              interviewed. In addition, the project is utilizing instruments from the CETP
              Core Evaluation study and contributing to the overall CETP evaluation effort.
              Induction support and professional development is provided for novice teachers.
              In collaboration with the Oregon Council of Teachers of Mathematics and the
              Oregon Science Teachers Association, OCEPT II provides workshops specifically
              designed for new teachers and their mentors, welcomes new teachers to statewide
              conferences, and provides memberships in the statewide professional
              organizations. Dissemination activities include support for Faculty Fellows to
              develop and publish scholarly articles on their work through the WRITE ON!
              Institute.
