Title       : Research Resources: Computational Science and Engineering: Intelligent
               Information Acquisition and Management Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0222628

Award Number: 0222628
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna M. Kavi kavi@cs.unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Armin R. Mikler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angela K. Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen M. Swigger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA 02-22628
Kavi, Krishna M.
Mikler, Armin R.; Swigger, Kathleen M.; Wilson,
              Angela K.
University of North Texas 

CISE RR: Computational Science and
              Engineering: Intelligent Information Acquisition and Management
              Infrastructure

This proposal, addressing multithreaded computer
              architectural and sensor-network simulations, concurrent analysis of multiple
              flight data recorders, and computational chemistry, requests a Beowulf cluster,
              a Sun multiprocessor, and a 1.3TB storage device to enable research in the
              following four projects:

1.  Scalable Clustered Multithreaded Architecture
              for Embedded and DSP Applications,
2.  SensorNet,
3.  Analysis of Flight Data
              Recorder (FDR) Information, and
4.  Computation Chemistry: Quantum Chemical
              Functional Group (QCFG) approach.

The first project evaluates the
              suitability of multithreaded architectures for embedded and DSP systems
              developing customizable and scalable implementations to meet the performance
              and energy requirements of future embedded and DSP applications. The second
              designs and implements an agent-based monitoring infrastructure to facilitate
              data-acquisition and event-correlation for large number of widely distributed
              environmental sensors of different types. This project aims at integrating the
              Leibniz system for computation based on prepositional logic. The third project
              concentrates on problems related to the organization and management of large,
              real-time distributed knowledge investigating various architectures and systems
              for real-time transmission of flight data to insure more accurate and reliable
              information. Looking into real-time collaborative interfaces that can support
              distributed communications and collective decision-making, this projects
              examines data mining techniques that can be used to aid in post-mortem analyses
              of accidents. The last project enables an approach to obtain quantitative
              descriptions of structures, energetics, and other properties for intermediate-
              to large-sized molecules.
The equipment is expected to lead to new research in
              Intelligent Information and Intelligent Resource Management.

