Title       : Collaborative Research: Decision-making in Collaborative Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0222892

Award Number: 0222892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Grosz grosz@eecs.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the last decade, computer systems have increasingly become participants in
              complex, distributed communities comprising people and computer systems, rather
              than devices used by individuals.  This major shift engenders a significant
              challenge for computer science: to determine ways to construct computer systems
              able to act effectively as team members. Although many current computer systems
              have sophisticated capabilities as individual actors, most lack capabilities
              required for working successfully as members of a collaborative group.  This
              proposal addresses problems central to this challenge.  It focuses on providing
              the foundation for the design of decision-making components of software agents
              that can handle multi-agent, dynamic team contexts. The proposed research
              comprises three activities: (1) empirical investigations, including examination
              of the influence on individual and group behavior and outcomes of policies and
              mechanisms for producing appropriately helpful behavior in collaborative
              settings and for
governing commitment to group activities; (2) development of
              formal theories that may be used to address abstractly questions of these
              mechanisms; and (3) construction of more sophisticated
collaboration-capable
              software agents.  The research will contribute to the development of
              collaboration-capable software agents and collaborative human-computer
              interface systems, and,
thus, will significantly increase the effectiveness of
              heterogeneous teams of people and software-systems agents.

