Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Manufacture of Aluminum and Magnesium Matrix
               Composites under Industrial Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2002   
File        : a0222603

Award Number: 0222603
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pradeep K. Rohatgi prohatgi@csd.uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : W223      STATE-REPUBLIC OF EGYPT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0222603
Rohatgi

Description:  This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Pradeep Rohatgi, Professor in the Department of Materials
              at the University of Wisconsin- Milwaukee (UWM), Milwaukee, Wisconsin and Dr.
              Atef Daoud, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Helwan,
              Cairo, Egypt.  The two scientists plan to conduct research aimed at increased
              understanding of fundamental phenomena of particle clustering, settling,
              nucleation and particle pushing, which control the distribution of particles
              and influence the properties in cast metal matrix composites (MMC). The work
              should result in a decrease in cost and improvement in properties of cast metal
              matrix composites.  MMC consist of a metallic matrix and a reinforcing phase
              such as fibers and particles.  The main function of the matrix is to transfer
              and distribute the load to the reinforcement.  The reinforcements impart
              strength, stiffness and other desirable properties like wear resistance and a
              low coefficient of friction to the composites.
Reinforcements are generally
              ceramics, including oxides, carbides and nitrides.  These materials are used
              because of their combination of high strength and stiffness at room and
              elevated temperatures.  Particles are the cheapest form of reinforcement
              materials and they impart isotropic properties to composites.  Among the
              reinforcements in aluminum SiC, aluminum oxide and fly ash are attractive
              materials because of their relatively low costs and interesting physical and
              mechanical properties.  

Scope: 
Although the U.S. automotive industry
              currently manufactures a limited number of components from cast composites,
              certain problems, such as high cost, low ductility and fracture toughness, a
              scatter in properties and casting defects, prevent the widespread use of cast
              MMC.  This research will help overcome these issues.  The U.S. PI has
              experience and a strong background in the solidification processing of alloys
              and MMC.  He and the Egyptian scientist have established collaboration in
              previous joint research activities.  In this project, Dr. Daoud's experience in
              laboratory-scale manufacturing of MMC components will complement the
              fundamental research experience of Dr. Rohatgi.  The project is likely to
              benefit the U.S. as well as Egypt in promoting the use of cast metal matrix
              composites to conserve energy and the environment.  The research is expected to
              involve a U.S. postdoctorate and a number of U.S. undergraduate students at
              UWM. This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
              which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry
              out these cooperative activities.

