Title       : CMG RESEARCH: Wavelet-Based Statistical Analysis of Multiscale Geophysical Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0222115

Award Number: 0222115
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $649999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Percival dbp@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Guttorp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher S. Bretherton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wavelets are a relatively new - but increasingly popular - mathematical tool for
              analyzing data in the geosciences. Wavelets reexpress data collected over a
              time span or spatial region such that variations over temporal/spatial scales
              are summarized in wavelet coefficients. Individual coefficients depend upon
              both a scale and a temporal/spatial location, so wavelets are ideal for
              analyzing geosystems with interacting scales. In this project, the
              investigators develop wavelet-based statistical methodology to address three
              multiscale geophysical problems. The first is to characterize scale-specific
              variances/covariances of atmospheric pressure time series from  NOAA's Tropical
              Atmosphere Ocean buoy array. Because these series have gaps in them, the
              investigators construct special wavelets for computing statistically tractable
              wavelet coefficients. The second problem is to analyze atmospheric turbulence
              measurements collected by an aircraft. The investigators use statistical
              methodology to combine wavelet coefficients with aircraft heights to determine
              scale/height variations of winds. The third problem is to assess
              spatial/temporal variations in ground-based radar rainfall measurements. Here
              the investigators use wavelets to extract spatial gradients, to assess
              variations in area-mean precipitation, and to determine the variability in the
              estimated quantities using wavelet-based bootstrapping.

The motivation
              behind this project is to further a scientific understanding of how the
              atmosphere changes over time, over heights and over different areas. A better
              understanding of the atmosphere is important for mankind because of the key
              role that the atmosphere plays as part of the climate of the earth. Federal
              agencies such as NOAA and NASA (in cooperation with its Japanese counterpart
              NASDA) are actively collecting sets of data that directly measure how the
              atmosphere changes. These data sets, along with others collected under NSF
              sponsorship, are inherently complex to interpret. In this project, the
              investigators study these data sets using wavelets, which are a mathematical
              microscope for interpreting changes in complex data sets.  The investigators
              develop new methods for using wavelets to study atmospheric changes. In the
              future, other investigators can apply these new methods to data sets collected
              in other areas of science such as oceanography, astronomy, agriculture and
              forestry.

