Title       : Developing a Regional Context for Rocky Subtidal Communities: Upwelling, Biotic
               Interactions and Diversity Regulation in the Galapagos Marine Reserve
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0222092

Award Number: 0222092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon D. Witman jon_witman@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The foundation of community ecology has been constructed from studies conducted
              on relatively small spatial scales. In marine ecology, the building blocks of
              the foundation are analyses of species interactions at focal sites that are
              bathed by currents transporting nutrients, food and reproductive propagules of
              the next generation of organisms. Thus, the communities living at local sites
              are linked to some extent on larger spatial scales by oceanographic processes.
              Understanding the extent and scale of such linkages is essential for the growth
              of community ecology as an intellectual endeavor and also for predicting how
              local biota of coastal marine ecosystems will be modified by an increasing pace
              of global change. The latter situation applies because global atmospheric
              processes regulate the oceanic currents that couple local sites. Although the
              need to expand the spatial scale of marine research has been recognized for
              nearly two decades, progress in developing a regional oceanographic perspective
              in marine benthic ecology has been slow, particularly for sub-tidal
              ecosystems.

This project herein relates to these broader goals by developing
              a regional context for benthic communities living on steep underwater sides of
              islands (rock walls) in the Galapagos Marine Reserve, (GMR) the second largest
              marine protected area in the world (Bustamente et al 2000). Due to nutritive
              upwelling currents and marine food webs that are nearly intact, GMR subtidal
              ecosystems provide an excellent opportunity to investigate the importance of
              bottom ?up (i.e. driven by food resources) vs top?down (predatory) regulation
              of benthic communities. Preliminary research by the project team indicates that
              the pace of community change is especially rapid where currents flow up rock
              walls at some of highest upwelling velocities reported (to 60 cm s) to date. An
              experimental design is used to test the general hypothesis that bottom? up and
              top ?down control of rock wall communities varies predictably as a function of
              upwelling. Regular measurement of upwelling currents, chlorophyll a, nutrient
              and zooplankton concentrations at 8 sites in the central GMR will be placed in
              a larger context by comparison to daily, high resolution images of chl a
              provided by the new SeaWIFS facility at the Charles Darwin Research Station.
              Measuring algal accumulation in treatments protected from and exposed to
              grazers will assess a response of benthic algae to the potentially enhanced
              upwelling nutrient regime. Because epifaunal. invertebrates feeding on plankton
              link water column production to higher trophic levels,, experiments are
              proposed to measure the growth and recruitment of 5 epifaunal species and their
              consumers (snails, sea urchins) to test the predictions of bottomup and
              top?down linkage . Key predators will be enclosed to evaluate the hypothesis
              that the strength of species interactions is greatest at upwelling sites while
              video cameras will provide another measure of site variation in consumer
              pressure. Finally, theory and observation suggest that the highest diversity
              and turnover of diversity occurs at upwelling sites due to rapid invertebrate
              production and high predation on primary space occupiers. By working at the
              crossroads of community ecology, oceanography and conservation biology, the
              research will increase our understanding of how productivity and local
              variation in species interactions influence species diversity in marine
              reserves. The broader merits of the proposal are that it will directly
              contribute to conservation planning, train a PhD student and positively impact
              undergraduate and graduate teaching.


