Title       : A Novel Method for Characterizing Atmospheric Turbulence Using Global
               Positioning System (GPS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0222531

Award Number: 0222531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88090              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Elosegui pelosegui@cfa.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian-Astrophys Obs
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    716/831-3051

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Signals from Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites propagate through the
              atmosphere with a velocity determined by the refractivity of the air, which
              depends on temperature, pressure, and humidity.  This award supports research
              based on the principle that the difference between the propagation delays from
              two GPS satellites measured at the same position on the ground depends on the
              difference in the integrated refractivity along the two ray paths.  The
              propagation delays are calculated from the measured phases of the GPS signals
              and are subject to uncertainty because of clock errors, uncertainties in
              satellite range, and receiver noise.  However, short-term fluctuations of the
              phase difference about averages over periods from a few seconds to minutes are
              largely free of these uncertainties and depend mainly on changes in the
              path-average refractivity.  These fluctuations are caused by the variability of
              atmospheric structure and hence may be regarded as a measure of the
              irregularity, or turbulence.  The objective of the work is to evaluate the
              feasibility of continuous, accurate, all-weather remote sensing of turbulence
              by monitoring GPS signals.  It holds the potential of improving weather
              forecasts and alleviating aviation hazards through better understanding of the
              occurrence and distribution of turbulence.

