Title       : VISUALIZATION: Visualization of Giga-Graphs and Graph Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0222920

Award Number: 0222920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240358             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Kobourov kobourov@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alon Efrat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Abello  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Graph drawing and information visualization tools are essential in many fields,
              including telecommunications,databases, and software engineering, where the
              models contain millions of objects and relationships. Even though graph drawing
              is a rich discipline, the promising new concepts and algorithms in the field
              have had too little practical impact in application areas. 
This project
              presents an integrated research and education plan focusing on graph drawing
              and information visualization techniques for large data sets and graph
              processes. 
The research component of this work focuses on the design and
              implementation of efficient data structures and algorithms for visualization of
              large graphs with the goal of impacting real-world problems in application
              areas. This problem is especially relevant because recent technological
              advances have brought about increased data volumes and increased data
              complexity. The theoretical aspects of this work include designing scalable
              force-directed methods, hierarchical graph decompositions, alternative visual
              representations for graph processes, external memory algorithms, and data
              structures that support efficient navigation operations. 
The theoretical
              results will be used to develop practical tools that will be packaged in a
              software library and an Adaptive GrAph Visualization Environment, AGAVE, that
              uses the new graph modeling standard GraphML. Through industrial
              collaborations, the new methods will be calibrated and tested using real-world
              data.
Alternatives graph representation methods and techniques for
              visuazalizing dynamic graph processes will also be investigated. The
              educational component of this proposal includes: (1) Creation and management of
              the already funded new Graphics and Visualization Lab; (2) Design and
              implementation of educational tools for visualization of large graphs and graph
              processes; (3) Supervision of graduate and undergraduate students; (4) Active
              involvement in outreach and integrative activities.


