Title       : CMG RESEARCH: An Adaptive Mesh, Spectral Element Formulation of the Well-Posed
               Primitive Equations for Climate and Weather Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2002 
File        : a0222282

Award Number: 0222282
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $501006             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Thomas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Henry M. Tufo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UCAR
	      PO Box 3000
	      Boulder, CO  803073000    303/497-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0222282
PI: 			Thomas, Stephen
Institution:
              		University Corporation for Atmospheric Research
Program: 		Collaborations in
              Mathematics and the Geosciences (CMG)
Program Manager: 	Catherine
              Mavriplis

Title: CMG RESEARCH:  An Adaptive Mesh, Spectral Element
              Formulation of the Well-Posed Primitive Equations for Climate and
              Weather

Climate simulation is a grand challenge problem requiring multiple,
              century-long integrations  of the equations governing the Earth's atmosphere.  
              Recently, it has been recognized that  localized flow structures may play an
              important role in obtaining the correct climate signal. Higher-resolution
              climate simulations may be required in the near future at the National Center
              for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and other  climate modeling centers in
              convergence studies and to assess model uncertainty. Rather than  increase
              resolution uniformly over the entire sphere, recent developments in adaptive
              mesh refinement techniques may be applicable to atmospheric general circulation
              models.  High-order polynomial based spectral element and discontinous Galerkin
              methods offer the geometric  flexibility required to implement adaptive methods
              and also exhibit the exponential convergence of the traditional spectral
              transform approach. The spectral element dynamical core is ideally suited to
              high-performance parallel computers based on microprocessors and a team at NCAR
              was awarded second place in the 2001 IEEE/ACM Gordon Bell competition for
              achieving 370 Gigaflops, representing a sustained climate simulation rate of
              over 100 years per day. This work represents a major advance in geophysical
              fluid flow simulations. By implementing an adaptive non-conforming spectral
              element dynamical core for atmospheric general circulation models, we propose
              to study how small scale flow features develop and feedback to larger scales.
              We also plan to study simple idealized physical  forcings in this context and
              explore, with NCAR and university researchers, how adaptive multi-scale
              physical parameterizations can be implemented. 

Weather and climate
              simulation is an extremely complex problem that requires many long time
              computer modeling runs for the Earth's atmosphere. Recently, with the advances
              in computer power and with advances in the understanding of the dynamics, it
              has been recognized that local flow structures can play an important role in
              determining specific weather and climate conditions. Computer models should
              thus advance to fully resolve these structures in an efficient way. This
              project is concerned with the development of new, efficient computer models
              that will automatically resolve local features while providing overall
              accuracy. The impact on  the next generation of weather and climate models
              should be significant.


Date: June 28, 2002

