Title       : VISUALIZATION: Effective and Efficient Segmentation Frameworks for Scientific
               Data Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0222909

Award Number: 0222909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447802             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth I. Joy joy@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernd Hamann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rapid and substantial improvements in computing power and sensor and imaging
              technologies produce data sets of ever increasing size. No longer is it
              possible to rely exclusively on traditional approaches to interactive data
              exploration and visualization. It is becoming increasingly important to provide
              technology that enables scientists to analyze their data interactively at
              higher levels of abstraction. Two approaches are
crucial to making possible
              higher-level data exploration: (1) hierarchical data exploration relying on a
              data format representing a data set at multiple approximation levels and (2)
              segmentation- (or feature-based) data exploration. Approach (2) as becoming
              increasingly important as it allows scientists to study qualitative behavior of
              their data, which, in turn, can lead to significant compression of data, i.e.,
              the geometrical representations for extracted segments or features are
              typically much more storage-efficient than original data.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                             We will do
              research based on approach (2), and our goal is to devise an entire new
              framework supporting more efficient and effective data exploration via
              segmentation. Complex scientific data sets represent physical phenomena with
              billions of elements. These data sets are multi-valued, muti-dimensional and
              time-varying, and we are no longer able to fully analyze them with merely
              traditional visualization technology.                                          
                                                                                             
                                             One can consider various paradigms when
              developing tools for the exploration of such data sets, and one
must consider
              that scientists rarely needs to examine entire data sets. Typically, the
              interest is in particular regions where certain properties hold. Tools should
              therefore be developed that allow a scientist to specify the properties of
              interest, and to segment data sets accordingly.
The proposed approach supports
              the definition of higher-level data properties, the efficient extraction of the
              implied data, and the effective visual representation of the extracted data.
              Our framework is aimed at multi-valued time-varying data sets, where, for
              example, grid vertices might have multiple associated scalar, vector and tensor
              quantities.
Our goal is to devise new algorithms that support the numerically
              robust extraction of regions (or boundaries of these regions) that represent
              similar qualitative behavior. We propose this ''segmentation'' approach to
              massive data set exploration as we believe that it is a necessary to provide
              scientists with exploration technology that supports higher-level data
              representation coupled with real-time system
behavior.
The challenge is to
              generate ''segmented data'' from given multi-valued data sets, store the
              segmented data efficiently, generate the boundaries of segment boundaries, and
              display these boundaries. We propose an integrated scheme that supports common
              data presentation for segmentation and that can be applied to a number of data
              types (scalar, vector or tensor).
In addition, we will combine the
              segmentation framework with new multiresolution techniques---multiresolution
              techniques that shall support the extraction and visualization of segmented
              data and extracted segment boundaries at multiple resolution levels.           
                                                                 The need for new tools to
              explore multi-valued time-varying data sets is paramount. The innovative
              framework we propose to develop will augment current data exploration
              paradigms. The new framework will allow scientists to define, segment and track
              meaningful derived data regions.
Scientists will be able to focus attention to
              those areas in a data set that carry largest information content, and the power
              of our framework lies in the fact that it will be possible to more effectively
              define and extract these area.


