Title       : VISUALIZATION: Advanced Weather Data Visualization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0222675

Award Number: 0222675
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jason J. Levit jlevit@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Ebert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Hansen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The atmospheric science community requires visualization of observed, measured,
              and simulated data for accurate analysis of the atmosphere and improved weather
              prediction. Unlike many scientific communities, weather observers and
              atmospheric scientists rely heavily on important visual cues in the atmosphere
              to determine the potential severity of many storms.
However, the current
              state-of-the-art in weather visualization from systems such as Vis5D, VisAD, or
              D3D, lack important visual information that is crucial for atmospheric
              scientists to fully understand the development and evolution of weather
              systems.
Recognizing the importance of these visual cues, this project will
              significantly enhance the visualization of weather data through the development
              of innovative software techniques that will provide more accurate and effective
              visual representations of weather data. Simple visualization practices, such as
              depth cueing, isosurface texturing, volume shading, shadows, and correct
              natural color effects (such as sunlight) are absent in current weather data
              visualization software.  While advanced computer graphics applications (e.g.,
              movie production) have effectively used these techniques for some time, they
              have yet to be applied in a robust way to weather data. In this project, we
              will not only fill this gap to create improved, visually accurate weather data
              visualization, but also increase the quantity and clarity of the information
              conveyed from the resulting visualizations.  Using mature numerical weather
              prediction software, the Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS), to
              generate numerically simulated severe weather events, new software techniques
              will be developed to enhance the visualization of this data and begin a new era
              in weather data visualization.
Beyond current capabilities of standard
              isosurfaces, scalar volume renderings, and two-dimensional images lies
              important rendering capabilities for weather visualization, such as shaded
              volumes, shadows, light-transport, and simulated natural cloud modeling. In
              this project, we will develop, enhance, and apply these techniques to
              atmospheric data in ways which have yet to be attempted.
The primary goal of
              our research is to produce visually accurate images of weather model data that
              will provide more accurate information than current methods and use the same
              cognitive model and analysis process as the forecasters already use, allowing
              them to increase their effectiveness. 
We will additionally develop techniques
              to effectively incorporate non-visual data and allow the selective
              visualization of the visual / non-visual weather data to enable better
              understanding of the relationships between these variables and quantities. Our
              goal is to develop these improved techniques, while also allowing interactive
              exploration of the observed, measured, and model data.
Through the use of
              programmable graphics hardware with three-dimensional texture-mapping, we will
              implement techniques for interactive visually accurate weather visualization
              with low-albedo illumination, physics-based atmospheric scattering and
              attenuation, and volumetric shadowing. 
We will also implement slower
              high-albedo illumination models at coarser resolutions to give approximate
              multiple scattering effects and utilize this scattering information in the
              illumination calculation per-pixel fragment through three-dimensional texture
              mapping hardware. We will use perceptually motivated mapping of non-visual
              weather quantities (e.g., temperature, dewpoint, wind, atmospheric pressure,
              vorticity) to glyphs, particles, and isosurfaces to provide more information in
              an easily understandable manner, extending on our previous work in 
              rceptually-motivated glyph rendering, fast isosurface rendering, and volume
              illustration. Given the capabilities of current graphics hardware, we won't be
              able to produce truly visually accurate images and animations of time-varying
              atmospheric data for at least the first half of the project, although we expect
              to be able to produce good approximations at interactive rates. We also plan to
              incorporate simple key-frame recording tools into the visualization system for
              off-line generation of atmospheric visualizations.
The weather models produced
              contain multiple variables at each spatial location. By employing
              scientific-based combinations of these variables, it is possible to localize
              specific features contained in these models. We will extend our preliminary
              work in the development of multi-dimensional transfer function methods for
              multivariate data to effectively convey information from this complex model
              data. This improved interactive weather visualization system will increase the
              effectiveness of atmospheric analysis, improve severe storm forecasting, and
              enhance the formulation, parameterizations, and physics of numerical weather
              prediction models. 
Additionally, it will improve the training of weather
              observers and atmospheric science students (both undergraduate and graduate),
              and provide understandable animations to help in basic weather education at the
              K-12 level. 
The ultimate goal of this research is to produce a visually
              accurate, interactive rendering of a numerical severe thunderstorm simulation,
              thereby enhancing the ability of both the scientist and general user to
              discover and explore atmospheric processes in an unprecedented way.


