Title       : Age Distribution of the Particulate Organic Carbon (POC) Discharged from Small
               Mountainous Rivers-- the Influence of Sediment Yield and Soil Residence Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a0222584

Award Number: 0222584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elana L. Leithold leithold@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neal E. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1389,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Short, mountainous rivers dominate the fluvial supply of sediment to
              the western margin of North America and to the oceans in general.  As a result
              of rapid rates of landscape denudation and minimal sediment storage in these
              active margin systems, the particulate organic carbon (POC) discharged differs
              from that transported by larger rivers on passive margins.  Recent
              investigations of two rivers in California indicate they carry a bimodal
              mixture of modern and ancient particulate organic carbon (POC), derived almost
              equally from extant vegetation and from the kerogen of uplifted sedimentary
              rocks.  To a first approximation, soils are eroded in these systems before
              significant aging occurs or before the kerogen can be completely oxidized and
              replaced by modern material.  Based on these preliminary results, the balance
              between modern, ancient, and intermediate-aged POC carried by rivers is
              hypothesized to depend on the residence time of particles in the regolith.  To
              test this hypothesis, this investigation will characterize the suspended POC
              loads of six rivers that exhibit a three-order range of magnitude in sediment
              yield.  Four rivers (Siuslaw, Noyo, Russian, and Eel) drain portions of
              northern California and Oregon.  The Waipaoa and Waiapu rivers on the north
              island of New Zealand were chosen because of their extremely high sediment
              yields.  Bedrock POC will also be characterized in each of the watersheds.  The
              principle measurements, OC content, 13C/12C(d13C), and 14C/12C (?14C), will be
              made on bulk samples, as well as density- and size-fractionated subsamples, to
              determine the kerogen and modern C contents.  Additional studies of soil
              profiles in the Eel watershed will be conducted to further delineate weathering
              and OC replacement processes in the regolith.  The evolution of the POC pool
              from bedrock C to modern surficial material will be studied in thick horizons,
              to contrast with previous results from thin soil profiles.  
	The results of
              this study will further understanding of the processes that regulate the
              quantity and character of OC transported from drainage basins to the ocean. 
              This study also addresses a key issue in the long-term biogeochemical cycle,
              namely how previously buried OC is recycled.  Interpretation of the sedimentary
              organic geochemical record of past environments, particularly on active
              margins, could be significantly improved by this investigation.

