Title       : CMG RESEARCH: Numerical and Experimental Validation of Stochastic Upscaling for
               Subsurface Contamination Problems Involving Multiphase Volatile Chlorinated
               Solvents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0222286

Award Number: 0222286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tissa H. Illangasekare tillanga@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Nonlinear problems with multiple scales, heterogeneity, and
uncertainty are
              pervasive in science and engineering.  In this
context, analytical theories
              are limited by unrealistic modeling
assumptions, and extensive large-scale
              physical experiments are
impractical.  Computational modeling and
              experimentation, the
"third methodology" of science, has a critical role to
              play in
conjunction with theory and physical experiments.  This
              project
combines the three methodologies to study multiphase flow in
porous
              media, specifically the remediation of groundwater
contaminated by dense
              nonaqueous-phase liquids (DNAPLs).  Field
scales are much too large for
              small-scale effects to be directly
representable in practical computations. 
              Multiphase flow in
heterogeneous subsurface formations involves local
              phenomena at
material interfaces whose valid effective representation
              at
larger scales is not understood.  Uncertainty is central, because
of the
              lack of complete or precise data, and because of the
randomness of small-scale
              properties and flows when viewed from a
larger scale.  The project develops a
              nonlinear upscaling
methodology based on a macro-scale stochastic theory of
              multiphase
flow and transport that accounts for local phenomena
              at
micro-scale material interfaces.  The theory is applied
numerically, so
              that limiting theoretical assumptions are local
in space and time.  The model
              is validated by multiple-scale
heterogeneous laboratory experiments, using
              realistic chemicals
and soil properties, that creates a "physical Monte
              Carlo"
database for comparison.

Environmental restoration is important to
              society.  Remediation
of contaminated groundwater often requires the study of
              the
simultaneous flow of multiple non-mixing fluids through porous
subsurface
              soils and rocks.  These aquifers consist of many
different materials and
              exhibit features such as layers and
faults on a multitude of scales, all of
              which affect the fluid
flow.  In small-scale detail, these effects are
              uncertain in
practical situations, because available data are insufficient
to
              describe the subsurface precisely, and because these details
are quite random
              from the standpoint of the larger field scale
at which a hydrologist wants to
              analyze the appropriate strategy
for a remediation project.  This project
              develops a methodology
that enables a scientist to describe the aquifer at the
              field
scale, so that strategies can be formulated and tested in the
setting
              where they will be applied.  This "upscaling" methodology
based on
              probabilistic concepts is an advance with wide
implications beyond
              environmental restoration itself, important as
it is, because similar issues
              arise throughout science and
engineering.  The project's combination of
              theory, computation,
and physical experiments requires the close
              interdisciplinary
collaboration of a mathematician and a geoscientist.

