Title       : ESS - Collaborative Research: Modeling the Patient's Perspective on Organ
               Acceptance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0222661

Award Number: 0222661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa M. Maillart lmm17@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1787      Service Enterprise Engineering
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Funding for this research project is provided under the Exploratory Research on
              Engineering the Service Sector (ESS) program announcement.  The United Network
              for Organ Sharing (UNOS) manages the national organ donation and allocation
              system.  When UNOS offers an organ to a transplant patient, the patient decides
              to either accept it or to continue waiting.  The research question at hand is
              therefore: if offered an organ, when should a patient decide to accept it? 
              This question is of great practical importance, as it is a life-or-death
              decision faced by thousands of people per year, and growing.  This research
              will focus only on livers, however the methodology used is applicable to other
              organs.  The key issue in modeling this decision process is the assumption made
              regarding the information available to the patient.  In all cases, the
              pertinent characteristics of the liver are known at the time an offer is made,
              as is the patient's health.  What is uncertain is the ranking of the patient
              relative to the other patients on the waiting list, and the timing of future
              offers.  The simplest version of this problem is the case in which a living
              donor exists.  Typically, however, donors are cadaveric.  In the latter
              situation, liver offerings occur randomly and patients "compete" with each
              other for livers without knowing their relative position on the waiting list.
              

This research project will formulate mathematical models for the
              living-donor as well as the cadaveric-donor situation, in which the objective
              is to maximize, for instance, "quality-adjusted life expectancy" or some other
              objective.   A model will be developed for the hypothetical situation in which
              the composition of the waiting list is public information.    Specifically, the
              reach team will formulate these situations as Markov decision processes and
              engage in numerical and analytical study of the resulting optimal policies. 
              Numerical study will make use of extensive clinical data, identify patterns
              that will guide the analytical study, and allow the researchers to explore the
              potential value in publishing the waiting list.  Analytical study will
              determine conditions under which the optimal policies have appealing,
              consistent structure.  It is interesting to note that most of the existing
              literature focuses on modeling the organ transplant problem from UNOS's
              perspective, rather than from the patient's perspective as considered here. 
              Note, however, that the research may have an impact on this policy-perspective
              line of research, since one of the objectives is to study the policy change
              that involves the publication of the waiting list.

