Title       : A Test for Shelter Limitation of Reef Fish Populations at Large Spatial Scales:
               An Integrated Empirical and Theoretical Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  2003   
File        : a0222087

Award Number: 0222087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $549167             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham E. Forrester gforrester@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Steele  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
The project is aimed at understanding the causes of population dynamics in two
              
species of reef fish at the meso-scale (over areas tens of km in extent). 
              Most reef fishes, and 
other benthic marine species, have a complex life cycle
              that includes a site-attached adult phase 
and a larval stage during which
              individuals may disperse long distances across open ocean.  
Much debate has
              centered on whether benthic population dynamics are controlled by the influx
              
of pelagic larvae (larval settlement) or by density-dependent interactions
              among juveniles and 
adults in the benthic habitat.  Past controversy, based
              on the notion that density-dependence is 
not compatible with a strong
              larval-input signal, has been resolved following recognition that 
both pre-
              and post-settlement processes influence the dynamics of most populations.  One
              
broadly applicable hypothesis (the recruit-adult hypothesis) predicts that
              oceanographic 
processes controlling the influx of larvae create predictable
              differences among populations at the 
meso-scale: sites with high settlement
              are chronically resource limited, whereas sites with low 
settlement rarely
              reach their carrying capacity and adult densities track larval influx.  The
              
carrying capacity of the benthic habitat, and the post-settlement
              interactions within it, are 
assumed to be consistent among meso-scale sites. 
              All experimental evidence on the nature of 
post-settlement interactions is,
              however, based on study at small spatial scales (a few m's in 
extent). 
              Studies in other environments indicate that population dynamics can potentially
              vary 
with spatial scale, however, and a major challenge now is to test
              whether small-scale results in 
marine systems will extrapolate to larger
              spatial domains.   

Past small-scale experiments by these investigators on
              two reef fishes indicate that competition for shelter 
sites used as refuges
              from predation is the cause of small-scale density dependence in both
              
species.  The strength of density dependence, however, depends on the local
              availability of 
shelter, and is eliminated in habitat patches that provide
              abundant shelter.  They hypothesize that, 
in addition to oceanographic
              processes causing differential settlement, the carrying capacity of 
the
              benthic habitat will also vary at the meso-scale and cause differences among
              populations in 
the strength of density-dependent mortality.  In this system,
              the investigators suggest that carrying 
capacity is a function of shelter
              abundance.  They will test experimentally for shelter limitation at 
the
              meso-scale.  To complement  the field work, a mathematical scaling model will
              be constructed to explicitly link local- and meso-scale populations.  This
              model will include a functional description of shelter limitation at local
              scales and will be used to test specific hypotheses for the congruence (or lack
              of it) in population dynamics at local and meso-scales.   

Testing the
              expanded version of the recruit-adult hypothesis will provide a rare
              
experimental test of the causal interactions shaping population dynamics at
              large spatial scales.  
Meso-scale populations are little studied, but a
              deeper understanding of their dynamics is of 
practical importance because it
              at this scale that marine reserves are designated and at which 
most reef
              fisheries are managed.  Support for the hypothesis that meso-scale carrying
              capacity 
depends on shelter provided by the reef would also have important
              implications for the effects on 
fishes of the ongoing habitat degradation on
              coral reefs.   


