Title       : Ant Club Trails: Privacy and Collaboration in an Ubiquitous Computing World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0222745

Award Number: 0222745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Canny jfc@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Information-sharing and privacy are fundamentally in tension, and it is
              important to study the trade-off from both technical and social-contextual
              perspectives. The emergence of ubiquitous computing opens up radical new
              possibilities for acquiring and sharing information, but today's methods cannot
              exploit the possibilites without grave privacy risks. This proposal explores a
              new methodology that provides much finer control over information exchange:
              only the information needed for the collaboration is shared, everything else is
              protected, and protection is provably strong. It is then possible to explore
              collaborative applications in ubiquitous computing settings that are exciting,
              but which would be otherwise impossible. Specifically, a class of collaborative
              applications called ``Ant Club Trails'' (ACT) will be developed.  The idea
              behind Ant Club Trails is to combine information from the ``trails'' left by
              individual users, and to share it with other users by collaborative filtering
              in a way which protects individual privacy. The project draws on cryptography,
              probabilistic reasoning and computational geometry for the development of
              working ACT systems. It is also guided by sociology and critical theory toward
              design of socially realistic and desirable systems. The outcome should be
              better scientific understanding of the information-sharing privacy tradeoff,
              and a larger landscape of collaborative applications that protect privacy.  The
              broader impacts of the work include: (i) empowerment of communities to share
              and possibly make a market in community knowledge;  (ii) training of research
              graduate students; and (iii) involvement of  undergraduates in developing ACT
              applications on smart phones.
