Title       : Student and Young Faculty Support to Attend the 33rd Semiconductor Interface
               Specialists Conference; San Diego, CA; December 5-7, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  2002       
File        : a0222558

Award Number: 0222558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Wallace rwallace@unt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A conference on semiconductor/insulator interfaces, and the interaction between
              materials science, device physics, and technology will be held December 5-7,
              2002 in San Diego, CA. The conference is interdisciplinary, and will cover many
              areas of MOS science and technology, including: Alternative and high-k gate
              dielectric materials; Physics of thin dielectrics and their interfaces;
              Gate-dielectric conduction and breakdown; Silicon carbide and its interfaces;
              Physical and electrical characterization of Si/SiO2 interfaces; Micro-roughness
              measurement, modeling, and device-related effects; Hot carrier, plasma damage
              and radiation effects; Nitrogen-containing oxides and stacked interfaces;
              Surface cleaning technology and effects on dielectrics and interfaces; Novel
              oxidation, deposition, and etching techniques; and Theory of oxide and
              interface defects. 
An important goal of the conference is to provide an
              environment that encourages interplay between scientific and technological
              issues. The program is organized as a workshop-style conference to provide a
              forum for device engineers, solid state physicists, and materials scientists to
              discuss topics of common interest both formally through invited and contributed
              presentations, and informally during a variety of events including a poster
              presentation session. In addition to the formal technical sessions of
              presentations, poster sessions and rump sessions for less formal discussion
              permit close interactions among participants. Objectives are to stimulate
              communications among the broad community of researchers addressing
              semiconductor/insulator interfaces and their relationship to technology. A
              variety of disciplinary backgrounds-chemistry, physics, engineering and
              materials science, is represented and contrributes very positively to the
              intellectual content of the Conference. Along with the opportunity to assess
              the field and future directions, it is expected that new ties will be
              established between universities, research institutions, and industry.
%%%
An
              evaluation of the progress and status of semiconductor/insulator interfaces and
              related device issues along with current assessments of the most important
              developments will be of significant value to the understanding and enhanced
              utilization of electronic materials in computing, data processing, and
              communications.	 
***

