Title       : Improvements to Surface Ozone Measurements for GLOBE.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0222624

Award Number: 0222624
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76615              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Fishman j.fishman@larc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irene G. Ladd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda C. Bush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Pippin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Russell Deyoung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA Langley Research Ctr
	      Mail Stop 401
	      Hampton, VA  256810001    757/864-5380

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.  This
              proposal will continue the development of surface ozone observation protocols
              using a chemically sensitive paper that changes color in response to ozone
              exposure.  Ozone levels will be estimated by comparing the paper color to a
              reference color chart.  This will complement and be supported by on-going work
              at NASA to separate stratospheric ozone from tropospheric and lower atmosphere
              ozone signals, all of which are detected by space-borne sensors, but are
              indistinguishable without ground data such as those provided by this method. 
              The project has the endorsement of the International Global Atmospheric
              Chemistry Program Steering Committee (IGAC).  Tropospheric and surface ozone
              are important for different reasons, and introducing students and teachers to
              the difference in effects of ozone at these different altitudes and to the
              different sources of ozone is valuable to the learning process.  Accurate
              observations of surface ozone on the spatial and temporal scales afforded by
              the GLOBE program will provide a significant advance for science and its study
              of ozone's effects on health and biological systems in general.
