Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Process of Agricultural
               Transformation among the Coastal Osmore Springs of Southern Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0222040

Award Number: 0222040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Garth L. Bawden gbawden@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Mr Gregory Zaro will conduct doctoral
              disserrtation research on the far south coast of Peru.  The study seeks to
              explain the process of agricultural development in the coastal Osmore region of
              southern Peru between AD 300 and 1700 by understanding the interplay of both
              cultural and ecological variables that condition agricultural decisions. 
              Previous research suggests the coastal Osmore springs fell in and out of
              production throughout the period of investigation, and today some remain under
              cultivation while others lie completely abandoned.  For millennia the climate
              of this typically dry region has experienced punctuated interruptions in the
              form of periodic el Nino events, tectonic activity, and gradual oscillating
              periods of above- and below-normal highland precipitation.  The Osmore drainage
              also played host to a complex history that witnessed the rise and fall of
              ancient political powers such as Tiwanaku and Wari.  An adequate understanding
              of how agriculture transformed along this hyper-arid coastline requires
              archaeologists to first identify the often-ephemeral indicators of past
              agrarian activities and situate them in their cultural and ecological contexts.
               

For this study, emphasis is placed on the well-preserved site of Wawakiki,
              one of a series of prehistoric/historic spring-fed agricultural systems along
              the desert coast.  The project will document diachronic changes in agricultural
              infrastructure and crop selection at Wawakiki, and place them in the context of
              wider patterns of resource exploitation among its neighboring spring systems
              north of the Osmore River.  The resulting data will be analyzed using ESRI
              ArcGIS Desktop and ultimately interpreted against already defined sociocultural
              and environmental sequences from the main Osmore River valley.  Excavations at
              Wawakiki are designed to generate data pertaining to the chronology of
              agricultural infrastructure and crop selection at Wawakiki, while analyses of
              semi-regional patterns of resource exploitation along the coast will be
              achieved using a survey database generated by Peruvian archaeologist Adan
              Umire.  Wawakiki exhibits a well-preserved array of stone-faced terraces,
              furrows, seedling beds, and water impoundment tanks, and chronological
              development of these features represents agrarian technology, engineering
              skills, and the relative amounts of labor invested at a site.  In addition,
              plant materials in archaeological contexts may provide direct insight into the
              nature of prehistoric agricultural production activities.  Changes in crop
              selection reflect changing emphases on subsistence crops (e.g., maize),
              industrial crops (e.g., cotton), or both, and relative proportions of specific
              plants suggest the degree to which farmers specialized their production of
              particular cultigens.  To determine the kinds of plants cultivated
              prehistorically, phytoliths, pollen, and macrobotanical remains from ancient
              fields at Wawakiki will be analyzed.  Finally, these data will be
              contextualized within the regional sociopolitical and environmental setting of
              the Osmore drainage to understand the interplay of cultural and ecological
              variables that shape agricultural decisions at the local level.  This research
              is important for several reasons.  It will highlight the manners in which local
              communities sustained themselves agriculturally in this hyper-arid environment,
              and explain the degree to which cultural and natural factors contributed to
              agricultural decline and rebirth among the coastal Osmore springs. 

