Title       : Insolation and Magnetospheric-Ionospheric Coupling: Three Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0222411

Award Number: 0222411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sunanda Basu                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $236924             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick T. Newell Patrick.Newell@jhuapl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Sotirelis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1521      AERONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's propose to investigate three specific problems for which there is
              reason to suspect that the ionosphere strongly influences phenomena previously
              thought to be driven solely by the magnetosphere. In each of these cases, UV
              insolation alters the ionosphere (through increasing conductivity, or through
              increasing polar wind outflows), which in turn may alter the phenomena. Each
              problem is expected to be solved in about one year with part time effort, yet
              yield worthwhile results.

The first of the three problems is whether intense
              aurora are affected not only by local ionospheric conductivity, as previously
              determined, but also by conductivity in the opposite hemisphere. If it is true
              that southern hemisphere conductivity affects the formation of intense aurora
              in the northern hemisphere and vice versa, then the influence of ionospheric
              conductivity has a far more global influence on space weather than previously
              believed.

A second problem is the possible coupling between the outflows
              associated with polar wind and the inflows from the distant magnetosphere (and
              ultimately solar wind) of the polar rain. In each case, the greater mobility of
              electrons leads to the creation of electric fields opposing electron flows, but
              in the opposite sense. Because the polar wind fluxes, driven by UV insolation,
              far exceed polar rain fluxes, it is likely the major direction of interaction
              is that when the polar wind is larger, the polar rain will be driven to higher
              fluxes. This can be relatively easily checked by determining whether polar rain
              is more intense when UV insolation is higher.

The third problem is whether
              ionospheric conductivity affects the diffuse aurora (and/or total auroral
              particle precipitation intensity). It is widely assumed that the diffuse aurora
              represents a direct dumping of the plasma sheet, and there is no obvious reason
              why it should be much affected by ionospheric conductivity from insolation.
              However it surprised much of the space physics community to learn that discrete
              aurora are suppressed by sunlight. There are some anomalies in recent reports
              in the literature which suggest that it would be well worthwhile investigating
              whether the "direct dumping" of the plasma sheet really is indeed independent
              of the insolation of the ionosphere.
