Title       : VISUALIZATION: A Metadata-Driven Visualization Interface Technology for
               Scientific Data Exploration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0222991

Award Number: 0222991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwan-Liu Ma ma@cs.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Gertz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project lays out our plan for research and development aimed atdramatically
              improving the process
and outcome of scientific data analysis and
              visualization. The improvement will be achieved by coupling an expressive and
              extensible metadata management framework with novel visualization interfaces
              that facilitate
effective reuse, sharing, and cross-exploration of
              visualizationinformation and thus will make a profound
impact on a broad range
              of scientific applications. The process of scientific visualization is
              inherently iterative. A good visualization comes from experimenting with
              visualization and rendering parameters to bring out the most relevant
              information in the data.
This raises a question. Considering the computer and
              human time we routinely invest for exploratory and
production visualization,
              are there methodologies and mechanisms to enhance not only the productivity
              of
scientists but also their understanding of the visualization process
              anddata used?
Recent advances in the field of data visualization have been
              made mainly in rendering and display
technologies (such as realtime volume
              rendering and immersive environments), but little in coherently managing,
              representing, and sharing information about the visualization process
and
              results (images and insights).
Naturally, the various information about data
              exploration should be shared and reused to leverage
the knowledge and
              experience scientists gain from visualizing scientific data. A visual
              representation of the
data exploration process along with expressive models
              for recording and querying task specific information
help scientists keep
              track of their visualization experience and findings, use it to generate new
              visualizations, and share it with others.
While previous research has
              addressed some related issues, a more comprehensive study remains to be
done.
              Thus, we propose two complementary avenues of research: (1) new user interfaces
              for data visualization tasks, and (2) expressive metadata models supporting the
              recording and
querying of information related to data exploration tasks. In
              addition, a set of user studies will be
conducted on a Web-based visualization
              testbed realizing (1) and (2) in order to refine the proposed
methodologies
              and designs.
Traditional user interfaces cannot support the increasingly
              complex process of scientific data exploration.
A fundamental change in the
              conventional designs and functionality must be made to offer more
intuitive
              interaction, guidance, and enhanced perception. We will begin our study with
              enriching the graphbased and spreadsheet-like interfaces we have developed, and
              also investigate alternative designs. An expressive and extensible metadata
              model representing the data exploration process and its embedded data
              visualization process is needed.                                               
                                                                                      Such a
              model along with an appropriate user interface makes it possible to manage
              diverse information about the input and results of the visualization process,
              analyze parameter coverage and usage, identify unexplored visualization spaces,
              and incorporate findings on the process and results in form of visualization
              metadata. The model is independent of the actual visual interface used and is
              open in that its realization in form of a metadata repository can be loosely
              coupled with a variety of different visualization tools. A set of interfaces
              and protocols to the repository will be designed to manage, query, and analyze
              visualization metadata gathered from and utilized by different visualization
              tools.
Our goal is ambitious and can only be accomplished by working closely
              with application scientists.
They will help us understand
              application-dependent and independent visualization requirements,
              processes,
and information. In return, we will offer them a new and greatly
              improved way to understand their scientific
data, which will help them lead to
              new discoveries quicker, likely with reduced cost.


