Title       : Integrated Phenology Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0222701

Award Number: 0222701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492674             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. White mikew@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elena B. Sparrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie S. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Gillies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.  This
              project will support, develop, and promote the phenology protocol for use at
              GLOBE schools in order to detect the annual waves of plant green-up and
              senescence that occur as photosynthesis becomes active and then dormant with
              the cycling of the seasons.  While satellites can detect such waves, there is
              very little data on what exactly the satellite derived greenness index is
              actually indicating, especially in areas like the dry tropical and semi-arid
              regions.  This project will conduct phenology measurements near the existing
              network of carbon flux-measuring eddy covariance towers and also in urban and
              other data-sparse areas. A variety of remote sensing algorithms and processing
              techniques will be compared with the GLOBE phenology data, to allow a more
              accurate interpretation of this remotely sensed data.  Scientists will benefit
              from improving knowledge of integrated phenological processes, and students
              will benefit from conducting real research with their own and others' data. 
              This project is being jointly supported by NASA's Terrestrial Ecosystems
              Program.
%%%
