Title       : CONTRAILS: A New Atmosphere Measurement Protocol for GLOBE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0222623

Award Number: 0222623
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Paul E Filmer                           
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104507             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lin Chambers l.h.chambers@larc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Stoddard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA Langley Research Ctr
	      Mail Stop 401
	      Hampton, VA  256810001    757/864-5380

NSF Program : 1053      GLOB LEARN & OBSER TO BEN ENVI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning and
              Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
              designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
              schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
              understanding Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.  This
              proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE Program needs: support
              for existing protocols, development of new protocols, and scientific research
              with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the development of a new protocol
              to assess the presence, extent, and duration of jet contrails and cirrus clouds
              at the same time of day as the other measurements in the Atmosphere suite of
              GLOBE protocols.
Jet contrails, under the right conditions, can generate
              wide-spread cirrus cloudiness, which has the potential to affect the radiative
              budget of the planet.  Given increases in jet traffic, the effect by 2050 could
              increase ten-fold, and be as large as one quarter of the current anthropogenic
              greenhouse gas radiative forcing. While models currently exist to predict the
              potential areas over which contrails can develop and spread, there is no
              consistent observation program to complement and validate efforts at satellite
              observation of contrails.  This GLOBE protocol has the potential to fill a gap
              in observations and research.
%%%
In response to an Announcement of
              Opportunity for the Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
              Program (GLOBE) this project is designed to meet GLOBE goals and objectives of
              linking scientists and schoolchildren in a global information network with the
              ultimate goal of better understanding Earth's environment and changes that take
              place within it.  This proposal consists of various segments addressing GLOBE
              Program needs: support for existing protocols, development of new protocols,
              and scientific research with GLOBE data.  This proposal will support the
              development of a new protocol to assess the presence, extent, and duration of
              jet contrails and cirrus clouds at the same time of day as the other
              measurements in the Atmosphere suite of GLOBE protocols.
Jet contrails, under
              the right conditions, can generate wide-spread cirrus cloudiness, which has the
              potential to affect the radiative budget of the planet.  Given increases in jet
              traffic, the effect by 2050 could increase ten-fold, and be as large as one
              quarter of the current anthropogenic greenhouse gas radiative forcing. While
              models currently exist to predict the potential areas over which contrails can
              develop and spread, there is no consistent observation program to complement
              and validate efforts at satellite observation of contrails.  This GLOBE
              protocol has the potential to fill a gap in observations and research.
***
