Title       : GridSolve: A System for Grid-enabling General Purpose Problem Solving
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0222945

Award Number: 0222945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan R. Blatecky                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack J. Dongarra dongarra@cs.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Micah D. Beck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Plank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henri Casanova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 4089      Network Centric Middleware Svc
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of GridSolve is to create the Middleware necessary to provide a
              seamless bridge between the simple, standard programming interfaces and desktop
              scientific computing environments (SCE) that dominate the work of computational
              scientists and the rich supply of services supporting by the emerging Grid
              architecture.  Users of scientific computing environments can easily access and
              reap the benefits of shared processing, storage, software, data resources and
              so forth, by using GridSolve.  Gridsolve will be build upon the work done
              earlier on NetSolve software.  The work will lead to a new RPC mechanism Grid
              RPC, will provide client interfaces for key general purposes SCEs, will ensure
              that GridSolve can bind to and utilize all major Grid backends,  will adapt
              GridSolve to use existing Grid services (security, resource monitoring) ,and
              will provide support for flexible state management and data logistics through
              the use of distributed storage resources.

Gridsolve is based on a
              substantial base of NetSolve software, and draws upon knowledge and experience
              using NetSolve with a variety of Grid environments and applications.  The
              effort will make tools like Matlab and Mathematica work on the grid, with the
              result that grid technologies and capabilities will be useful to an even
              broader base of scientists and researchers.

