Title       : CMG Research: Experiments Aimed at Improving Global Seismic Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0222327

Award Number: 0222327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180638             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Garnero garnero@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne Gelb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosemary A. Renaut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0222327
Garnero

The purpose of this proposed research is to employ two
              methods from 
the field of applied mathematics to seismic tomography; each is
              
focused on the goal of improved imaging of spatial data.  This work 
is a
              collaborative effort between geophysicist Ed Garnero and two 
applied
              mathematicians, Anne Gelb and Rosie Renaut.  This effort will 
train two
              graduate students in a cross-disciplinary approach between 
the fields of
              applied math and seismology. While 3D images of Earth's 
mantle have come in
              clearer focus over the last 25 years, many 
challenges remain, most notably
              because of incomplete data coverage. 
Inversions of seismic data require
              smoothing and damping that 
effectively blurs resulting images.   The
              investigators are motivated 
to better resolve the gradients and shapes of
              seismic velocity 
heterogeneity since they relate to temperature and/or
              compositional 
changes in Earth's interior. The project will employ the
              following 
two methods.  (1) Data reprocessing and inversion methods:
              
deconvolution methods will be used to intelligently preprocess 
differential
              travel time computations. Inversion may also be improved 
by regularization
              through a total variation type penalty term. (2) 
Image reconstruction
              methods: apply the Gegenbauer reconstruction 
method for high resolution
              post-processing reconstruction, which has 
proven effective for removing Gibbs
              oscillations without compromising 
the finer image features even near jump
              discontinuities in other 
applications, such as magnetic resonance imaging.
              The tasks can be 
summarized as follows.  (1) Pre-inversion processing: travel
              time 
series cleanup evaluated for blind and knowledge-based deconvolution,
              
approximated from structural models of the Earth's interior.  (2) 
Inversion
              experiments: determine effectiveness of a total variation 
regularization
              model, particularly in conjunction with the impact on 
post-inversion
              processing. (3) Post-inversion processing: sharpen 
images through removal of
              artifacts with the Gegenbauer 
reconstruction method. (4) Assess solution
              images with data: data 
from geographical regions with best data coverage will
              be analyzed 
and modeled to test solution structures.

