Title       : Microcomputer Applications for Chemistry Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9252021

Award Number: 9252021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gene G. Wubbels                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20293              (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Hansen hansen@ssu.southwest.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest State University
	      
	      Marshall, MN  56258    507/537-7100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry is purchasing 8 microcomputers with                
              associated peripherals and sofware for use in laboratory                       
              courses in general chemistry, physical chemistry, and                          
              instrumental analysis.  These laboratory courses are                           
              coordinated with one another so that students receive the                      
              benefits of a coherent introduction to the applications of                     
              computers in chemistry; including data analysis, interfacing to                
              experiments, and theoretical computations.  As part of this                    
              project, new computer-based experiments are being developed for                
              these labs.  In addition to their use in specific courses,                     
              these computers are available to all chemistry students at all                 
              unscheduled times.In the general chemistry course, students are                
              introduced to computers for data collection, analysis and                      
              problem solving; including exposure to spreadsheet, graphing                   
              and equation-solving software.  Various transducers, such as                   
              thermistors, thermocouples, and photodiodes are used.  In the                  
              quantitative analysis course, experiments are performed                        
              involving anion analysis by high performance liquid                            
              chromatography.  In the instrumental analysis course,                          
              instruction in the use of computers for data acquisition,                      
              control, and analysis build upon the experience gained in                      
              earlier courses.  In the physical chemistry course, the                        
              geometry and vibrational frequencies of a molecule, such as SO2                
              are calculated.
