Title       : RIMI: Multiaxial Testing and Constitutive Modelling of Volcanic Tuff Rock (in
               Yucca Mountain, Nevada) Under Multiaxial Load Histories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1995       
File        : a9252923

Award Number: 9252923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Sibley                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reza Salami   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina A&T St Univ
	      312 N Dudley Street
	      Greensboro, NC  274110001    919/379-7500

NSF Program : 9130      RES IMPROVE IN MINORITY INSTIT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,1417,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Predicting the behavior of engineering and geologic                            
              materials under a variety of complex, random and                               
              arbitrary loading and unloading conditions is an                               
              essential element to many engineering design                                   
              problems.  Such an understanding comes through both                            
              analytical modeling and experimental testing.                                  
                                                                                             
              The multiaxial testing devices and data acquisition                            
              system requested will allow for the physical analysis of                       
              a broad array of materials including concrete, rock,                           
              composite materials, and soil.  Within the cubical test                        
              cell these materials may be subjected to variable and                          
              independent levels of stress along any of the principal                        
              axes.  This variable and independent loading is what                           
              makes the test cell superior to conventional stress                            
              analysis along a single axis and therefore more accurate                       
              when used to predict behavior over the life of a                               
              particular material or composite.  The proposed equipment                      
              will be used for testing engineering materials under                           
              uniaxial, biaxial, or triaxial compressive loading                             
              conditions.  The devices consist of a cubical steel frame                      
              and six walls which function as lids.  The load is                             
              applied via a hydraulic pressure system whose                                  
              polyurethane membranes and pressure seals contain the                          
              fluid pumped into the system.  The deformation of the                          
              specimen is measured with a proximitor probe system.                           
                                                                                             
              This work is proposed to find basic constitutive                               
              properties and the stress-strain relationships of tuff                         
              rocks (from Yucca Mountain, Nevada) under multiaxial load                      
              histories.  Yucca Mountain located near the southwest                          
              margin of the Nevada Test Site (NTS) in southern                               
              Nevada, as show in Figure 1, is being evaluated as a                           
              potential site for underground disposal of nuclear waste.                      
              Yucca Mountain primarily consists of layered volcanic                          
              tuff (Bish et al., 1981).  The Topopah Spring Member of                        
              the Paintbrush Tuff has been tested (under uniaxial and                        
              two dimensional loadings) and reported by References                           
              (Olsson and Jones, 1980; Price, Nimick, and Zirzow, 1982;                      
              Price, Spence, and Jones, 1984; Price et al., 1985;                            
              Nimick et al., 1985; Nimick et al., Price 1986) for                            
              physical, thermal, and mechanical properties as part of                        
              the Nevada Nuclear Waste Storage Investigations (NNWSI)                        
              Project, which is administered by the Nevada Operations                        
              Office of the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE).  Figure 1                       
              shows the geographic locations of NTS, Yucca Mountain,                         
              and Busted Butte, Figure 2 the stratigraphic setting of                        
              the Topopah Spring Member, and Figure 3 a measured                             
              section of the tuff exposures at the sample location.                          
                                                                                             
              There is a need for quantitative methods to predict the                        
              environmental impact of excavating operations so that                          
              preventive and remedial measures can be taken to reduce                        
              or eliminate adverse impact.  The overall objective of                         
              this proposed study is to develop models as quantitative                       
              predictive tools to improve the capability of accurately                       
              predicting probable subsidence resulting from underground                      
              excavating.  The specific tasks of this study include:                         
                                                                                             
                    1.  To compile all available relevant data.                              
                    2.  To develop constitutive and failure models for                       
              discontinuous tuff rock based on available uniaxial                            
              and triaxial compression test series on Topopoh                                
              Spring tuff rocks which have been reported in these                            
              Refs. (Olsson and Jones, 1980; Price, Nimick, and Zirzow,                      
              1982; Price, Spence, and Jones, 1984; Price et al., 1985;                      
              Nimick et al., 1985; Nimick et al., Price 1986) and other                      
              References.                                                                    
                    3.  To conduct laboratory testing of new core                            
              samples and make determination of mechanical properties                        
              of tuff rock materials under multiaxial load histories.                        
                    4.  To develop the finite element computer                               
              simulation model to analyze the basic behavior of the                          
              underground opening field, including behavior of                               
              individual underground opening field, movement of the                          
              overburden formation, and dislocation movement between                         
              the top of the cavern field and the overburden                                 
              formations.  By using the finite element computer                              
              simulation model, the causes of the probable damage will                       
              be analyzed and appropriate measures to prevent such                           
              damage will be recommended.
