Title       : A Simulation/Interactive Video Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1992     
File        : a9252332

Award Number: 9252332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19113              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Edinboro Univ of Penn
	      
	      Edinboro, PA  16444    814/732-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Laboratory for Training Pre-College Physics Teachers The                       
              Simulation/Interactive Video Physics Laboratory consists of a                  
              six computer workstations equipped with a laserdisc player and                 
              associated color monitor.  This laboratory forms an integral                   
              part of the one semester course Physical Science (taken by                     
              elementary education majors) and the two semester course                       
              sequence Physics 1 and Physics 2 (taken by secondary education                 
              science majors).  The purpose of the project is to enhance                     
              student understanding of basic physics through the use of a                    
              planned sequence of student centered activities.  The                          
              simulation/video lab forms part of a larger project which                      
              includes a separate computer-based physics lab in which                        
              students are able to use equipment interfaced to a computer to                 
              acquire and display data in real-time and then to manipulate                   
              the data both visually and numerically.  In the proposed                       
              simulation/video lab, students at each computer workstation                    
              have available a complete array of physics simulation software,                
              The Physics Explorer, with which they are able to investigate                  
              the full range of physical phenomena normally studied in                       
              introductory physics courses.  In addition, each student has a                 
              comprehensive package of interactive video software based on                   
              the Mechanical Universe.  Upon completion of the project, the                  
              courses Physical Science, Physics 1, and Physics 2 will have                   
              undergone a complete transformation from traditionally taught                  
              elementary physics courses to courses based on student centered                
              data acquisition, simulation, and interactive video activities.
