Title       : Physics Laboratory Computerized Data Acquisition and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1992        
File        : a9252202

Award Number: 9252202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25491              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Lucey luceyca@jccw22.cc.sunyjcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie F. Plumb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jamestown Cmty Col
	      525 Falconer Street
	      Jamestown, NY  147011920    716/665-5220

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to help beginning physics                  
              students make the transition from high school to college                       
              physics instruction.  The student are being helped to take                     
              responsibility for his/her own learning by providing physics                   
              instruction in an environment with a heavy emphasis on direct                  
              observation and active student involvement.  The already well-                 
              integrated laboratories at Jamestown Community College are                     
              being enhanced by the addition of computer data acquisition                    
              systems at each lab bench.  Students, working in pairs or                      
              threes, are using this equipment to verify the laws of physics,                
              by directly measuring force, motion, temperature, displacement,                
              magnetic fields, etc., and by using computer tools such as                     
              spreadsheets, mathematical and graphics packages, and data                     
              acquisition software designed by Tools for Scientific Thinking                 
              at Tufts University.  Furthermore, a powerful mathematics and                  
              graphing program called Mathematica is also being used to help                 
              students deal with difficult mathematics concepts.  Via this                   
              project the college is building the laboratory resources                       
              necessary to move gradually toward a heavily observation-based                 
              approach to introductory physics, consistent with the nature of                
              physics as an observation-based discipline.  Nine Macintosh                    
              IIsi computers, equipped with Vernier U.L.I. data acquisition                  
              boards and analysis software, are being networked to a Quadra                  
              900, which runs Mathematica 2.0, which was purchased earlier.                  
              This project has been designed in consultation with faculty at                 
              several colleges and universities.  This cooperation should                    
              enhance the chances of project success and replication.
