Title       : Holographic Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1992      
File        : a9252241

Award Number: 9252241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick H. Wirth fwirth@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Hampshire College, although a relatively new institution, has                  
              a reputation for excellence in the teaching of science.                        
              Introductory courses for both science majors and non-majors                    
              focus on inquiry methods and often involve students in                         
              independent projects in the laboratory.  These relatively                      
              sophisticated student projects for beginners have become the                   
              hallmark of Hampshire's innovative science education.  Optics                  
              and Holography (NS 104) is such a course.  Using students                      
              natural enthusiasm for holograms and lasers we give them a good                
              basis in physical optics and equip them to function in the                     
              holographic laboratory in a very independent way.  Students                    
              create transmission, reflection and rainbow holograms in 4x5                   
              format.  During the last third of the course, and continuing                   
              into the following semester students complete an entirely                      
              independent project on some aspect of holographic production,                  
              instrumentation or utilization, or on some closely related                     
              topic.  Improving the laboratory equipment for these courses                   
              has improved them in several ways:  1) eliminating the                         
              frustration caused by the touchiness our homebuilt equipment                   
              helps new students gain confidence and independence in the lab;                
              and 2) improving image quality helps to maintain student                       
              enthusiasm during the sometimes difficult transition to                        
              independent work. Hampshire's project based approach to                        
              introductory science education has proved effective in                         
              attracting non-science students to the sciences.  A greatly                    
              expanded computational component aids student understanding and                
              introduces them to a rapidly expanding field of physics.                       
              Hampshire annually graduates more than twice as many students                  
              majoring in science as entered with a declared interest in                     
              science.
