Title       : VPW: Mechanistic Investigation of Transcription Initiation and Elongation by E.
               coli RNA Polymerase (Biochemistry)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1992    
File        : a9252956

Award Number: 9252956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lilian M. Hsu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1166,
Abstract    :
                    The proposed research will address two fundamental                       
              aspects of transcription by Escherichia coli RNA polymerase,                   
              namely, its tendency to undergo abortive initiation and its                    
              mechanism of translocation during transcription elongation.                    
              To clarify the first question, the P.I. will perform direct and                
              quantitative comparisons, under a standardized reaction                        
              condition, of the extent and pattern of abortive initiation by a               
              comprehensive set of E. coli promoters.  The results of this                   
              determination may lead to sequence-specific correlations of                    
              abortive initiation with the initial transcribed sequence of each              
              promoter.  The second question is aimed at resolving two                       
              currently conflicting models of RNA polymerase translocation-                  
              one continuous and the other discontinuous-with the growth                     
              of the RNA chain.  Experimentally, footprinting analysis with                  
              DNase I, exonuclease III, hydroxyl radical, and potassium                      
              permanganate will be performed on a contiguous set of                          
              specifically-halted elongating complexes.                                      
                    RNA polymerase is a central enzyme in the regulation                     
              of gene expression.  Despite extensive investigation, many                     
              aspects of its catalytic mechanisms remain controversial and                   
              unclear.  This work should forge a clearer picture of how                      
              translocation occurs.                                                          
                    The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                   
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science                    
              or engineering through research, and to encourage other                        
              women to pursue careers in these areas through the                             
              investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on the host                 
              campus.  The proposed activities which contribute to the                       
              second objective include:  teaching part of the introductory                   
              Biochemistry course to non-biochemistry science majors;                        
              mentoring and advising students;  and directing                                
              undergraduate and graduate students working on research.
