Title       : VPW: A Dynamically Reconfigurable Register Organization to Facilitate
               Multitasking, Sequential Programs, and Other Language Paradigms (Computer
               Science/Systems Architecture)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9252969

Award Number: 9252969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna Quammen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 4715,9225,
Abstract    :
                    Most current architectures have one of two large registers               
              organizing, either a register stacks, or a large sized single register         
              sets.  A single register set excels over a stack if a program                  
              requires frequent access to globals.  A register stack performs                
              better if deep recursive chains exist.  It is generally agreed that            
              neither organization will benefit programs written in a concurrent             
              language because of the heavy context switch overhead.  In this                
              research a register hardware organization called "threaded                     
              windows" is examined to enhance the performance of concurrent                  
              systems, and sequential programs.  The organization allows the                 
              registers to be dynamically restructured to either of the above                
              forms, and any combination of the above forms.  This permits the               
              compiler, or the programmer, to capitalize upon each register                  
              organization's strong points and avoid their weak points.  In                  
              addition, hardware fault tolerance is facilitated, as well as graceful         
              runtime fault detection and recovery.  This work will also explore             
              the applications of this register configuration to programming                 
              paradigms such as object oriented languages, functional                        
              languages, and logic languages.                                                
                    This project proposes a study of a new approach in                       
              designing register organization for high performance computer                  
              systems.  It takes into account several recent developments in                 
              computer architectural design which can tackle the memory                      
              latency problem in such high performance systems.                              
                    The effort furthers VPW program objectives to provide                    
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              teaching an undergraduate course, and jointly teaching a second                
              year graduate course; doing a colloquial presentation; involving               
              students in research; serving on the Women and Engineering                     
              Program Faculty Advisory Board and and being involved in WIE's                 
              annual conference; participating in informal discussion groups;                
              and mentoring students, especially those with career interruptions.
