Title       : United States National Center- Third International Mathematics and Science
               Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9252935

Award Number: 9252935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3723113            (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Schmidt bschmidt@pilot.msu.edu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 7260      DISSEMINATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,7260,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   With this proposal, Michigan State University is requesting               
              funds to support the U.S. National Center for the Third                        
              International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS).  In addition,             
              we are requesting support to conduct the United States curriculum              
              analysis and to do the international data analysis.                            
                   The TIMSS sponsored by the International Association for the              
              Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA), will be the major                 
              international assessment activity during the 1990's.  The interest             
              which governments around the world have in assessing what is                   
              learned in school is a reflection of a global recognition that                 
              scientific literacy and economic productivity are inextricably                 
              linked, with mathematics at the forefront as the universal language            
              of modern technology (Walberg, 1983).  Assessment can play a                   
              critical part in the identification of needed reforms in education.            
              Thus far, 40-50 countries around the world are committed to                    
              participate in TIMSS.  The study will take place in 1993-94 and                
              1997-98.  United States participation in TIMSS has been agreed to              
              at least in general terms as conveyed by the U.S. IEA General                  
              Assembly Representative Gordon Ambach and as endorsed by the                   
              National Academy of Science Board for International Comparative                
              Studies in Education, by the National Science Foundation, and the              
              National Center for Education Statistics.                                      
                   The activities involve three major tasks outlined below:                  
                                                                                             
                   Administration and Supervision of U.S. Participation in TIMMS:            
              This includes all of the administrative and coordination activities            
              the National Center must perform to ensure that the U.S.                       
              participation in TIMSS is informed and shaped by the many                      
              contextual realities that affect U.S. mathematics and science                  
              education at all levels and is highly coordinated within the                   
              country.  The breadth of this task will require a staff of                     
              professionals to coordinate this responsibility and the people                 
              involved.  This task constitutes the major work for which this                 
              funding is being requested.                                                    
                   Conduct of U.S. Curriculum Analysis for TIMSS:  The National              
              Center will undertake the U.S. curriculum analysis.  This will be              
              carried out in three phases:  definition of the sampling frame with            
              regard to the curricular materials in conjunction with the ICC,                
              conduct of the analysis, and development of the U.S. report                    
                   Conduct International Curriculum Data Analysis and Develop                
              Report:  This will involve the development of a complex data file              
              and constructing of weights and procedures for analysis, detailed              
              data analysis to be completed at Michigan State University and                 
              development and dissemination of extensive monograph contrasting               
              countries with regard to science and mathematics curriculum.
