Title       : VPW: New Methodologies for Evaluating Interactive Technologies (Computer
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9252943

Award Number: 9252943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187292             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine R. Marshall   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6850,9225,
Abstract    :
                    Since we lack fundamental means for evaluating the merits                
              of non-traditional technologies, this research looks at extending              
              currently impractical analytic techniques, such as conversation                
              analysis, to more easily used measures of interaction                          
              effectiveness.  In a laboratory experiment, face-to-face                       
              communication will be compared with two forms of mediated                      
              communication:  audio-only and audio-plus-video.  Two types of                 
              tasks will be studied:  one with a strong visual-spatial component             
              and one with a strong verbal-logical component.  Task                          
              performance will be measured and questionnaires given.  Using                  
              the results of the objective measures of effectiveness, systematic,            
              non-anecdotal methods for conversation analysis will be                        
              developed using the videotaped protocols.  The research will                   
              make a substantial new corpus of task-related interaction available            
              to the scientific community.                                                   
                    The project explores and evaluates the use of new                        
              techniques for measuring the effectiveness of interactive                      
              technologies, including teleconferencing systems, multimedia                   
              computing systems and portable office environments.                            
                    This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                  
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              mentoring and counseling women students (in a department with                  
              no women faculty); teaching one course in interactive systems;                 
              co-leading the Interactive Systems Reading Group; advising                     
              students, and OGI as an institution, on policies and mechanisms                
              necessary for the development of careers for women in science                  
              and engineering.
