Title       : Utilizing Characterization of Materials to Develop Unity and Coherence of the
               Composite Materials Engineering Curriculum at WSU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9252168

Award Number: 9252168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beckry Abdel-Magid Beckry@vax2.winona.msus.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey C. Logas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Myron Snesrud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Winona State University
	      8th and Johnson Streets
	      Winona, MN  55987    507/457-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The Composite Materials Engineering Program at Winona State                    
              University, the first of its kind at the undergraduate level,                  
              has a curriculum which includes basic and engineering sciences,                
              materials science, mechanics, and design and manufacturing.                    
              The goal of this project is to use the laboratory work to                      
              provide a relationship between these elements in the                           
              curriculum.  Unity and coherence of subject matters are                        
              provided by practical experiences in materials characterization                
              at various stages of study.  Characterization of materials                     
              enables students to understand materials properties, their                     
              structure and composition, their performance, and how to design                
              and process them.  This understanding will enable students to                  
              develop and produce composite materials that perform in new and                
              more effective ways for a myriad of applications.  The                         
              laboratory equipment consists of: ten microscopes, an                          
              analytical balance, two hardness testers, surface area and                     
              porosimetry equipment, three high temperature furnaces, a                      
              tabletop tensile test machine, and a data acquisition system.                  
              This equipment is used in laboratory and classroom instruction                 
              of 13 courses in the curriculum, and in the development of two                 
              new courses.  The equipment is also used in student design                     
              projects and undergraduate research.
