Title       : VPW: Copper Speciation Studies at Simulated Particulate Surfaces Using
               Electrochemical and Spectroelectrochemical Methods of Analysis
               (Analytical/Surface Chemistry)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1992    
File        : a9252967

Award Number: 9252967
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Goldberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1970,9225,
Abstract    :
                    Experimental methods will be developed to enable the study               
              of copper speciation at simulated natural water particulate                    
              interfaces.  A novel experimental model is presented to permit                 
              analytical determination of interfacial phenomena in situ.  The                
              model consists of a stable polymer microemulsion containing                    
              immobilized reactive ligands on its surface and is intended to                 
              simulate pertinent features of organic-coated natural water                    
              particulates.  Interdigitated array electrode electrochemistry                 
              methodology will be developed to determine Cu(I) generated by                  
              complex photolysis.  This will result in enhanced interdigitated               
              array methodology and determination of copper-amino acid                       
              photolysis rates.  Spectroelectrochemical methods will be                      
              developed to optically determine complexed copper                              
              concentrations following electrochemical generation of Cu(II).                 
                    The methods will have general utility to speciation studies at           
              surfaces and will be applied to the study of copper-amino acid                 
              complex formation and photolysis.  This advances interfacial                   
              spectroelectrochemical methodology and knowledge of equilibrium                
              speciation of copper-amino acid complexes on surfaces.                         
                    The project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                   
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:                   
              developing and teaching a new course on Aquatic Chemistry;                     
              presenting a guest lecture on environmental chemistry; starting a              
              new curriculum in Environmental Chemistry; and providing                       
              research guidance and mentoring to students.
