Title       : VPW: The Cloning Membrane Receptor-Proteins in Mammalian & Sea Urchin
               Development (Cell Biology)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1995  
File        : a9252959

Award Number: 9252959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merrill B. Hille   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Whitehead Inst Biomed Res
	      Nine Cambridge Center
	      Cambridge, MA  021421479    617/258-5215

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1114,
Abstract    :
                    The project has two objectives: (1) for the investigator to              
              learn molecular cloning by isolating a new member of the TGF-                  
              beta superfamily from mammalian cells through work in the host                 
              laboratory, learning state-of-the-art cloning of membrane proteins;            
              and (2) to make sea urchin cDNA libraries from embryos, and with               
              these and host laboratory resources, to search for clones for TFG-             
              beta receptors and integrin receptors.  The investigator will begin            
              by using low-stringency hybridization to look for sea urchin clones            
              of TGF-beta and integrin receptors.  If too many clones are found              
              she will design redundant oligo-nucleotide probes and use PCR                  
              techniques to try to isolate sea urchin probes from her libraries, or          
              prepare antibodies to redundant peptide sequences in the integrin              
              receptors and screen expression libraries for clones.  Finally, she            
              will use her own antibodies to the putative 200kDa-laminin                     
              receptor to screen for clones in the sea urchin libraries.  The long           
              term goal is to understand how receptor molecules on the surface               
              of cells interact with specific molecules of the extracellular matrix          
              to signal or aid cell movements and morphogenesis of embryos.                  
              With preliminary evidence that the interaction of the extracellular            
              matrix protein, laminin, by interacting with cell receptors may                
              stimulate or mediate gastrulation these embryos, the investigator              
              has begun to purify membrane proteins from sea urchin embryos                  
              that bind to extracellular matrix components.  She has found one               
              protein that binds laminin--the first identification of a matrix               
              receptor in sea urchin embryos, and is currently searching for                 
              other integrin proteins that may bind laminin or fibronectin using             
              an antibody evolutionary tree from sea urchins to mammals,                     
              significantly overlap.                                                         
                    The investigator, an expert on the regulation of translation in          
              echinoderm egg and embryos, is changing the emphasis of her                    
              own laboratory to study the role of membrane receptors and                     
              extracellular matrix molecules in morphogenetic movements of sea               
              urchin embryos.  The studies on sea urchins, a model for the easy              
              visualization and manipulation of development, are potentially very            
              important for furthering our understanding of cell-extracellular               
              matrix interactions as determinants of embryonic cell movement                 
              and differentiation, particularly the critical processes of                    
              gastrulation, and similar processes such as imaginal disc                      
              formation in Drosophila or neurulation in vertebrates.                         
                    This project furthers VPW program objectives to provide                  
              opportunities for women to advance their careers in science or                 
              engineering through research, and to encourage other women to                  
              pursue careers in these areas through the investigator's enhanced              
              visibility as a role model on the host campus.  The proposed                   
              activities which contribute to the second objective include:  giving           
              lectures/seminars; lecturing in a number of graduate and                       
              undergraduate courses, including developmental biology,                        
              introductory biology, and advanced cell biology; working with                  
              graduate student women participating in the on-going biology                   
              brown-bag lunches; and giving a lecture to the Cambridge                       
              Chapter of the Association of Women in Cell Biology (AWIS).
