Title       : Collaborative Research: Upper Ocean Paleotemperatures: Direct Measurement Using
               ODP Geothermal Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9596183

Award Number: 9596183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew T. Fisher afisher@es.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9416735  Fisher  This project involves researchers from Woods Hole Oceanographic
              Institution and Indiana University.  They will analyse temperature and thermal
              conductivity measurements of sediments at two sites drilled on the eastern U.S.
              continental slope by the Ocean Drilling Program (ODP).  The will also carry out
              instrument calibrations which will allow future collection of such data at
              drilling sites of opportunity.  The objective of the research is to examine
              ocean temperature change, particularly in "intermediate" water depths, which is
              important in understanding global climate change over the past few thousand
              years.  The data in hand was collected at two ODP sites located only 4.4
              kilometers apart near the edge of the Gulf Stream off New Jersey.  The two
              temperature profiles show a dramatic difference in the upper sediment
              temperature gradient, and the investigators have modelled the data, suggesting
              that a plausible interpretation is that the position of the Gulf Stream has
              changed measurably over the past 100 to 130 years, affecting the shallower site
              but not the deeper one.  Their observations are consistent with a 5-7 degree
              (Celsius) temperature change over that time period at the shallower site, in
              about 440 meters water depth.  Such large temperature change is not commonly
              observed at these depths.  The research carried out under this award will allow
              them to extend their modelling to examine both the hypothesis they propose
              (changes in Gulf Stream location) as well as other possible causes (subsurface
              aquifer flow, sediment slumping are examples) for the observed temperature and
              conductivity profiles.  Data will be compared with historical measurements of
              water column temperature in the region, as well as with published "proxy"
              measurements of longer-term temperature which are obtained through analysis of
              isotopes of oxygen preserved in planktonic foraminifera skeletons.  This award
              also provides funds to carry out a precise calibration of the instrumentation
              for measuring subs urface temperatures to remove uncertainties associated with
              instrument error in the future.  ***
