Title       : Characterization of SBP1 Binding Determinant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9596236

Award Number: 9596236
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan H. Hardin shardin@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Preliminary evidence indicates that the Drosophila Structure                   
              Binding Protein 1 (sbp1) gene is an excellent candidate for                    
              involvement in DNA recombination, replication, and/or repair.  The             
              spb1 gene is a single copy gene producing three different                      
              transcripts that are enriched in tissues and life stages involved              
              in rapid cell division.  The SPB1:beta-galatosidase fusion protein             
              preferentially binds three-stranded DNA structures in a sequence               
              independent manner, and appears to possess a strand displacement               
              activity. The protein predicted from the nucleic acid sequence of              
              sbp1 cDNAs shares some sequences similarity with prokaryotic DNA               
              ligases.                                                                       
              The primary objective of this proposal is to define, at single-                
              nucleotide resolution, the specific binding determinant present in             
              three-stranded DNA structures that is preferentially recognized and            
              bound by SBP1.  This will be accomplished by first chemically                  
              probing isolated structures to model the three dimensional                     
              structure of the DNA.  Regions that are accessible to the probe are            
              predicted to be either single stranded or distorted double stranded            
              regions in DNA.  Subsequently, the relative binding affinity of                
              SBP1 for modified versions of the preferred binding substrate will             
              be assayed.  Modifications resulting in a reduction or elimination             
              of binding will indicate the importance of a determinant for SPB1              
              binding.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              Recombination, or crossing over, is the event in which blocks of               
              genes are exchanged between chromosomes during meiosis.  The                   
              process involves breakage of two DNA helices and the subsequent                
              exchange.  It is generally accepted that unusual DNA structures are            
              formed during recombination.  This proposal is directed toward                 
              understanding how these unusual DNA structures are recognized and              
              resolved.
