Title       : Efficient Light Transport Algorithms for Computer Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1995   
File        : a9596066

Award Number: 9596066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick M. Hanrahan hanrahan@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many realistic image synthesis algorithms have been proposed                   
              in the last few years, but unfortunately they tend to be very                  
              inefficient, often requiring hours or days of calculations.                    
              As a result, the visual cues provided by these algorithms                      
              (shading, shadows,  transparency, reflections, etc.)  still                    
              have not been used routinely by applications requiring                         
              visualization.  This project is concerned with development of                  
              efficient image synthesis algorithms based on the integral                     
              equation representing light transport in the environment.  It                  
              used techniques recently developed to solve the N-body problem                 
              in linear time.  Preliminary results indicate that the                         
              interaction matrix corresponding to the integral equation with                 
              a linear number of blocks can be approximated.  Since this                     
              approximation has linear-space complexity, it makes it                         
              possible to explore solution techniques that have been                         
              previously too time and memory intensive to consider.  It also                 
              studies visibility problems, sampling and meshing problems,                    
              and lazy evaluation strategies within the context of solving                   
              the light transport equation.  Finally, these ideas will be                    
              implemented and tested.  The long range goal of all this                       
              research is to develop robust and practical algorithms that                    
              can be incorporated into 3D graphics workstations of the                       
              future.
