Title       : FT/ICR/MS: Technique Development and Non-Biological Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1994  
File        : a9596045

Award Number: 9596045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred M. Hawkridge                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 30,  1993 
Expires     : March 31,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan G. Marshall marshall@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research, in the general area of Analytical and Surface                    
              Chemistry, focuses on continued development of Fourier                         
              transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry.  The work                 
              promises to enhance the development of mass spectrometry, a                    
              very important analytical technique.                                           
                                                                                             
              The project tackles the problem of external ion injection and                  
              linearized excitation/detection.  Both theoretical modelling                   
              and equipment building and testing are planned.  New theory to                 
              be studied will include general spectroscopic aspects, and will                
              focus on Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance (FT/ICR)                    
              mass spectrometry.   New instrumental developments will include                
              studies of ion trap design and characterization, ion guides for                
              ion external injection, and dual-channel SWIFT and detection                   
              modules.  New experiments will be performed to directly                        
              determine the ICR orbital radius from the detected ICR signal,                 
              together with experiments to study the use of a fast neutral                   
              beam ion source for involatile samples and a bilateral                         
              frequency sweep for ion injection.  Some analytical and                        
              chemical applications regarding actinide metal complexes,                      
              stereochemical effects, gas-phase basicities of carbenes,                      
              osmium cluster ion chemistry and applications to the analysis                  
              of polymers and electrode surfaces are also planned.
