Title       : Galvinoxyl Radical Mediated Hydrosilylation Reactions: Mechanistic and Synthetic
               Aspects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1995     
File        : a9596214

Award Number: 9596214
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 27,  1995    
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22895              (Estimated)
Investigator: G. A. Slough   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the work                 
              of Professor Greg A. Slough at the College of Wooster.  The                    
              hydrosilylation of ketones with a co-catalytic mixture of                      
              Wilkinson's catalyst and galvinoxyl radical will be                            
              investigated.  Mechanistic studies will attempt to provide                     
              evidence for a ketyl radical intermediate.  A series of                        
              4-substituted phenyl cyclopropyl ketones and 5-hexenones will                  
              be investigated.  The use of a chiral Wilkinson's catalyst to                  
              explore the effect of galvinoxyl on chiral induction and the                   
              effect of the chiral ligand on the reaction will also be                       
              examined.  The scope of the reaction will be determined with a                 
              series of "5-hexenones" which ultimately produce cyclized                      
              products.                                                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              The ability of specifically designed materials to speed up                     
              organic transformations (catalysis) will be studied.  The                      
              intimate details of how a metal containing compound can                        
              catalyze the delivery of a hydrogen to an organic molecule will                
              be explored.  The ability of this system to specifically                       
              produce only one of the two possible products which are mirror                 
              images of each other will also be investigated.  The results                   
              obtained from this study will provide information which can be                 
              used to improve the ability to construct important molecules.
