Title       : Labor Market Turnover and Self-Employment: An Empirical Analysis for the U.S.
               Using SIPP
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9596171

Award Number: 9596171
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theresa J. Devine   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    It has long been agreed that understanding variation in                  
              job-exit,  job-entry,  and job-to-job transitions among                        
              workers having different demographic and skill                                 
              characteristics is key to understanding variation in                           
              unemployment rates and the distribution of income among major                  
              groups in the United States.  More recently,  as self                          
              employment has increased,  it has been recognized that                         
              discussions of labor market activity should not be restricted                  
              to the wage-and-salary sector.                                                 
                    Limited information on employer-employee separations                     
              and self-employment activity available in previously existing                  
              data sets has precluded adequate measurement of labor market                   
              turnover for specific groups in the United States,  however,                   
              while non-representative sample designs have prevented                         
              analysis of variation across all groups using even the                         
              limited measures available.  Systematic empirical analysis of                  
              underlying dynamic processes that existing theories suggest                    
              might give rise to patterns of variation among individuals                     
              has thus been constrained.  This,  in turn has further                         
              limited the development and refinement of theory.                              
                    The proposed research will provide the first                             
              comprehensive measurement and analysis of job-entry,  job-                     
              exit,  and job-to-job transitions,  including transitions                      
              into and out of self-employment,  for all major groups in the                  
              United States population.  It will exploit data from the                       
              Rectangular Microdata files for the 1986 and 1987 Panels of                    
              the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP).  For                    
              representative samples of the non-institutionalized U.S.                       
              population,  these Microdata Files provide detailed                            
              information on the variables that are key to the measurement                   
              and analysis of labor market turnover.  The major drawback of                  
              the SIPP data is the complexity of the survey instruments and                  
              the structure of the public use files,  particularly when                      
              attempting to exploit SIPP's longitudinal features.  The                       
              planned research will enhance the data for the 1986 and 1987                   
              Panels by constructing detailed work histories from the                        
              Microdata Files.                                                               
                    The investigator is extremely knowledgeable about the                    
              structure,  content,  and problems associated with the                         
              current SIPP data files,  and their restructuring into                         
              something more readily usable promises to be of great value                    
              for the study of labor market dynamics.
