Title       : GOALI/CRISP: Analysis of the Start-up Stage of Direct Chill Ingot Casting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1998      
File        : a9596067

Award Number: 9596067
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bob Minaie   (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Richmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mass Lowell Res Fdn
	      600 Suffolk Street
	      Lowell, MA  01854    978/934-4750

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313192  Minate       The project is an interdisciplinary investigation of the 
              start-up stage of the direct chill (DC) ingot casting process.   During the
              start-up stage of the process, the entry of the molten  metal into the mold
              cavity takes place under very dynamic and  transient conditions.  The resulting
              fluid flow and the associated  solidification pattern can drastically affect
              the microstructure of  the ingot.  In addition, the thermal stresses during the
               solidification stage can be large and can lead to cracking in the  ingot. 
              Moreover, the formation of air gap between the ingot and  the mold can
              significantly  change the heat transfer at the ingot-  mold interface. 
              Therefore, the transport phenomena, thermal  deformation, and associated
              coupling between them during the start-  up stage of the process can have a
              major impact on the formation of  defects in the ingots.  The proposed
              interdisciplinary study will  involve a comprehensive experimental and
              computational analysis of  the fluid flow, solidification, and thermal stresses
              during the  start-up stage to determine their contribution to cracking and 
              inferior microstructure in the ingots.  The thermomechanical  coupling between
              the fluid flow, solidification, and thermal  stresses will be studied with the
              aim of preventing defects during  the DC ingot casting process.       The
              results of the study may allow for the faster casting of  metal ingots with
              reduced defect content.  Such ingots can be used  to produce higher quality
              parts at lower cost.
