Title       : Modeling the Lung: Computational Analysis of 3D Viscous Airflow Through
               Bifurcating Tubular Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9596075

Award Number: 9596075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Hammersley hammersley@opus.mco.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rama N. Reddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Col of Ohio
	      3000 Arlington Avenue
	      Toledo, OH  436142598    419/381-4172

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is designed to explore and quantitate the complex                 
              fluid dynamic forces governing global pulmonary transport and local            
              cellular mechanical strain. From experimental work we have learned             
              that the geometric design of the lung induces specific flow effects            
              such as asymmetric flow distribution, chaotic mixing and variable              
              pressure zones. Until recently the scientific community has                    
              considered the pulmonary airways and vascular passive conduits to              
              a relatively simple gas exchange sheet. In the cells comprising                
              these branching networks however, evidence now points to an active             
              participation in local flow regulation as well as mechanical signal            
              transcription (cellular release of secondary messengers, altered               
              ion fluxes, cytoskeletal changes and transcription bursts). The                
              applied forces and cellular strains are unknown and imposed within             
              bifurcations we have initiated a large scale transfer of aeronautic            
              computational fluid dynamic and supercomputer techniques to the                
              biological sciences. In conjunction with the NSF sponsored ERC for             
              Computational Field Simulation this project will initiate an                   
              exploration of the fluid dynamic forces within small airways. This             
              region has been chosen for initial exploration because pre-                    
              existing data is available to cross check early model development.
