Title       : Endomembrane Calcium Control and the Regulation of Cell Division
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9596159

Award Number: 9596159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Silver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marine Biological Lab
	      7 MBL St.
	      Woods Hole, MA  025431015    508/548-3705

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9308024  Silver    Cell division is a central feature in the life of every
              living  cell.  It is known from the work of this and other laboratories  that
              intracellular free calcium is an essential regulator of  specific biochemical
              and physiological aspects of mitosis.  This  laboratory is identifying patterns
              of calcium transients during the  cell cycle in normal sand dollar blastomeres,
              using calcium-  dependent aequorin luminescence, multi-spectral video
              microscopy  and high performance computational analysis of discrete calcium 
              signals in intracellular microdomains.  Prior results show that  calcium is
              released into the cytoplasm in discrete, short-lived,  and highly localized
              pulses within local regions, or microdomains.   Computational analyses,
              including three-dimensional Fourier  analysis, show that spatial and temporal
              patterns of calcium  release vary in characteristic fashions throughout the
              cell cycle.   The goal is to decipher the spatial and temporal patterns of  
              calcium release associated with specific steps in mitosis known to  be
              dependent upon calcium-sensitive biochemical pathways (e.g.  nuclear envelope
              breakdown, anaphase onset, and cytokinesis).  In  this way a library of
              descriptors of calcium release patterns  associated with specific mitotic
              events will be assembled.  In  addition, biochemical studies of how the cell
              mediates the  localized release of calcium within microdomains of the cytoplasm
               are underway.  The present focus of the biochemical studies is the  role of
              phospholipid metabolism in regulating calcium release,  particularly
              phospholipases and other enzymes associated with the  arachidonate pathway
              whose lipid-derived products (e.g. inositol  trisphosphate, leukotrienes,
              arachidonic acid) are known to  mobilize calcium from intracellular stores. 
              Monoclonal antibodies  to phospholipases A2, C and D, and antibodies to
              thromboxane  synthase and cyclooxygenase label endomembranes associated with
              the   cytoskeleton and mitotic apparatus.  Which of these enzyme s are 
              associated with which endomembrane system, which lipid-derived  products can
              serve to release calcium from endomembranes in vitro,  and which may be acting
              in vivo to mediate calcium release  associated with mitotic events will be
              determined.  %%%  It is known from the work of this and other laboratories that
               intracellular free calcium is an essential regulator of biochemical  and
              physiological aspects of mitosis, the process by which one cell  divides to
              become two.  The long-term goal of this technically  demanding research is to
              understand the regulation of intracellular  calcium on a physiological time
              scale and in three dimensions  within an egg cell undergoing division.  In
              vitro experiments on  the biochemical role of lipid-derived mediators of
              calcium release  will complement in vivo experiments using sophisticated video 
              imagery to develop a three-dimensional picture of when and where  within the
              cell calcium is released.  The results of this research  will be a major
              contribution to our understanding of the regulation  of mitosis.  ***
