Title       : GEM: Determination of the Boundary Conditions on the Ionospheric Electronic
               Potentials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9596169

Award Number: 9596169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112097             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Weimer dweimer@mrcnh.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mission Research Corp
	      735 State Street
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93101    805/963-8761

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                The ultimate objective of the proposed research is to develop an  improved
              model of the ionospheric electric potentials in the polar  cap.  The initial
              step will be to determine the locations of the  convection boundaries, and how
              the electric potential is  distributed around the perimeter of the
              convection/electric field  reversal boundaries under different orientations of
              the IMF and two  categories of geomagnetic activity.  Solving this problem is 
              perceived to be the most critical step towards  the development of  a better
              model of ionospheric plasma convection.  Measurements from  the Vector Electric
              Field Instrument on DE-2 will be used to obtain  a data base of boundary
              locations and electric potentials around  the boundaries.  The data will be
              sorted according to IMF  orientation and substorm activity, then an innovative
              but proven  method of fitting the data will be used to determine the locations 
              of the convection boundaries and potential distribution as a  function of
              magnetic local time.  These measurements will next be  used as the initial
              boundary conditions for numerical calculations,  to produce reasonable models
              of ionospheric electric potentials.   The results of this project will be
              needed to check the results of  the GEM Program's global geospace general
              circulation model (GGCM),  and could be useful in the development of the GGCM
              code.  The  proposed research will also help to obtain the objectives of the 
              GEM program's substorm campaign.
