Title       : Coelomocyte Activation and the Sea Urchin Immune System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  1995 
File        : a9596251

Award Number: 9596251
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54800              (Estimated)
Investigator: L. Courtney Smith csmith@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric H. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/676-4949

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The purpose of this investigation is to explore the immune system              
              of the purple sea urchin, Strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and the               
              molecular mechanisms of coelomocyte activation.  The profilin gene             
              (SpCoel1), cloned from coelomocytes, is upregulated in cells                   
              responding to injury or to injections of foreign coelomic fluid.               
              This molecular parameter denotes changes that occur during                     
              activation of coelomocytes and will be used to assess the magnitude            
              of responses shown by the sea urchin immune system to experimental             
              challenge.  We will identify stimuli that are most effective in                
              maximizing the transcription rate of SpCoel1 and in activating                 
              coelomocytes.  This analysis will indicate the recognition                     
              capabilities of the coelomocytes, and suggest the range of ligands             
              these cells can detect.  To further analyze the response to                    
              external stimuli, coelomocyte proliferation, including the time                
              course of the appearance of new cells in the coelomic fluid, and               
              the location of the proliferative centers in the animal will be                
              characterized.  Coelomocyte activation most likely involves the                
              appearance of a number of new transcript species that are required             
              for defense functions.  Differences in the transcript population in            
              activated cells compared to resting cells will be used to clone and            
              characterize activation related genes.  To provide a molecular                 
              understanding, the regulatory region of SpCoel1 will be analyzed by            
              comparing protein-DNA binding patterns that regulate expression in             
              activated and resting coelomocytes, and in early developmental                 
              stages when this gene is also expressed in cells that may be                   
              coelomocyte precursors.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              The echinoderm immune system responds quickly and efficiently in               
              protecting sea urchins from infection and repairing injuries.  It              
              is a non-specific system, the effector cells of which are the                  
              coelomocytes found within the body cavities.  Although this system             
              appears primitive compared to the mammalian immune system, it may              
              be functionally homologous to important elements of higher                     
              vertebrate immune systems.  Primary cellular responses in                      
              vertebrates that underlie adaptive immunity are mediated by cell               
              types that also function in a non-specific manner, so the                      
              echinoderm defense system may not have changed much from the basic,            
              ancestral form.  Gene expression and the regulation of gene                    
              expression in invertebrate immune systems is an almost unexplored              
              area of biology.  Initial results of research on sea urchins have              
              identified a critical gene that is activated in early stages of a              
              defense response.  Further studies of how this gene is regulated               
              and how the gene-product functions in immune-cell activation will              
              shed new light on the cellular mechanisms of non-specific immune               
              function and how these ecologically important organisms defend                 
              themselves from injury or infection.
