Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Information Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9596217

Award Number: 9596217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tommaso Toffoli tt@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman H. Margolus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               The investigator and his colleague construct and explore a range  of
              physics-like models of computation, from chiefly conceptual to  more
              application-oriented.  Ballistic models of computation, for  example, suggest
              ways to exploit atomic-scale effects for  computer-logic operations. 
              Fine-grained digital models of  processes traditionally described by continuum
              methods (e.g.,  fluid dynamics) help in understanding what types of macroscopic
               behavior can be obtained from given microscopic laws.         Information
              Mechanics is the study of computation viewed as a  distinguished mode of
              operation of dynamical systems with a  physics-like structure.  A main task for
              information mechanics is  to develop theoretical models of computation that
              more  expressively and accurately reflect essential aspects of the  underlying
              physics (such as locality, invertibility, inertia,  quantum character), opening
              the way to more direct and efficient  physical implementations of computing
              processes.  Results of this  line of investigation have a direct bearing on the
              theory and  practice of computation and on the computational modeling of 
              physics.  For example, logic invertibility is now being exploited  to reduce
              energy dissipation in computers; and lattice gases  provide theoretical models
              and simulation tools for a better  understanding of complex fluids.
