Title       : Forest Floor Carbon Dioxide Evolution: Measurement and Modeling at Landscape
               Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9596191

Award Number: 9596191
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269897             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul V. Bolstad   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Vose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Seiler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne T. Swank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Alan Yeakley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Bolstad  The overall objectives of this study are to determine the range o
              spatial and temporal heterogeneity in CO2 evolution from eastern deciduous
              forest floors, and to develop and validate a landscape-scale forest floor CO2
              evolution model,.  This project would measure multiple abiotic and biotic
              factors, and couple these to forest floor CO2 evolution over a large area using
              a variety of modeling and scaling techniques.  The 1600 ha main basin of the
              Coweeta Hydrologic lab in the Southern Appalachian Mountains will be the
              physical focus of our research.  Measured factors will include soil
              temperature, soil moisture, litter quality and quantity, fine and coarse root
              biomass, N, and C, and soil N and C.  We will then integrate these factors with
              mappable landscape parameters such as elevation, terrain position, soil
              characteristics, vegetation  type, age, and structure, in a series of models
              which predict forest floor CO2 evolution across the landscape.    The proposed
              research will utilize the measurements of the spatial and temporal variation in
              forest CO2 evolution to develop models which link abiotic and biotic driving
              variables with forest floor CO2 evolution.  These will help understand and
              predict ecosystem-level changes in CO2 response to short-term and long-term
              changes in environmental and global conditions.
