Title       : RUI: Hormones Neurotransmitters and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9596009

Award Number: 9596009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68647              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Renner krenner@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9309451     Renner    Serotonin, or 5-hydroxytryptamine (5HT) is a central 
              neurotransmitter.  This neurotransmitter has been implicated in the  control of
              an extremely diverse group of physiological and behavior  functions including
              aggression, sleep, renal regulation, pain  perception, hormone secretion,
              thermoregulation, motor activity,  food intake, cardiovascular function and
              reproduction.  For  example, serotonin is shown to influence female estrous
              behavior  possibly through its interaction with the gonadal steroids.   Indeed,
              Dr. Renner has demonstrated that sequential administration  of estrogen and
              progesterone reduce serotonin turnover in several  brain regions known to be
              important for the expression of  reproductive behavior.  He will now extend
              these findings by  determining the physiological relevance of ovarian effects
              on  serotonergic functioning.  Dr. Renner will use a novel technique,  in vivo
              microdialysis, to pinpoint the alterations in serotonin  neurotransmission that
              may contribute to the regulation of  reproductive behavior.  Using this
              technique, he will examine the  relationship between estrogen and progesterone,
              serotonin release,  and reproductive behavior in several different brain
              regions in  freely moving animals.  This work will help define the functional 
              linkage between sites within the neural network controlling  reproductive
              behavior.  Dr. Renner will also monitor the  neurochemical and behavioral
              effects of various pharmacological   interventions in animals primed with
              different regimes of ovarian  hormones.  These results are likely to help
              unlock some of the  secrets underlying the integration of the neurochemical
              events by  which gonadal steroid hormones induce a behavioral response.    ***
