Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships Among the Cucurbitaceae and Allied Families
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  1997     
File        : a9596273

Award Number: 9596273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Swensen SSWENSEN@ITHACA.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loren H. Rieseberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ithaca College
	      Danby Road
	      Ithaca, NY  14850    607/274-3111

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306913  Swensen       The Cucurbitaceae and Begoniaceae are two plant families
              whose  members exhibit very distinctive morphological features, yet their 
              phylogenetic relationships to each other and to related groups  remain unclear.
               The cucurbit family is widely appreciated for its  diversity of fruit
              structures (compare pumpkin, luffa, cucumber,  chayote) whereas the begonias
              show a diversity of floral structures  and leaf forms.  Research by Drs.
              Swensen and Rieseberg is designed  to use DNA gene sequences from the
              chloroplast and nuclear genomes  for comparing members of these two families
              and several putative  relatives.  The new molecular data will be compared with 
              traditional morphological characters used in the taxonomy of these  plants, in
              order to determine areas of congruence and areas of  disagreement.  Where
              congruent, the data will allow recognition of  reliable morphological features
              for taxon identification and for  study of evolutionary change in characters. 
              Disagreements will  highlight problems of homology and possible differences in
              rates of  molecular evolution.  %%%       Two related families, Datiscaceae and
              Coriariaceae, will also  be studied.  These include plants with symbiotic
              associations with  nitrogen fixing actinorhizal bacteria.  The research will 
              investigate the evolution of this association and will provide  hypotheses as
              to why it occurs in some groups and not in others.   This information should
              prove useful in the induction of nitrogen  fixing symbioses in agriculturally
              important plants.
