Title       : Statistical Inference on Part Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9596172

Award Number: 9596172
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Seiford                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28285              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Kurfess tom.kurfess@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This research combines statistical theory with engineering                
              technology to develop confidence levels for part inspections.  The             
              goal is to extend previous research on cylindricity to all solid               
              geometric primitives.  The research will employ maximum likelihood             
              estimation of part geometric parameters, such as the radius of a               
              sphere, to estimate the probability of geometry conforming to a                
              specific model.  These models will incorporate expected random and             
              systematic deviations from nominal values and will be developed in             
              the context of the manufacturing process.  Once the measurements               
              are complete, the theory developed will permit the statisically                
              characterization of the impact of part geometry deviations.  The               
              research will enable the determination of several important values,            
              among them is the number of sample points required to assure                   
              specified probabilities on type I and II errors.                               
                   Individually inspected parts will be employed to draw                     
              inferences about the remainder of the parts in the production                  
              system.  The relation between individual components and uninspected            
              parts will be developed from the statistical theory of tolerance               
              regions.
