Title       : Phylogenetics of New World Aneuploid Astragalus: Molecular, Morphological, and
               Cytogenetic Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1995   
File        : a9596279

Award Number: 9596279
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154233             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Sanderson mjsanderson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin F. Wojciechowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9407824  Sanderson       The flowering plant genus Astragalus, of the legume
              family,  containing upwards of 2500 species worldwide, is a remarkable  example
              of rapid evolutionary diversification on a global scale.   Reconstructing the
              evolutionary relationships or phylogeny within  such a genus can provide clues
              as to why it is so ecologically  successful.  However, the technical and
              logistical problems  associated with phylogenetic analyses of large genera have
               prevented significant progress in understanding relationships  within
              Astragalus.  One promising approach is to identify major  subgroups, establish
              the phylogenetic status of these (whether they  are monophyletic), and then
              reconstruct their relationships to each  other.       The present study will
              evaluate three phylogenetic hypotheses  regarding one large putative
              monophyletic group within Astragalus.   This group consists of a series of some
              500 species distributed in  the New World, which all possess an unusual
              chromosome complement  (they are aneuploids) that differs from the rest of the
              genus.  The  three hypotheses are (1) that all New World aneuploids form a 
              monophyletic group distinct from rare Old World aneuploids and  equally rare
              New World euploids; (2) that Old World aneuploids  represent evolutionarily
              independent origins of the aneuploid  chromosome condition; and (3) that New
              World euploids are not the  closest relatives of New World aneuploids, rather
              they are more  closely related to Old World species.  Evidence from mutational 
              differences in nuclear ribosomal and chloroplast DNA will be  gathered from
              hundreds of New and Old World species, and integrated  with chromosome counts
              and morphological features.  Efforts will be  made to detect reliable
              morphological characters associated with  the origin of the aneuploid groups in
              the New and Old World.
