Title       : Biomimetic Oxidation Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9596085

Award Number: 9596085
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17940              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia J. Burrows burrows@chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Organic Dynamics Program,                        
              Professor Cynthia J. Burrows of the Chemistry Department at                    
              State University of New York at Stony Brook will study                         
              "Biomimetic Oxidation Chemistry".  Biological mechanisms of                    
              hydrocarbon oxidation and halogenation will provide the basis                  
              for the design of new transition metal catalysts for these                     
              processes.  The oxidation of organic substrates using metal                    
              catalysts is of great importance to the petrochemical industry,                
              especially since oxygen-containing compounds (primarily ethers)                
              will have great impact on the gasoline industry.                               
                                                                                             
              Mechanistic studies are underway in order to characterize the                  
              roles of nickel and the ligand in the catalytic epoxidation of                 
              alkenes with a terminal oxidant.  New macrocyclic ligands will                 
              allow the investigation of asymmetric induction in reactions                   
              with alkenes.  These experiments will seek to  distinguish                     
              between the intermediacy of metal oxo species versus electron                  
              transfer mechanisms.  Mechanistic information will be applied                  
              to the design of new oxidative transformations based on radical                
              cyclization or ring opening reactions.  Related group transfer                 
              reactions such as aziridination and cyclopropanation will be                   
              investigated, as well as other metal complexes.
