Title       : Geochemistry of the Belt Supergroup (Middle Proterozoic), Montana:
               Paleoenvironmental Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1995  
File        : a9596079

Award Number: 9596079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Maccini                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100478             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy W. Lyons lyonst@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynn M. Walter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kyger C. Lohmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9405689  Lyons       The goal of the proposed two year study is to perform the 
              first detailed geochemical assessment of the Middle Proterozoic  Belt
              Supergroup, northwestern United States, with specific emphasis  on
              paleoenvironmental reconstructions.  Despite its importance  within the context
              of Precambrian research, fundamental  environmental questions remain
              unanswered.  Previous  interpretations of marine and nonmarine depositional
              conditions  have relied on an ambiguous set of stratigraphic and sedimentologic
               observations, yet geochemical studies that might provide new  interpretive
              insights have remained largely unexplored.  These data  will also directly
              address the resource potential and the regional  patterns of postdepositional
              alteration of a classic, economically-  significant Precambrian basin. 
              Research plans call for an  evaluation of C-S-Fe systematics and C-O stable
              isotopic trends  within organic-rich shales of the lower Belt Supergroup and 
              limestones and dolomites of the middle Belt carbonate unit,  respectively. 
              Through collaborative efforts, this study will be  undertaken within a strict
              stratigraphic and chronologic context.   Although the C-S-Fe system has proven
              value for the interpretation  of Phanerozoic paleoenvironments, its potential
              for studies of the  Precambrian has gone virtually untested.  The results of
              this study  should provide critical insight with regard to controversial 
              Proterozoic continental reconstructions.  Furthermore, a carefully-  defined
              marine end member within the Belt Supergroup would permit  a direct
              characterization of the chemical composition of the poorly  constrained
              Proterozoic ocean.
