Title       : RUI: Reciprocal, Direct and Indirect Effects of Pre-dispersal Seed Predation and
               Pollination of Two Co-occurring Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1997        
File        : a9596178

Award Number: 9596178
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alison K. Brody akbrody@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Zimmerman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9318602  Brody     This research investigates the combined roles of pollinators
              and a seed predator on the origins of flowering times of two Rocky Mountain
              wildflowers: Polemonium foliosissimum and Ipomopsis aggregata.  Because these
              two plant species have a common seed predator but utilize different
              pollinators, the flowering time of one species may affect seed production in
              the other by attracting the seed predator.  The investigators are also
              examining how the seed predators (an anthomyiid fly) select and/or manipulate
              flowers to increase their own offspring's survival.  %%%  This research is
              novel in addressing the potential indirect interaction between two plants
              species that share seed predators.  Most previous research has been limited to
              studying a single interaction between organisms at a time.  This project is
              important in that it addresses multiple plant-plant and plant-insect
              interactions simultaneously, allowing the detection of complex relationships
              that may be common in nature but usually ignored in standard ecological
              studies.  The results of this research may have applications in agriculture and
              conservation biology: seed-production by valuable plants is often
              simultaneously reduced by seed predators and increased by pollinators. 
              Understanding the dynamics of these conflicts may help us learn how to optimize
              flowering schedules to increase seed yields.  ***
