Title       : Regulation of Expression of Fish Insulin-Like Growth Factor Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1995  
File        : a9596241

Award Number: 9596241
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203917             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Chen tchen@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chun-Mean Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9317132  Chen      Insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) are small peptide 
              hormones known to play important roles in regulating growth  and
              differentiation of vertebrates.  Studies conducted in  mammals showed that
              IGF-II is produced in the liver and  several other prenatal and neonatal
              tissues, whereas IGF-I  is primarily produced in the post-natal livers under
              the  control of growth hormone (GH).  However, the mechanism of  hormonal
              regulation of IGF-I and IGF-II gene expression has  not been determined.  Using
              rainbow trout as experimental  animals, the long term objective of this
              research is to  investigate the molecular mechanism of GH controlled IGF  gene
              expression.  To achieve this long term objective, a  list of short term aims
              has been developed for the next  three years.  These are:  (1) determining
              patterns of tissue  and developmental stage specific expression of IGF genes; 
              (2) identifying hormonal factors that regulate the  expression of IGF genes in
              vivo and in vitro; (3) assessing  the consequence of differential inactivation
              of the  production of IGF-I or IGF-II polypeptide by a combination  of
              transgenic fish and Ribozyme technologies; (4) isolating  and characterizing
              the GH receptor and its cDNA molecules.  Fish represent the largest and the
              most diverse group of  vertebrates and their unique evolutionary position
              relative  to other vertebrates and their ability to adapt to a wide  variety of
              environments make them ideal for studying the  molecular mechanisms of growth
              regulation. Results of these  proposed studies will advance the knowledge of
              vertebrate  IGF gene regulation and expression in a way that is both  easily
              generalized to vertebrate models, and will provide a  phylogenetic perspective
              that has proved useful in the  studies of other complex biological phenomena. 
              Furthermore,  these studies on GH modulated IGF gene expression in fish  will
              provide an excellent alternative model for studying the  control of growth
              factor gene expression at the molecular  level in hu mans.  ***
