Title       : Phylogeny and Evolution of Antlions and their Allies: Neuroptera:
               Myrmeleontiodea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1998   
File        : a9596224

Award Number: 9596224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160500             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Oswald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9407165  Oswald   Pit-building antlions have fascinated generations of amateur
              and professional biologists with their intriguing behavior of building conical
              pit-fall traps in loose sand or soil to capture small ground-walking prey. 
              These animals are the larvae of a very successful group of approximately 1700
              species of small to medium sized insect predators assigned to the family
              Myrmeleontidae.  It has been suggested that an important factor in the
              diversification of this group of insects was the development by their larvae of
              the ability to adapt to living in loose granular substrata, particularly sand. 
              These substrata may have provided a relatively unoccupied ecological zone or
              niche into which antlions could speciate because relatively few other animals
              had previously been able to effectively utilize such environments.  The
              research supported by this grant will test this empty niche hypothesis by
              examining the distributions of morphological characters among numerous species
              of antlions and other closely related insects.  Evidence supporting the
              hypothesis will have been found, if the first appearance of characters that
              adapt antlions to a life in granular substrata correlates with the origin of
              this group.  %%%   This study will provide important information for improving
              antlion classification, interpreting historical (phylogenetic) relationships
              among major groups of antlions and related groups, and studying the origin and
              development of animal behaviors.  The study is one component of a longer-term
              research program aimed at improving our knowledge of relationships among the 17
              families of the insect order Neuroptera (lacewings), an important group of
              predatory insects that includes several subgroups that are of interest for
              their potential use in the biological control of crop and ornamental plant
              pests.  ***
