Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Numerical Problems in Incompressible
               Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9596098

Award Number: 9596098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weinan E   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9303779  E       The investigator studies two problems in fluid flow. (1). 
              Statistical behavior of two dimensional turbulence.  There are  two major
              problems in this area.  The first is concerned with the  spatial (scaling)
              behavior and the second the temporal scaling  behavior.  Classical theory
              attempts to answer these questions  via Kolmogorov-like arguments.  Recently
              this classical picture  is challenged by a combination of very detailed
              numerical and  analytical results of E and Majda.  The investigator continues 
              this study to establish an alternative picture for 2D turbulence.  (2).
              Mathematical and numerical problems for incompressible flows  in the presence
              of boundaries.  In particular, the  investigator studies the separation of
              boundary layers and the  approximation to Navier-Stokes equation before the
              separation.   Recently he has shown that in the presence of an adverse pressure
               gradient the steady boundary layers have to separate and  separate
              self-similarly.  Now he takes up the unsteady Prandtl  equation, examining its
              validity in describing the boundary  layers in the zero-viscosity limit. 
              Previous results of Fife et.  al. are restricted to the class of solutions
              satisfying some  uniform bounds (independent of viscosity).  The existence of
              such  a class is in doubt.  On the numerical side, the investigator  studies
              numerical methods with vorticity boundary conditions  through the introduction
              of a simple model problem that captures  the essence of the full problem and is
              explicitly computable.   Such a program has already been carried out for the
              projection  method by E and Liu.       One can view both problems as
              preparation for  studying turbulence.  In reality, most turbulence is generated
              at  the fluid-solid boundary through friction.  Large-scale  computing offers
              another dimension for studying such problems.   But the efficient exploitation
              of this new dimension also  requires powerful numerical methods.  At the
              present time, even  the basic issues in formulating a nu merical method are
              unsettled  whenever boundaries are present.  Insight can be improved 
              drastically if simple representative models are introduced.  This  motivates
              the investigator's study and design of numerical  methods. Understanding of
              turbulence is a central problem in  applied mathematics, with broad scientific
              and technological  ramifications.  ***
