Title       : Collaborative Research: Transformations to Quality Organizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1995  
File        : a9596276

Award Number: 9596276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James W. Dean, Jr.                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114140             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Easton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research project will analyze the role and nature of business and strategic
              planning in driving  the effective implementation and continuing development of
              Total Quality Management (TQM).  The study  will characterize effective
              planning processes, identify barriers to implementation and other areas  which
              cause difficulty, and examine the way in which planning systems evolve in
              conjunction with the  development of a TQM system.   An important aspect of the
              research will be the examination of  processes for resource allocation in
              conjunction with the planning process; in particular, researchers  will
              investigate the way in which difficult-to-measure costs are incorporated into
              the decision-making  process.  A key goal of the research will be to improve
              the integration of business planning and  quality systems planning.  The
              research methods involve in-depth and on-site assessments of the  planning
              systems of organizations in varying stages of development of their TQM systems.
               Interviews  with employees at all levels and review of company documentation
              will be the primary data sources;  survey methods may be used as a supplement. 
              Companies participating in the study include AT&T  Transmission Systems, First
              Chicago Bank, and Hewlett Packard.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
