Title       : NSF Young Investigator:Investigation of Sparse Resultants and Polynomial Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1996       
File        : a9596109

Award Number: 9596109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 22,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Pedersen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Two lines of research will be pursued.  The first is to develop a            
              hybrid symbolic-numeric system for solving systems of polynomial               
              equations numerically.  For this, symbolic algorithms for global root          
              separation will be combined with local numerical methods for root              
              refinement.  One task in the project is to determine the feasibility           
              of a hybrid Groebner basis routine which may deal with inputs more             
              general than ordinary polynomials.  The quotient algebra module is             
              noteworthy because it reduces both the computation of resultants (for          
              general algebraic feasibility ) and the computation of trace forms             
              (for real root location).  The other modules build up, layer by layer,         
              the tools necessary to effectively isolate and refine all solutions of         
              a system of polynomial equations.                                              
                The second research direction is to analyze the structure of sparse          
              resultants.  Sparse polynomials arise frequently in important                  
              applications, so computational advances in dealing with them have much         
              practical significance.  It is planned to investigate resultant                
              equations for systems of sparse Laurent polynomials.  There are                
              important relationships between the combinatorics of parameters                
              associated with such systems and the solutions of polynomial                   
              equations.  Any knowledge of such structure feeds back into                    
              computational methods, e.g., limiting a priori the types of systems            
              which may have solutions of various sorts.
