Title       : Ant Ventilation and Gas Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1995      
File        : a9596196

Award Number: 9596196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $86000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Lighton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306537  Lighton    If any animals on Earth could as easily have evolved on a 
              different planet, in terms of sheer difference from humans, those  animals are
              insects.  For example, insects have arrived at  entirely different answers from
              ours to the problem of breathing,  or obtaining oxygen and releasing carbon
              dioxide from their  tissues.  Air is delivered directly to their tissues via
              internal  tubes or tracheae, rather than indirectly via the bloodstream, as 
              with us.  This allows insects to attain far greater metabolic  intensity, but
              imposes a penalty in terms of water-loss rates  from their respiratory systems.
               Most insects exist in a  perpetual state of near dehydration because of their
              high surface  area to volume ration, so minimizing respiratory water loss rates
               is extremely important to them.  They do this by breathing at  very infrequent
              intervals - perhaps once every five minutes in  insects as small as ants, using
              a complicated and poorly-  understood breathing strategy called discontinuous
              ventilation.  The proposed work will explore the occurrence, mechanisms, 
              biophysics, metabolic modulation, and water-loss significance of  discontinuous
              ventilation, using ants as experimental insects.  Because insects are by far
              the most numerous and successful  animals on the planet, the way they breathe
              is not only  intrinsically interesting; it has implications ranging from 
              applied science through theoretical biology to evaluating the  effects of
              pesticides and pollutants, and the biological  significance of global
              temperature changes.  ***
