Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Large Systems of Coupled Oscillators in Biology and
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1995     
File        : a9596114

Award Number: 9596114
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11025              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strogatz shs7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigator analyzes the large systems of coupled                    
              oscillators that arise in various branches of biology and                      
              condensed-matter physics.  A common theme is the spontaneous                   
              emergence of synchronization due to cooperative interactions                   
              among the oscillators.  The systems of ordinary differential                   
              equations that constitute the models will be investigated                      
              analytically and numerically.  Techniques to be used include                   
              methods of dynamical systems, bifurcation theory, statistical                  
              visualization of the many-osillator dynamics plays a                           
              crucial heurisc role in the research.  Several of the taksk are                
              expected to generate experimentally testable predictions.                      
                   The mathematical problems studied here are models of                      
              behavior as varied as the beating of a heart, the patterned                    
              flashing groups of fireflies, or the circadian rhythm.                         
              Specific areas to be studied include:  phase models with a large               
              but finite number of oscillators; pulse-coupled oscillators                    
              with distributed frequencies or local coupling; phase-locking                  
              and invariant 2-tori in arrays of Josephson junctions; arrays                  
              of electronic relaxation oscillators; coupled oscillator models                
              for the Drosophila circadian system; and delayed switching of                  
              charge-density.
