Title       : FAW: Graphical Specification Techniques for Parallel Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9596163

Award Number: 9596163
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janice E. Cuny cuny@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 9292      FACULTY AWARDS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              When programming massively parallel computations, programmers must             
              specify large numbers of processes and their interactions, efficiently         
              map their logical structures onto disparate hardware structures, and           
              debug in the absence of reproducibility and consistent global states.          
              Some of these activities can be supported by extensions of sequential          
              tools, but most require development of novel techniques specific to            
              parallelism.  This development is made even more challenging by the            
              diversity of target architectures, the relative lack of experience             
              with parallelism, and the range in degree and granularity of available         
              parallelism.  This research focuses on support for message-passing             
              architectures.  During the funding period, work will continue on               
              parallel program specification and debugging, and begin on programming         
              support specific to the Connection Machine.                                    
                                                                                             
              The abstractions provided by a programming environment determine a             
              programmer's effectiveness in implementing and debugging algorithms,           
              yet few abstractions support massive parallelism.  A graph grammar-            
              based editor can facilitate the concise, scalable specification of             
              parallel programs as annotated graph families.  Specification,                 
              however, is not enough.  Program graphs must be available to other             
              tools - such as debuggers, animators, and mappers - within the                 
              environment.  This work will investigate the applicability of existing         
              techniques, to design methods of partial visualization, and determine          
              the feasibility and utility of lazy graph generation.  It is intended          
              to explore the adaptation of these graphical specification techniques          
              for the Connection Machine.
