Title       : Collaborative Research: Phylogenetic Analysis Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae) using
               DNA and Morphological Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  1994  
File        : a9596019

Award Number: 9596019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104399             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce G. Baldwin bbaldwin@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9318490   Baldwin       Understanding the taxonomic relationships, evolution,
              and  biogeographic history of organisms depends upon accurate  phylogenetic
              information, that is, knowledge of the genealogy of  the group.  Dr. Bruce
              Baldwin of Duke University in collaboration  with Dr. Scott Armbruster of the
              University of Alaska is  reconstructing the phylogeny of Old and New World
              species of the  pantropical plant genus Dalechampia (Euphorbiaceae family) in
              order  to gain insights into the evolution of the group's pollination  system
              and its biogeographic history.  Specific objectives include:  1. to collect
              liquid-preserved and herbarium specimens for  morphological analysis and for
              DNA sequencing of chloroplast and  nuclear ribosomal genes; 2. to determine the
              pollination ecology of  a sample of Old World taxa, thus complementing
              knowledge of New  World species; 3. to reconstruct the phylogenetic pattern of 
              species divergences using nuclear and chloroplast DNA data and  morphology; and
              4. to use the phylogeny to trace the biogeographic  history of the group and to
              generate testable hypotheses about  change in pollination ecology and floral
              form.       The application of phylogenetic information to evolutionary 
              biology and ecology has generated considerable excitement in recent  times. 
              Important features of studying evolution with an estimated  phylogeny include
              the ability to infer long-term evolutionary  history of characteristics not
              preserved in the fossil record, such  as ecological relationships between
              plants and animals, and to  distinguish adaptive evolution from the effects of
              phylogenetic  constraint and past stochastic events.  The Armbruster and
              Baldwin  project will advance that agenda.
