Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Functional Analysis in Applied Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1994  
File        : a9596048

Award Number: 9596048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23470              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Takac   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9401418  Takac       This project is concerned with development and applications
               of methods of modern functional analysis to problems arising in a  number of
              generally well-accepted mathematical models in applied  science. The
              investigator proposes to continue his development of  modern functional
              analytic techniques that are suitable for  studying large-time asymptotic
              behavior of solutions to monotone  dynamical systems. A particular emphasis of
              this part of the  proposed research will be on the large-time asymptotic
              behavior  of orbits (trajectories) in almost periodic monotone dynamical 
              processes. Various instability phenomena are described by a  parabolic system
              of complex Ginzburg-Landau equations. The  investigator proposes to establish
              the local (in time) existence,  uniqueness and complex analytic extension of
              solutions to the  parabolic system. This will be followed by a development of 
              suitable global estimates in the Lebesgue-Hardy spaces over a  region in
              multi-dimensional complex space in order to prevent all  the derivatives of the
              solution from blowing-up in finite time.  For the Ginzburg-Landau equation it
              should be possible to obtain  such estimates directly from the equation.      
              Global existence, uniqueness and complex analytic extension  of solutions to a
              mathematical model guarantee the existence and  uniqueness for all times of a
              particular physical (biological,  material or economic) structure described by
              this model, and its  smooth dependence upon the spatial and temporal variables
              (no  sudden jumps). These properties are essential for the design of 
              measurements to be performed on the physical structure. Large-  time asymptotic
              behavior of solutions to a model determines the  ultimate state of
              relationships within the modeled structure.  Mathematical models investigated
              in this project are expressed in  terms of non-linear differential equations. 
              ***
