Title       : MRI: Hatching Rhythms of Estuarine and Freshwater Grass Shrimps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1995       
File        : a9596175

Award Number: 9596175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan E. H. Wilson jwilson@morgan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morgan State University
	      Hillen Road and Cold Spring Lane
	      Baltimore, MD  21239    301/444-3200

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project represents a comparative study of larval release rhythms          
              and the environmental factors that control egg hatching in caridean            
              shrimp of the genus, Palaemonetes. Grass shrimp from estuaries                 
              exhibiting different tidal cycles and a freshwater pond/lake will be           
              used as test organisms. Palaemontes pugio and Palaemonetes paludosus       
              will represent the estuarine and freshwater habitats, respectively. The        
              major objectives of this project are: 1. to determine the type of              
              hatching rhythms shown by grass shrimp species from the two habitats;          
              2. to ascertain the presence of endogenous control of the hatching             
              rhythm and the environmental parameters to which they are entrained; 3.        
              to establish the site(s) of control of endogenous hatching rhythms in          
              grass shrimp from the two habitats; 4. to ascertain the presence and           
              nature of any chemical cue that synchronizes the hatching of eggs; and         
              5. to correlate hatching rhythms with the prevailing environmental             
              parameters in the two habitats. The results of this investigation will         
              represent the first comparative account of egg hatching rhythms of             
              grass shrimp from diverse habitats and will provide a unique                   
              opportunity for testing previously proposed larval release models. The         
              project will contribute to our understanding of the basic types of             
              hatching rhythms and the interrelationship between the ecology of              
              adult shrimp and hatching rhythms.
