Title       : Whales, Sharks & Things In The Dark
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9596078

Award Number: 9596078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $737801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Palmer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Hanle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leighton R. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Wildlife Federation
	      1412 16th St NW
	      Washington, DC  200362202    202/797-6800

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              WHALES, SHARKS & THINGS IN THE DARK - A 70MM IMAX FILM is the                  
              first science museum and aquarium film in the 70MM large-screen                
              format to present the diversity of life in the oceans in a                     
              science context.  Through a unique collaboration of a national                 
              environmental education group, a leading non-profit science                    
              center, and with the co-operation of a federal agency, the                     
              project's main objective is to convey to a general and school-                 
              age audience a view of the richness and range of life in the                   
              underwater realm -- from the deep sea creatures to whales and                  
              sharks and other marine life.  Narratively, the film will                      
              proceed through the water column and selected food webs, showing               
              the relationships in the complex skein of life--including human.               
              The audience will be guided by explorers and role-model                        
              scientists, such as Dr. Sylvia Earle, an enthusiastic and well-                
              known oceanographer, and three other sets of characters involved               
              in marine science and exploration.  The content will highlight                 
              a range of scientific disciplines, including marine biology,                   
              engineering, geology, physics, and oceanography, and it will                   
              shed light on the entire study of the oceans as a career path,                 
              and as an area for further investigation.  Accompanied by a                    
              educational package delivered and supported by all three groups,               
              this film will have wide impact, reaching a projected 8 million                
              U.S. viewers within two years.
