Title       : Structure Elucidation by Electrospray and Laser Desorption Mass Spectrometry,
               U.S.-Pakistan Collaborative Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9596015

Award Number: 9596015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9413023  Smith    Description:  This project supports the  participation of a
              Pakistani scientist, Dr. M.  Saleh Ajaz, from the H.E.J Research Institute  of
              Chemistry, University of Karachi, Pakistan,  in a collaborative project with
              Dr. David L.  Smith of the Medicinal Chemistry and  Pharmacognosy Department at
              Purdue University.   The project is intended to isolate and  determine the
              structures of certain proteins  and natural products.  Specifically, two 
              important classes of proteins will be examined:  casein isolated from camel
              milk, and  hemoglobins from several species of birds.  It  is intended to
              locate sites of phosphorylation  in the casein and to compare the three- 
              dimensional structural features and dynamics of  casein and hemoglobin from
              different species.   The utility of new mass spectrometric  ionization methods
              (electrospray and laser  desorption) for determining the molecular  weights of
              biologically active natural products  that cannot be analyzed by conventional
              mass  spectrometric methods will also be  investigated.    Scope:  This project
              seeks to accomplish two  objectives:  the analysis of specific proteins  using
              modern and innovative techniques; and  familiarizing the Pakistani scientist
              with the  modern techniques used in the U.S. to enable  him to maintain a
              parallel research activity at  the H.E.J. Institute in Pakistan, for joint 
              work with the laboratory of Dr. Smith.  The  long- term parallel activities
              will be  beneficial to both sides because of the access  in Pakistan to
              different species, and their  ability to do first-rate analytical chemistry 
              research.  The development of this long-term  linkage meets the objectives of
              the Division of  International Programs.  ***
