Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Non-Standard Singular Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9596111

Award Number: 9596111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2900               (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hofmann hofmann@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The object of this mathematical research is the analysis of               
              certain singular integral transforms and their mapping properties              
              relative to various spaces of functions.  In particular, work                  
              will be done to establishing the boundedness of such mappings in               
              those cases where the kernel of the singular integral lacks the                
              smoothness necessary to be treated by classical techniques.                    
              These include multilinear singular integrals called d-commutators              
              and operators which fail to carry the Hardy space into integrable              
              functions or bounded functions into BMO.  Some progress has                    
              already been made.  For example, a result similar to the now                   
              standard David-Journe T1-condition has been developed which                    
              permits consideration of very rough kernels.  The work also lends              
              itself to the consideration of commutators of singular integrals               
              with mixed homogeneity, in particular parabolic homogeneity.                   
                   Singular integral transformations form the basis for much of              
              the important work under active consideration in modern harmonic               
              analysis.  Among the motivating forces behind these studies is                 
              the goal for finding comprehensive techniques for solving broad                
              classes of partial differential equations.  These equations arise              
              as models of many important, nonlinear physical phenomena.
