Title       : Role of the Axial Musculoskeletal System in Locomotion and Ventilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1996     
File        : a9596212

Award Number: 9596212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111600             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Carrier carrier@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  9306466  Carrier    Vigorous activity requires increased rates of
              metabolism, so for an  animal to sustain vigorous locomotion, it must breathe
              as it runs.   Lizards are unable to do both simultaneously, because the muscles
               required for ventilation are also involved in locomotion, and can  not
              accomplish both functions at the same time.  Evidence from the  fossil record
              suggests that the early ancestors of birds and  mammals were probably also
              restricted in this way.  The research of  this proposal aims to increase our
              understanding of the mechanical  linkage between the locomorotr and ventilatory
              systems by  investigating the role of the axial musculo-skeletal system in 
              locomotion.  There are three main goals. The locomotor activity of  the epaxial
              and hypaxial muscles in green iguanas and domestic dogs  will be characterized
              by electromyography. This information is not  known for any tetrapod.   Then
              the activity of the external and  internal intercosatal muscles of dogs,
              lizards and opposums during  locomotion will be compared to their activity
              during ventilation of  the lungs.  Recordings of the forces exerted by their
              limbs on the  ground will be correlated with muscle acitivty to test hypotheses
               of muscle function.  These stduies will result in a better  understanding of
              the function of these muscles, and by looking at  three different animals will
              aid in understanding the evolution of  the axial musculo-skeletal system.  ***
