Title       : Reactions to Stigma: The Mediating role of deserving
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9596226

Award Number: 9596226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193165             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Crocker jcrocker@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda N. Major  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9412306  Crocker                              ABSTRACT         A variety of
              conditions, including those based on race or  ethnicity, physical conditions,
              and some behaviors, may be  considered stigmatizing in that people with those
              conditions are  the targets of negative stereotypes, are generally devalued in 
              the larger society, and receive disproportionately negative  interpersonal and
              economic outcomes.  Although previous research  indicates that the stigmatized
              do not generally experience low  self-esteem and psychological distress, there
              is considerable  variability in these reactions across stigmatizing conditions,
               across individuals within stigmatized groups, and within  individuals across
              situations.  This program of research refines  the PIs' previous attributional
              analysis of this variability,  using principles of distributive justice to
              clarify reactions of  the stigmatized to social outcomes that they attribute to
              their  stigma. Specifically it tests the hypothesis that a critical 
              determinant of the effects of outcomes that are attributed to  stigma is
              whether those outcomes are judged to be deserved.  It  also tests the
              hypothesis that individuals will judge such  outcomes as deserved when they
              view their stigma as a relevant  input in the particular domain and that
              stigmatizing conditions  perceived as controllable are more likely to be judged
              as  relevant inputs in many domains than those perceived as  uncontrollable. 
              Other determinants of the belief that stigma-  associated outcomes are deserved
              include situational information  suggesting that the procedures for determining
              outcomes are fair,  a general belief that the system for allocating outcomes is
              a  meritocracy, or a belief that the world is just. These hypotheses  will be
              tested in experiments involving members of pre-existing  groups formed on the
              basis of race and ethnicity, gender, and  weight, as well as members of groups
              created in the laboratory.      Previous research has shown that individuals
              with stigmatizing   conditions, who are the targets of negative stereotypes or 
              prejudice, sometimes suffer from low self-esteem and sometimes do  not.  This
              program of research will determine when negative  stereotypes and prejudice
              lead to lower self-esteem among  stigmatized individuals and groups.  It is
              proposed that when an  individual is rejected or experiences a failure, he or
              she will  consider whether this outcome is due to the stigmatizing  condition
              and whether the outcome is fair, or deserved.   Stigmatized individuals are
              expected to experience low self-  esteem when they believe that negative
              outcomes due to their  stigma are fair, but not when they believe those
              outcomes are  unfair.  Several factors will influence this judgment, including 
              beliefs about whether they are responsible for their stigmatizing  condition,
              whether the condition decreases their qualifications,  whether they believe
              that the procedures followed are fair, and  whether they generally believe that
              the world is a just place  where people usually get what they deserve.  By
              increasing  understanding of maladaptive reactions to the disadvantages 
              associated with stigmatizing conditions, this research will place  us in a
              better position to ameliorate these reactions.
