Title       : Factors Affecting Root Life-Span in Citrus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9596050

Award Number: 9596050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322523             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Eissenstat dme9@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9306872  Eissenstat    In a range of ecosystems, there is greater annual biomass
               productionbelow ground than aboveground. In spite of the  magnitude of root
              biomass production, there is extremely  little information on factors
              influencing root death. Root  carbon costs can be divided into that used for
              root  construction and that used for root maintenance. Maintenance  respiration
              can exceed the total cost of root construction  in as little as two to three
              weeks, whereas roots of many  species live an average of eight months or
              longer. Thus,  plants experience a tradeoff between having long-lived roots 
              and paying  high lifetime maintenance costs vs. shorter  lived roots that need
              to be constructed more often but with  lower lifetime maintenance costs. We
              predict that species  with small diameter roots of high specific root length
              (SRL;  root length/mass) may have higher maintenance respiration  costs than
              species of low SRL, which may in turn affect root-  life span. Furthermore,
              when maintenance respiration  increases, as caused by increases in soil
              temperature, root-  life span may decrease. Root maintenance respiration and 
              root life-span of individual roots and whole-root systems in  pots will be
              examined to test these prediction in a  combination of controlled laboratory
              under conditions where  soil moisture, soil temperature and SRL are varied.
              This  work has important implications for better understanding the  effects of
              climate change on global CO2 sustainable  agriculture and plant growth in
              general.  ***
