Title       : Towards Practical Higher-Order Metalanguages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1995    
File        : a9596119

Award Number: 9596119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113360             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gopalan Nadathur   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Investigations will be conducted on the implementation and use of  a           
              higher-order   metalanguage  that  has   several   applications   in           
              prototyping  derivation systems. This metalanguage is based  on  the           
              logic  programming  paradigm  but  it  enriches  conventional   such           
              languages  by incorporating a polymorphic typing regimen,  providing           
              the  terms  of  a lambda calculus as data structures, using  higher-           
              order  unification for probing these data structures  and  including           
              two  new search primitives for realizing hypothetical reasoning  and           
              for   creating  new  constants  during  search.  The  implementation           
              problems that are raised by each of these features have been studied           
              and  a  preliminary  abstract machine  has  been  designed  for  the           
              underlying  logical  language. Efforts will  now  be  devoted  to  a           
              practical realization of a programming system based on these  ideas.           
              Language and interface design aspects will be considered to  enhance           
              the usability of the metalanguage based on the logical language. The           
              abstract  machine will be extended to cover the additional  language           
              features  and  an  implementation of  the  overall  system  will  be           
              undertaken. Experiments will be conducted with the implementation to           
              obtain  feedback  on  specific design decisions  pertaining  to  the           
              abstract machine. Attempts will be made to tailor the implementation           
              to   sublanguages   that  are  becoming  of  independent   interest.           
              Theoretical  issues  affecting the quality and  correctness  of  the           
              implementation will also be examined. A particular interest will  be           
              the  study  of  notations for lambda terms and  their  relevance  to           
              optimality in reduction.
