Title       : Transferring New Assessment Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9596080

Award Number: 9596080
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $854738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Shavelson richs@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail P. Baxter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to transfer new assessment                         
              technologies from researchers to education practitioners.                      
              This would enable curriculum development teams to align                        
              curriculum and assessment within the classroom, and provide                    
              teachers the knowledge and skills needed to effectively use                    
              new assessments embedded within the curriculum.  To                            
              accomplish this, the project will produce hands-on training                    
              materials for enhancing teachers' and other educators'                         
              capabilities to use, and for some to construct, new forms of                   
              student assessments--such as portfolios and hands-on                           
              investigations--that are aligned with curricular reform in                     
              science and mathematics education.  To this end, prototype                     
              hands-on training materials will be developed and field                        
              tested.  Prior to developing the prototype materials, the                      
              project will create new assessments, in order to study the                     
              steps involved in producing the assessments, and then work                     
              with teachers and other educators to find out how best to                      
              transfer new test-development technologies from research                       
              staff to those involved in classroom and school test                           
              development.  The final product will be two hands-on                           
              training packages, one for providing preservice and                            
              inservice teachers with the knowledge and skills to use new                    
              assessments and another, building on the first, to provide                     
              teachers, graduate students in science education,                              
              supervisors, and other educators the knowledge and skills to                   
              create and evaluate new assessments.                                           
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing will be a minimum of 13% of the NSF                           
              portion.
