Title       : Molecular Basis of the Circadian Mechanism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1995      
File        : a9596164

Award Number: 9596164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65237              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jadwiga M. Giebultowicz giebultj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. O'Brochta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9407948  Abstract  A circadian system was described which controls sperm release
              and  maturation in the make reproductive tract of the gypsy moth. The  system
              was characterized at both the chrono-biological and  physiological level,
              including a time-table for its development  during adult metamorphosis. Study
              of this system at the molecular  level was initiated and resulted in the
              isolation of three clock  related(cr) genes whose transcript abundance appear
              to fluctuate in  a circadian fashion. A determination will be made as to
              whether and  how CR genes are involved in the clock mechanism. Changes in the 
              abundance of the three CR genes will be examined during the course  of
              development of circadian system after resetting of the circadian  mechanism by
              light or temperature, and in conditions which disrupt  rhythmicity using an
              RNAse protection assay and reverse  transcription-PCR. In addition, cellular
              localization of mRNAs  corresponding to CR probes will be studied by in situ 
              hybridizations.  %%%  Circadian rhythms are ubiquitous in living organisms at
              every level  or organization, from gene transcription to behavior. Despite the 
              fundamental importance of circadian rhythms, the molecular identity  of the
              clock that drives them remains one of the significant  unanswered questions of
              modern biology. In this study, a simple  circadian system of an insect, sperm
              release and maturation in the  male reproductive tract of the gypsy moth, is
              used to explore the  molecular basis of the biological clock.  ***
