Title       : NSF Young Investigator: The Evolution of Normal Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1998        
File        : a9596229

Award Number: 9596229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan M. Simkin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $267500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles C. Steidel ccs@astro.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9457446  Steidel      Over the course of the next several years, a number of 
              inter-related projects will be pursued which address the broad  question of the
              history of "normal", Milky-Way-like galaxies from  the epoch of their formation
              to the present time. The studies are  based on a combination of the technique
              of quasar absorption line  spectroscopy and more conventional optical and
              near-infrared  imaging and spectroscopy of very faint, distant galaxies.  The 
              objects for study are selected on the basis of their having  produced hydrogen
              and metallic absorption lines in the spectra of  even more distant, background
              quasars.  High resolution  spectroscopy of the quasars yields extremely
              detailed physical  information on the galaxies producing the absorption, even
              for  galaxies whose mere detection (using conventional methods)  strains our
              technological capabilities at the present time.  Samples of galaxies, selected
              in essence by their gas  cross-section, are constructed without any biases
              related to the  nature of stellar radiation being emitted by the galaxies as a 
              function of time.  The samples represent a very large range of  cosmic epochs,
              from times when the Universe was only 10% of its  current age, to the present. 
              One then combines this information  with data that is obtained from direct
              identification of the  galaxies producing the absorption line systems using
              imaging and  low-dispersion galaxy spectroscopy in the optical and the 
              near-infrared.  These latter data provide information on the  stellar
              populations, luminosities, and geometrical orientations  with respect to the
              line of sight to the quasars.  In total, then,  one obtains information on the
              chemical composition, gas-phase  structure, kinematics, luminosity
              distribution, ionization state,  space density, and clustering properties of
              galaxies as a function  of time.  The marriage of these methods, all of which
              can be  pursued using currently existing instrumentation on large  ground-based
              telescopes, allows the construct ion of a detailed  history of normal galaxies
              since the time of their formation.   Galaxy formation and evolution theories
              are at present largely  unconstrained by observations, and it is the intent of
              this  research effort to place the subject on a firm empirical footing.    This
              award is to recognize an outstanding young faculty member in  science and
              engineering.  The award will enhance the career of the  faculty member by
              providing flexible support for research and  educational activities. 
              Cooperation with industry and institutions  that support research and education
              is encouraged.
