Title       : The Sustainable Management of Civil Infrastructure: A Methodology and Testbed to
               Bridge Information Technology and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a9596099

Award Number: 9596099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1303466            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen C-Y. Lu sclu@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael P. Case  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia M. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara J. O'Keefe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Noshir S. Contractor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9422730 Lu  This award is made in support of the NSF initiative ENG-CISE-IITA94,
               National Challenges.  It  is a joint initiative between the Engineering
              Directorate and the Computer Information and Engineering Directorate.  Civil
              infrastructure systems are large, complex, heterogeneous, distributed, dynamic
              systems that affect, and are affected by, technological, environmental, social,
              political, and economic factors. Examples include communication systems, roads,
              bridges, and the distribution of water, gas and electricity.  The life cycle of
              such systems includes design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair,
              rehabilitation, and disposal.  Throughout these phases, coordination among
              distributed, diverse groups of experts is required to yield efficient,
              cost-effective, and sustainable practices and outcomes. To meet these
              challenges, successful information technology applications must address issues
              that are both technical (the design and implementation of information
              technology) and social (involving consideration of human problem solving, work
              practices, communication, and organizational structures).  The solution
              addressed here is the Team Engineering Analysis and Modeling methodology for
              design and application of information technology in organizations, and the
              integration and extension of previous work in information infrastructure;
              including the System Workbench for  Integrating and Facilitating Teams (SWIFT),
              Agent Collaboration Environment (ACE), and engineering management systems
              developed by the U. S. Army Construction Engineering Research Laboratory
              (CERL).  This army laboratory has developed ACE and a suite of software
              applications related to the design and management of civil infrastructure in a
              military context.  These existing software systems provide a significant base
              for the development of the propoqed information infrastructure technology.  The
              team engineering methodology focuses on the modeling of activity and
              communication within human teams, in the context of avail able media,
              technology, and organizational structures; and the evolving interrelationships
              between technological possibilities and communicative and work practices.  This
              project applies this methodology to the specific case of the sustainable
              management of the gas pipeline and road systems of Fort Gordon, Georgia, which
              is designated by the Army as a "Model Installation" for the 21st century and is
              thus committed to the use of advanced information technology.  This
              "controlled" environment provides an outstanding opportunity to conduct
              experiments in the application of information technology to the problems of the
              sustainable management of civil infrastructure.  The objective of this project
              is to support the sustainable management of civil infrastructure via (1) a
              methodology for team engineering -- both the study of work practices, problem
              solving, coordination, and use of technology in an organization, and the
              deployment and management of new technological infrastructure; (2) the
              integration and further development of advanced information technology to
              support team decision making and information sharing; and (3) the application
              and demonstration of this deployment methodology and information technology to
              the civil infrastructure system at Fort Gordon, Georgia.  This project
              contributes to (1) fundamental knowledge of human coordination and interaction
              with technology in complex systems, (2) a paradigm of information
              infrastructure design and deployment applicable to other large-scale complex
              systems, and (3) the practical application of this methodology and technology
              to an issue of National importance, namely the sustainable management of civil
              infrastructure.
