Title       : Sulphur-Nitrogen Reagents in Asymmetric Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1995 
File        : a9596261

Award Number: 9596261
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin A. Davis fdavis@astro.ocis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226099    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the rational development of                      
              nonracemic sulfur-nitrogen reagents, including                                 
              N-sulfonyloxaziridines, sulfenimines and primary                               
              sulfonamides,for efficient preparation of enantiomerically pure                
              compounds. Not only will this provide the enantioselective                     
              synthesis of previously inaccessible compounds but also a                      
              better understanding of the molecular recognition involved with                
              these reagents. Specifically, new N-sulfonyloxaziridine                        
              oxidants will be used to prepare enantiopure sulfoxides,                       
              selenoxides, and sulfinimines. New reagents derived from                       
              optically active primary sulfonamides, N-sulfinylsulfonamides,                 
              N-chloro-N-sodiosulfonamides, and                                              
              (N-sulfonylimino)phenyliodinanes will be evaluated in the                      
              asymmetric synthesis of aziridines and beta-amino alcohols.                    
              Site-specific fluorination will be explored with new chiral                    
              N-fluorosulfonimides.                                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              With this Renewal award, the Synthetic Organic Program is                      
              supporting the research of Dr. Franklin A. Davis of the                        
              Department of Chemistry at Drexel University. Professor Davis                  
              will focus his work on the rational development of nonracemic                  
              sulfur-nitrogen reagents for efficient preparation of                          
              enantiomerically pure compounds. He also will explore the                      
              site-specific fluorination of compounds using new chiral                       
              reagents.
