Title       : Action of Le and Lip1 Genes in Controlling Stem Growth of Pisum by Gibberellins
               and Light
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9596086

Award Number: 9596086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Erik T. Nilsen                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Valerie M. Sponsel vsponsel@lonestar.utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas San Antonio
	      6900 North Loop 1604 West
	      San Antonio, TX  78249    210/458-4340

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      9318358  Sponsel  The proposed research will utilize gibberellin (GA)
              biosynthetic  mutants and photomophogenetic mutants of Pisum sativum (garden
              pea)  to investigate the mechanisms by which a plant can regulate both  the
              levels of active hormone and the responsiveness of its target  tissue.    In
              the le dwarf mutant of pea the conversion of gibberellin A20 to  GA1 by
              3Beta-hydroxylation is reduced in intact plants.  GA1 is the  active GA for
              internode growth in pea.  Some recently reported  results necessitate a
              re-examination of the biochemical basis for  the le mutation.  In vivo and in
              vitro feeding studies of labeled  GAs will be used to examine whether the le
              mutation interferes with  the transport of GA20 from leaves (which are its
              putative site of  synthesis) to stems, or whether the le locus could code for a
               regulatory factor.  Qualitative and quantitative analyses of the GA 
              metabolites will be conducted using gas chromatography-mass  spectrometry
              providing definitive identification.  Since 3Beta-  hydroxylation is one of the
              most important steps in GA biosynthesis  it is imperative that the functional
              basis of the le mutation is  defined.      The newly characterized lip1
              mutation of pea results in light  independent photomorphogenesis.  In this
              mutant the severe  reduction in stem growth which normally takes place when pea
               seedlings are transferred from dark to light (de-etiolation) is  manifest in
              complete darkness.  Biochemical studies suggest that  the signal transduction
              pathway from phytochrome A is affected in  the mutant.  An investigation of the
              effect of this mutation of GA  levels, metabolism and on tissue responsiveness
              will be conducted  in order to define which aspects of GA biochemistry are a
              factor in  photomophogenesis.  ***
