Title       : Chain Dynamics and Structure of Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1996   
File        : a9596267

Award Number: 9596267
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188621             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Wool wool@ccm.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Wool  The question of whether polymer molecules reptate or not remains as  one
              of the most important and controversial problems in polymer  physics.  The
              reptation model was proposed by P.-G. de Gennes  (1971) to describe the
              dynamics of linear polymer chains in the  melt.  We have designed an experiment
              which probes the essential  features of this model, i.e., the snakelike motion
              of chains due to  their confinement by the other chains, and related scaling
              laws.   We explore the interdiffusion of two sets of matching triblock  chains,
              HDH/DHD, where the chain centers are deuterated on one side  (HDH) and the
              chain ends (DHD) are deuterated on the other side of  the interface.  If the
              chains reptate, a characteristic "ripple"  develops in the concentration
              profile CD(x, t) which grows to a  maximum and then decays.  The ripple is due
              to the anisotropic  motion of the chains.  Our initial Ripple experiments 
              Nature, 365,  235, Sept 1993  using SIMS and Neutron Reflection analysis of 
              matching polystyrene triblocks provide strong support for  reptation.  Several
              critical experiments remain to complete the  investigation of the reptation
              model using matching triblocks.   These include (a) the effects of molecular
              weight at M >> Mc, (b)  the effects of Rouse dynamics at M < Mc (critical
              entanglement  molecular weight), (c) location of chain ends, (d) effects of 
              chemistry, (e) scaling behavior with time and molecular weight, (f) 
              quantitative comparision between computer simulation and  experiment, and
              others.  These experiments should provide a  definitive statement on the
              validity of the reptation model.  %%%  Reptation is a key concept in the
              motions of linear polymer chains.   A validation, or negation, of this model
              would have important  consequences in such areas as the healing of cracks in
              rubber or  plastics.
