Title       : International Postdoctoral Fellows Program: Spin Polarized Inverse
               Photoemissions of Atomically Engineered Magnetic Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1995     
File        : a9596216

Award Number: 9596216
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Mankey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9401668  Mankey      This award is under the International Junior Investigator 
              and Postdoctoral Fellows Program, which enables U.S.  scientists and engineers
              to conduct three to twelve months  of research abroad at research centers of
              proven excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint 
              research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities,  expertise and
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a four-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Gary J. Mankey of Penn State University to
              work  with Dr. Markus Donath at Max-Planck Institute fur  Plasmaphysic on spin
              polarized inverse photoemission of  atomically engineered magnetic structures. 
                The goal of Dr. Mankey's research is to develop a new  instrument capable of
              studying newly discovered phenomena  for a wider range of magnetic materials
              and artificially  layered structures.  The collaborators intend to measure the 
              changes in the electronic structure of solids as one goes  from the bulk to
              thin films, superlattices, and ultimately  to a single atomic layer.    The
              work will develop  collaboration between  two leading groups in inverse 
              photoemission spectroscopy: a university research group at  Penn State, an
              industrial research group at IBM Yorktown in  the U.S. and a university
              research group at MPI in Germany.  ***
