Title       : Privatizing Property Rights and Reshaping State-Peasant Relations: A Preliminary
               Study of the Implementation of Ejido Reform in Michoacan, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9596156

Award Number: 9596156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luin Goldring   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : York Univ
	      
	      Toronto,   00000    /   -

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    This  is a study of the impact of the ejido reform  in  rural  Mexico.  
              That  reform,  initiated  in  1991-92,   is  designed  to  make  possible the
              eventual  privatization  of  lands   that  were  formerly  held  communally  by
                Mexican  cultivators.   The project will be conducted  through  pilot 
              research  in  the  Zamora Valley, Michoac n,  Mexico.   This  project is funded
              through NSF's program of Research Planning  Grants for Women Scientists and
              Engineers.        Communally  held  land has been  a  basic  feature  of 
              agrarian  Mexico  since the time of the Mexican  revolution.  Critics  of the
              ejido system claim that it hinders  economic  development; defenders of the
              system argue that its  erosion  will lead to increased inequality and
              landlessness.  A study  of  the reform from its early stages will throw light
              on the  merits  of such opposing arguments.  It will also illuminate  the 
              impact  of  this important reform  on  the  social  and  economic  lives of
              Mexican farmers and on Mexico's political  stability   and   links   to  the  
              world   economy.    Land  privatization  reforms have been proposed or tried 
              in  many  other  parts  of the world, and the Mexican experience  will 
              contribute  to  growing  scientific  understanding  of   the  consequences of
              such reforms.  In addition to its scientific  and  practical importance, this
              grant will enable a talented  young  researcher  to conduct pilot research  to 
              prepare  a  request for funding for a larger project.
