Title       : Development of a New Technique for Quantifying Selective Ingestion of Diatoms by
               Deposit Feeders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9596182

Award Number: 9596182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9100               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn S. Mayer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Lawrence University
	      
	      Canton, NY  13617    315/379-5011

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9314338  MAYER  Deposit feeders typically dominate benthic communities in soft 
              bottom sediments.  Because they feed on the organically dilute  mixture
              (typically <5% organic matter) of mineral grains, micro-  organisms, and
              detritus, they process large volumes of sediment to  obtain sufficient
              nutrition.  Selective ingestion of the more  nutritious components of sediment
              (e.g., diatoms) is a potentially  important part of their feeding behavior.  It
              also has profound  ramifications for decomposition of organic matter, sediment 
              stratigraphy, and the transport of organic matter and pollutants in  sediment. 
              However, quantification of selective ingestion by de-  posit feeders is
              hampered by methodological problems.  The goal of  this research project is the
              development of a new technique for  quantifying the degree to which deposit
              feeders selectively ingest  diatoms, an important nutritional component of
              sediments.    The technique to be developed by this project involves labeling
              an  essentially inert component of diatoms (the frustule) with the  radioactive
              isotope  68Ge(a metabolic analog of Si) such that  incorporated 68Ge becomes a
              conservative radiotracer for diatoms.   Consequently, selective ingestion of
              diatoms can be quantified by  comparing the concentration of the radiolabel in
              fecal material  with that in test sediment.  This project will develop
              protocols  for labelling diatoms and preparing samples for scintillation 
              counting.  Also, the degree to which the 68Ge activity of diatoms  acts as a
              conservative radiotracer and the sensitivity of the  technique will be
              evaluated.  Finally, the developed method will be  applied to quantify the
              selective ingestion of diatoms by one  species of deposit feeder.  ***
