Title       : Blue Light Perception and Signal Transduction Mechanisms in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9596186

Award Number: 9596186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Estelle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger P. Hangarter  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                          9408166  Hangarter  Plant development is influenced by many
              environmental stimuli,  including light, temperature and gravity.  Of these
              stimuli, light  is of particular importance because it regulates nearly all
              stages  of development in addition to supplying energy for photosynthesis.  
              Examples of light-regulated development include germination, stem  growth, leaf
              and root development, tropic responses, chloroplast  development, branching,
              and flower induction.  Plants respond to  different qualities of light through
              the action of multiple  photosensory systems.  The long-term objective of this
              proposal is  to determine at the cellular and molecular level how blue light in
               particular is perceived by plants and converted into modified  growth
              responses.  The research will focus on the Arabidopsis blue  light
              photomorphogenic mutants blu1, blu2 and blu3 which have been  shown to be
              deficient in several important blue light responses.   The major objective of
              the proposed research is to identify the  nature and mechanism of action of the
              gene products required for  blue light-dependent signal transduction.  A second
              objective is to  continue conducting physiological and genetic experiments
              using  various double mutants between the three blu mutants and other 
              photomorphogenic mutants, including phytochrome-deficient mutants,  in order to
              identify functional interactions between different  photosensory systems.  This
              work will provide significant new  knowledge about the complex network of
              regulatory events that  control photomorphogenesis and will help elucidate the
              mechanisms  by which light, and possibly other environmental stimuli, control 
              plant development.  ***
