Title       : Structural Complexity Theory and Reductions to Low Density Sets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9596033

Award Number: 9596033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 16,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30251              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luc Longpre longpre@cs.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on reductions between sets from                          
              different complexity classes, such as many-one, Turing, truth-                 
              table, and other, as well as considering  sets from most basic                 
              complexity classes, including probability classes like R and                   
              BPP, and sparse sets and tally sets.  When are such reductions                 
              possible?  When they are, how efficient they can be?  The                      
              ultimate purpose is to make as many connections as possible                    
              between different complexity classes, to bring them closer or                  
              further apart, depending on the cases.                                         
                                                                                             
              To be more specific, one research direction is to find what                    
              consequences can be derived from a given set being reducible                   
              to a sparse set, or to a tally set.  For example:  Is it                       
              possible that an NP-complete set is reducible to a sparse set?                 
              What are the consequences, using various type of reductions.                   
              Is it possible that all BPP sets are reducible to sparse sets?                 
              to tally sets?  If it is, that would mean that in some way,                    
              randomness can be simulated by another type of resources.  Can                 
              one reduce the problem of building a one-way function to some                  
              other complexity class?  Can one prove that this reduction                     
              must be to a very dense set?  How efficiently can one reduce                   
              on NP-complete set to another one.
