Title       : Mathematical Sciences: A Singular Semilinear Elliptic Boundary Value Problem in
               Fluid Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 28,  1994  
File        : a9596049

Award Number: 9596049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aihua W. Shaker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Air Force Inst of Tech
	      Wright-Patterson A F B
	      Dayton, OH  45433    513/255-2816

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                940925  Shaker                    We study a singular semilinear elliptic
              boundary value  problem in a bounded domain in the n dimensional real space.
              The  importance of this problem in scientific applications has been  widely
              recognized (see  W ).  The motivation for this proposal is  three-fold.  First
              we wish to generalize the existing theorems by  relaxing the coefficient
              function in the equation from being  Holder continuous to Lipschitz integrable.
              Second we are  interested in possibilities of achieving similar results for 
              systems of equations. A third impetus proceeds from our numerical  results on
              the unit interval and unit square which have shown  that multigrid methods can
              provide an efficient means of  solution for reasonable choices of the
              coefficient function.  However, an actual convergence proof for the multigrid
              Full  Approximation Scheme (FAS) is very hard to obtain and the  literature is
              remarkably sparse in the area of founding  theory for the FAS method. Our
              future research into solution  methods for the discussed problems will be to
              fill this gap and  to investigate new and perhaps more efficient techniques
              such as  the Multilevel Projection (PML) methods to deal with this type of 
              nonlinear problems.  ***
