Title       : Political Equilibrium and Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1995      
File        : a9596199

Award Number: 9596199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Per Krusell pekr@troi.cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9414253  Krusell    One of the implications from the recent literature on
              economic  growth is that economic policy, and particularly taxes which  affect
              the accumulation of physical and human capital, may have  important effects on
              economic growth and welfare.  The new  literature on political economy offers a
              theory of how policies  are chosen in which the interaction between politics
              and  economics is brought to the fore and used to address a series of 
              questions regarding the interaction between economics and policy  choice.  More
              specifically, this project addresses four aspects  of the political economy of
              growth:   (1) how politico-economic institutions explain time series data  on
              the income and wealth distributions, capital accumulation, and  tax rates;  (2)
              the political economy of the economic and political  transition taking place in
              Eastern Europe;  (3) the effects of political uncertainty on economic growth;
              and  (4) the development of new conceptual and computational tools for 
              politico-economic equilibrium theory.    This research could make important
              contributions to our  understanding of economic transition and transitional
              politics in  the former socialist countries.  This project develops a dynamic 
              model that formalizes the important properties of economic and  political
              transitions.  Preliminary results suggest that a simple  move to democracy
              will, besides creating an initial recession,  lead to relatively poor long-run
              performance due to the dynamics  of policy determination.  Under what
              conditions will vested  interests against rapid economic expansion build up and
              persist  over time and across generations?  The research focuses on the 
              political economy of adoption of new production techniques and  costly
              investment in human capital.
