Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Phenomena in Fluid Dynamicsand Related P.D.E.'s
               with Applications to Atmosphere-Ocean Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1995     
File        : a9596102

Award Number: 9596102
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119921             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew J. Majda   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9301094  Majda       The investigator continues his research on the partial 
              differential equations of fluid dynamics, involving a combination  of
              modelling, mathematical theory, asymptotic methods, and  scientific computing. 
              The present project centers around various  theoretical issues regarding
              turbulence in incompressible flows,  with a new direction involving potential
              applications to  atmosphere-ocean science.  This proposal contains specific 
              research projects in the following areas: (a) Eddy diffusivity, 
              renormalization, and Monte Carlo simulation in  turbulent transport; (b) The
              generation of small scale  three-dimensional structures in incompressible flow;
              (c) The  statistical interaction of internal gravity waves and vortical 
              structure in stably stratified flow fields.       The range of physical scales
              necessary for  understanding fluid flow in the atmosphere or ocean is enormous.
                The processes associated with molecular diffusion involve scales  smaller
              than centimeters while the large scale patterns of  significance for weather
              prediction and other environmental  issues involve scales of hundreds to
              thousands of kilometers.   Even the largest supercomputers process observations
              over the  globe at a mesh spacing with each side no smaller than 500 
              kilometers.  How can one assess the mean impact of the many  scales, which
              cannot be described in detail on the large-scale  processes of environmental
              significance?  The proposal takes up  this question.  The work bears on current
              issues in atmospherics  and oceanics.  ***
