Title       : RESEARCH INITIATION AWARD: Short-Wavelength Tunable Solid-State Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1999  
File        : a9596179

Award Number: 9596179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Swapan K. Gayen gayen@sci.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9410795  Gayen  The objective of the proposed research is to develop tunable
              solid-  state lasers which will operate in the near-ultraviolet, and blue- 
              green spectral regions.  The strong, broad-band fluorescence that  results from
              5d-to-4f vibronic transitions in trivalent rare earth  ion-doped crystals is
              particularly suitable for the four-level mode  of laser operation in these
              wavelengths.  Since the 5d electrons  are strongly coupled to the host lattice,
              a careful choice of  active ions (Ce3+, Pr3+) and host crystals would be used
              to optimize  the 5d-to-4f fluorescence, and to simultaneously minimize the 
              detrimental effect of excited-state absorption.  The properties of  the
              absorption, excitation, and fluorescence spectra, fluorescence  lifetime and
              intensity would be used to extract key spectroscopic  parameters which are
              pertinent to laser action, such as absorption  and emission cross sections,
              oscillator strengths, radiative and  nonradiative decay rates and line
              strengths.  Laser-pumped lasing  experiment would be conducted to demonstrate
              laser action in  promising crystals.  Detailed measurements of output 
              characteristics, quantum electronic properties and loss mechanisms  would be
              undertaken.  The goal is to be able to formulate the  selection and design
              criteria for these crystals.  The results of  this project would have an impact
              on such diverse areas as  underwater laser communication, optical storage,
              cytometry and  biotechnology, as well as the development of phosphors for 
              radiologic imaging and scintillators for radiation detection.  ***
