Title       : Floral Evolution in Caesalpinioid Tribes Amherstieae, Detarieae, and Cercideae
               (Fabaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9596281

Award Number: 9596281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shirley C. Tucker tucker@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9420158  Tucker        Recent  molecular analyses of DNA variation  in 
              putatively  primitive members of the legume family Leguminosae (Fabaceae)  as 
              well  as continued morphological studies have emphasized our poor 
              understanding of the taxonomic relationships among the genera  of  the
              subfamily Caesalpinioideae.  These are typically woody plants  of  tropical 
              regions of the world, some of which  are  nitrogen-  fixers  and  hence
              important ecologically as well.   Dr.  Shirley  Tucker  of  Louisiana  State
              University  is  studying  the  early  ontogenetic  or developmental stages of
              floral form  in  a  broad  sample  of  genera  of  caesalpinioid legumes, 
              using  light  and  scanning  electron microscopy.  The goal is to  characterize
               the  sequential  stages of sepal, petal, stamen, and ovary initiation, 
              relative  positioning, fusion of parts if  any,  and  maturation,  leading  to 
              the final structure of the flower in this  group  of  plants.   Specialized 
              floral shape and size  often  result  from  seemingly   minor  shifts  in  the 
              timing  and  positioning   of  developing  floral  organs.  Evidence about 
              these  morphological  shifts in pattern formation is useful for assessing the
              taxonomic  and phylogenetic relationships among plant groups.        Detailed
              morphological studies of floral form and  ontogeny  provide   criteria  for 
              assessing  the  homology  of   taxonomic  characters   used  to  infer 
              phylogenetic  relationships.    Dr.  Tucker's  morphological  findings will  be
               integrated  with  new  molecular data from DNA analyses to improve
              understanding of  the  early evolution of the legume family.
