Title       : Modeling and Recognizing Curved Surfaces from Image Outlines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1994  
File        : a9596047

Award Number: 9596047
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32100              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Forsyth daf@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 Recognizing objects from a single view is hard, because their               
              appearance depends crucially on the direction from which they are              
              viewed.  Curved surfaces are particularly subject to this effect.              
              This research concentrates on recognizing curved surfaces from                 
              their outline in a single perspective image, using both                        
              theoretical studies and practical implementations, along two                   
              lines of investigation.  The problem has already been solved for               
              generic algebraic surfaces by the Principal Investigator.  The                 
              result indicates that an image outline contains substantial                    
              amounts of information about an object's shape.  The research                  
              will investigate extending this result to a wider range of                     
              popular surfaces, and will also investigate the practicalities of              
              applying the resulting algorithms.  Recent work by the PI and                  
              colleagues suggests that there is a large range of surface models              
              which are intrinsically easy to recognize.  These results suggest              
              building a surface modeller oriented specifically towards                      
              computer vision applications, where the resulting models would be              
              a fortiori easy to identify from any view.  The research will                  
              investigate theoretical issues involved in constructing such a                 
              modeller, and will implement simple modelling system with these                
              properties.
