Title       : Fourth Karachi Symposium on Protein Structure-Function, Karachi, Pakistan,
               January 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1994  
File        : a9596014

Award Number: 9596014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9415393  Smith   Description:  This regional project provides support for the 
              participation of five U.S. scientists in the fourth international  Symposium
              and Workshop on Protein Structure-Function, planned for  January 1995, Karachi,
              Pakistan.  The U.S. team will be headed by  David Smith, professor of medicinal
              chemistry at Purdue  University.  The Pakistani organizer is Zafar Zaidi of the
              HEJ  Postgraduate Institute of Chemistry at the University of Karachi.   Past
              symposia have achieved high levels of success.  They have    attracted leading
              international protein chemists including Nobel   Laureates and have been
              effective in developing contacts that  often lead to collaborations among
              scientists from over a dozen  countries.  Proceedings from all the symposia
              have been    published.  The six day symposium will be followed by a one week 
              workshop on protein structure elucidation and will provide  substantial
              training for research fellows, members of the  teaching faculty, and students
              from Pakistan and neighboring  countries.     Scope:  This is a significant
              meeting on an important topic in  basic science that has many direct
              applications in health and  agriculture.  These gatherings do much to catalyze
              the   development of biochemistry in Pakistan and South Asia, and they  
              provide a unique training opportunity for budding young  scientists in the
              region.  The host institute has excellent  facilities for research in this area
              of analytical biochemistry.   The Karachi area is well suited due to the
              concentration there of  the pharmaceutical and natural medicines industries.   
                NSF funds will be used to support the U.S. participants and   partial support
              for a few young scientists from neighboring  countries in South Asia.       ***
