Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Labor Force Experiences of Non-College
               Bound Youth in Chicago: The Role of Schools and Neighborhoods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0221153

Award Number: 0221153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  2002  
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6365               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Bidwell cbidwell@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              SES-0221153
PI(s):  Charles Bidwell
	Julia Gwynne
	University of
              Chicago


The Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project investigates the
              role of schools and neighborhoods in shaping early labor force experiences of
              non-college bound youth in Chicago.  Specifically, it proposes that social
              experiences within schools and neighborhoods influence three dimensions of
              labor force participation:  The choice of labor force participation versus
              college attendance, the type of first employment, and the early stages of
              development in an employment career.  The proposal argues that social
              experiences within schools and neighborhoods are composed of two elements, form
              and content.  While content involves any sort of interest, purpose or motive,
              form is the structuring mechanism by which content is experienced.  Within the
              school context attention is focused on the form (degree of differentiation) and
              content (academic vs. vocational) of the curricular program as well as the form
              (frequency, intensity) and content (encouragement of information about college
              vs. labor force) of social interaction with school personnel.  Within the
              neighborhood, the focus is on the form (frequency and intensity) and content
              (encouragement of and information about college vs. labor force) of social
              interaction with local adults.  These two elements of social experiences in
              both neighborhood and school bear directly on the way in which youth make
              decisions about post-secondary opportunities.  

The project makes
              contributions to research on labor force experiences of non-college bound
              youth.  First, it expands the literature on occupational attainment by
              examining mechanisms other than educational attainment that are important in
              facilitating the location of employment.  Second, by simultaneously considering
              the role of both schools and neighborhoods in transition into the labor force,
              this project offers a more complete picture of resources available to youth as
              they negotiate the job search process.

