Title       : IGERT: A Joint Graduate Program in Applied Mathematics and the Earth &
               Environmental Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2002  
File        : a0221041

Award Number: 0221041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2904606            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorenzo M. Polvani polvani@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duong H. Phong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Upmanu Lall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Visbeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Victor H. de la Pena  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Columbia University is establishing a new, multi-departmental graduate program
              in Applied Mathematics and the Earth & Environmental Sciences. The aim of this
              new IGERT Joint Program is to train a new generation of scientists whose level
              of mathematical sophistication will be considerably higher than that of typical
              students currently graduating from earth and environmental science programs
              and, at the same time, whose familiarity with the important issues and major
              open research questions in the earth and environmental sciences will be much
              deeper that what is usually expected of students trained uniquely within
              applied mathematics departments. To achieve this goal, five departments at
              Columbia - Mathematics, Statistics, Applied Physics & Applied Mathematics,
              Earth & Environmental Sciences, and Earth & Environmental Engineering - under
              the coordinating role of the Columbia Earth Institute, will collaboratively
              train graduate students under this new IGERT Joint Program. While students in
              the IGERT Joint Program will be individually admitted by each department, their
              progress will be monitored by a Steering Committee of faculty associated with
              the Joint Program.  In addition to satisfying the requirements of the
              departments into which they are admitted, all students in the Joint Program
              will take a new integrated two-semester sequence in Applied Mathematics
              specifically tailored to issues and problems in the global environmental
              sciences, and will be expected to earn a minimum number of credits in both
              mathematical and earth science courses.  In addition, they will be expected to
              attend a weekly colloquium organized by the Joint Program, give a formal
              presentation of their research results once a year to the faculty and other
              students affiliated with the Joint Program, attend special series of invited
              lectures, assist in the mentoring of undergraduates, and complete a one summer
              internship during their graduate training at a research institution, national
              laboratory, or industrial research center.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being
              made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas
              of science and engineering supported by NSF.

