Title       : Orographic Enhancement of Precipitation in Mid-latitude Baroclinic Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0221843

Award Number: 0221843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $830800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Houze houze@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley F. Smull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to advance understanding of the orographic
              modification of precipitation systems as they pass over major mountain ranges. 
              The study will integrate data from two recent field programs: the Mesoscale
              Alpine Programme (MAP), conducted over the European Alps in 1999, and the
              second phase of the Improvement of Microphysical PaRameterization through
              Observational Verification Experiment (IMPROVE II), conducted over the Oregon
              Cascades in 2001. 

Data in both projects was collected from a variety of
              airborne and ground-based advanced weather radars.  This collection of radars
              was effective at indicating the predominant precipitation mechanisms over the
              windward slopes in both projects.  In MAP, mobile Dopplers provided further
              information in deep valleys hidden from the view of fixed site radars.  In
              IMPROVE II the University of Washington Convair aircraft collected ice particle
              samples aloft, while ground observers collected ice particle samples at the
              crest of the Cascades.

The tentative conceptual model of orographic
              precipitation enhancement inferred from the data collected in MAP suggests that
              coalescence of drops below the 0 degree C level and riming that generates
              graupel, just above the 0 degree C level, are key processes in producing
              particles that fall out quickly on the windward slopes.  This process seems to
              work best in unblocked flow over the terrain, i.e., when the flow is strong and
              weakly stable, so it possesses the energy required to rise directly over the
              barrier.  The process works even better when the flow up the terrain is
              slightly unstable, so that embedded convective cells can form and accelerate
              the coalescence and graupel-forming processes over the first large windward
              peak of terrain.  Preliminary analysis of the new IMPROVE II data set suggests
              that similar processes are at work over the Cascades.

The empirical
              conceptual models will guide the critical evaluation of high resolution
              numerical model runs for the MAP and IMPROVE II storms.  Numerical model output
              provides a database which will be evaluated for consistency with the MAP and
              IMPROVE II empirical models of orographic enhancement.  The numerical models
              also will be run for select cases to obtain finer spatial resolution and more
              details on the microphysical processes taking place in the model.  The radar
              data will provide dynamical constraints on the model results and the data will
              be examined for consistency with the model-simulated microphysical fields. 
              

Improvements to the numerical models will help to advance the forecasting
              of precipitation and runoff in mountainous regions.
