Title       : Primitive Antibodies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0221487

Award Number: 0221487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Marchalonis dianah@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel F. Schluter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to John J. Marchalonis, Ph.D. for studies on
              
"Primitive Antibodies". This project addresses the molecular basis of
              
diversification of the recognition molecules that are essential for the
              
generation of specific immunity. The project focuses upon the immune system
              
of sharks because these are the most primitive vertebrates to share with
              
humans the combinatorial immune response. This is based uniquely upon the
              
recombination of gene segments to generate the variability in antigen
              
receptor molecules present in serum and on blood cells. Sharks, which arose
              
approximately 450 million years ago, like humans have immunoglobulins (also
              
termed antibodies), T-cell receptors (TCRs), major histocompatability
              
antigens (MHC), and recombination activating genes (RAGs) that are required
              
to allow rearrangement of the gene segments making up the antibodies and
              
T-cell receptors. The project will address both conserved and unique
              
features of the combinatorial system of carcharhine sharks to elucidate the
              
molecular underpinning of combinatorial immunity as it is expressed in all
              
vertebrates.

The project includes three major areas of focus: The first is
              the complete 
characterization of the shark RAG locus with emphasis upon its
              evolutionary 
emergence and functional similarities and differences to the
              molecular 
homologs found in mammals and other higher vertebrates. The second
              major 
area of concentration is the characterization of the genes specifying
              the 
alpha/beta and gamma/delta T-cell receptors of carcharhine sharks
              including 
their diversity and gene organization, and the construction of
              recombinant 
single chain TCRs for functional and structural analyses. Because
              of the 
pronounced differences in organization of shark and mammalian antibody
              gene 
segments, it is crucial to determine the arrangement of shark TCR genes.
              
The third aim tests the generality of clonal selection theory by
              
determining whether sharks which have a cassette organization of antibody
              
gene as opposed to translocons of higher vertebrates show clonal
              
restriction in their antibody forming lymphocytes. These studies are
              
directed towards applying molecular and protein chemical technologies to
              
obtain precise answers to fundamental problems of the system as it obtains
              
in all vertebrates, with implications for defense against invading
              
pathogens, cancers and immunological dysfunction in autoimmunity.



