Title       : IGERT: Graduate Training Program in Interactive Digital Multimedia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0221713

Award Number: 0221713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2909596            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bangalore S. Manjunath manj@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Turk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen T. Pope  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Legrady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT award will support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate
              training program of education and research at UCSB in the broad field of
              interactive digital multimedia. The objective of the program is to train
              students in a truly interdisciplinary approach to digital multimedia, while
              preparing them for careers in industry, research, and education. The
              convergence of digital media, computing, and communication has created new and
              exciting opportunities in science, engineering, and the arts. The goal of this
              program is to integrate multiple, diverse approaches to the creation, analysis,
              deployment, and utilization of digital media within a coherent educational
              framework of training and research. This multidisciplinary endeavor
              necessitates collaboration between students and faculty from a broad spectrum
              of backgrounds and perspectives, including computer science, electrical and
              computer engineering, psychology, geography, design, composition, and art.
              Through innovative and interdepartmental courses and seminars, opportunities
              for internships in industry, and guidance by faculty from several departments,
              students will gain a unique perspective on interactive multimedia, including
              the creation, encoding, and distribution of multimedia content, as well as
              applications of multimedia systems in education, communication, and arts and
              entertainment. Areas of focus for research and education include image, video,
              and audio processing, networking, human-computer interaction, graphics and
              visualization, visual arts, interactive media, and computer music. The graduate
              training program will emphasize a broad background in several of these areas,
              while research projects, interactive installations and artistic performances
              will bring together small, interdisciplinary teams of researchers with diverse
              expertise. The IGERT-supported program will leverage existing strengths at UCSB
              in related areas and will involve the participation of several departments. The
              program will complement the UCSB Media Arts and Technology Program, a
              masters-level graduate program, by enabling doctoral students from several
              departments to build upon the current foundation it provides.

IGERT is an
              NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
              are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
              the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

