Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Internationalization of Professional
               Business Services: Impetus or Impediment to the Development of Advertising
               Services in Southeast Asia?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0221464

Award Number: 0221464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: AnnaLee Saxenian anno@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A few foreign transnational corporations (TNCs) dominate professional business
              services (advertising, accounting, legal, and management consulting activities)
              worldwide.  An analysis of location patterns of branch offices of these global
              producers finds that Asia Pacific has the highest concentration of global
              business service centers of all developing regions, with Southeast Asian cities
              emerging as important third tier hubs in the global business service network. 
              Existing literature on the internationalization of business services views
              these peripheral nodes of global networks as passive recipients of foreign
              investment.  Yet in many business services in Southeast Asia, locally generated
              dynamics appear to be emerging which indicate that the region is shifting from
              being a passive recipient of foreign investment, to a generator of local
              business service activity and a source of competitive advantage for TNCs.  The
              main goal of this doctoral dissertation research project is to examine foreign
              direct investment in professional business services -- the form it takes, its
              determinants and its impacts on developing metropolitan economies of Southeast
              Asia.  A secondary goal of the research is to determine implications for public
              policy.  This research addresses current theoretical biases based on a case
              study of the Southeast Asian advertising and marketing industry.  The analysis
              has two components:  an in-depth case study of the industry's development in a
              single city, Bangkok, to develop and refine the theoretical framework, and a
              cross-national comparative study of the development trajectories of a single
              TNC firm operating in Bangkok, Manila, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore.  The TNC
              acts as a proxy to control for variation in firm organization, strategies,
              ownership and services, thus regional variations in the TNC's strategy, role,
              and interaction with other locally based firms will indicate differences in
              country-specific factors.  Hypotheses are tested using a mixed research
              approach that combines in-depth, semi-structured interviews with firms and key
              informants, archival research of organizational histories and government
              policies, and statistical analysis of the service economy and professional
              business services industries in each city.  Anticipated findings from this
              research are that: (1) sources of firm competitive advantage increasingly
              originate locally, in the branch firm and through linkages with other local
              agencies, suppliers, and supporting institutions; and (2) TNC investment is
              having a stimulating, rather than stifling, effect on the development of local
              factors of production in this industry.

This project research will
              contribute to a refinement and deepening of knowledge in three key theoretical
              areas of regional development studies:  international producer services theory,
              East Asian development theory, and the theory of international networks of
              production clusters.  In particular, the research will provide insights into
              urban economic development in Southeast Asia through enhanced understanding of
              the impacts of internationalization and emerging local dynamics in
              foreign-dominated global business service industries.  The findings will also
              inform developing countries about the development of policy frameworks and
              initiatives aimed at promoting the knowledge economy and enhancing innovation
              and productivity through professional business services.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

