Title       : IGERT: Multidisciplinary Integration of High Performance Computing in Ph. D.
               Programs in Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0221680

Award Number: 0221680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2677083            (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudio Rebbi rebbi@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David F. Coker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roscoe C. Giles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael C. Caramanis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Grossberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Science and technology of the twenty first century will be dominated by
              computing. The training of well prepared computational scientists and engineers
              demands an approach that transcends the strictures of the standard academic
              curriculum. This IGERT project will provide students who follow
              discipline-specific studies with a multidisciplinary program of training in
              computational science that will maximize their exposure to the
              cross-disciplinary nature of computational science and to its realm of
              industrial applications. This program will build a three-way interface between
              graduate students, the academic faculty training them, and industrial,
              government, and academic research laboratories who may ultimately be their
              employers. It will offer training opportunities through a program of visits and
              internships at such institutions.  As the students proceed towards a Ph.D.
              within their chosen field, they will also earn a certificate in computational
              science in recognition of the special expertise that they have developed. The
              students will have access to state-of-the-art computational facilities at the
              University and will participate in multidisciplinary seminars, workshops and
              regular meetings with faculty and students in this program.  They will also
              attend specialized lectures on ethics and issues of law that are relevant for
              scientists in the computational field. Special efforts will be made to enhance
              the participation of students from groups underrepresented in the sciences. The
              IGERT project will have the merit of providing a large number of doctoral
              students pursuing disciplinary research with broad education on the methods and
              scope of application of computational science, through the teamwork of faculty
              from many different departments. The results of this interdisciplinary project
              will be widely disseminated through seminars, workshops and web publishing and
              thus it will have the broad impact of establishing a model for training in
              computational science students who are pursuing education in a variety of
              disciplinary fields.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

