Title       : Collaborative Research: Production and Dynamics of DMSP and Related Compounds in
               Response to Oxidative Stress in Marine Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0221106

Award Number: 0221106
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276525             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Kieber djkieber@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Col Env Sci&Forestry
	      
	      Syracuse, NY  13210    315/470-6500

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Oxidative stress is a pervasive problem for oxygen-evolving plants, and is
              likely to be especially important for marine phytoplankton growing in
              nutrient-impoverished waters with high fluxes of visible and ultraviolet (UV)
              solar radiation.  Very little is known about how marine algae cope with
              oxidative stress.  In this study, a new hypothesis is presented that
              dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP) is a unique and very important antioxidant in
              the ocean that serves as a primary defense in combatting and alleviating
              oxidative stress.  Its role as an antioxidant is likely because DMSP is the
              dominant cellular sulfur compound in, and a major organic constituent of many
              marine algae worldwide.  Furthermore, preliminary results indicate that DMSP
              and its enzymatic lysis product, DMS are highly effective scavengers of toxic
              reactive oxygen species (e.g., hydroxyl radicals) in cells, removing these
              species faster, in some cases, than the well documented antioxidants, ascorbic
              acid and glutathione.  DMSP and DMS oxidation yield dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO),
              which is also an effective oxidant scavenger as is acrylate, the other product
              of DMSP lysis.  Together, these related compounds should serve as a
              multifunctional, highly flexible antioxidant system in DMSP-containing algae. 
              To investigate this DMSP antioxidant system, the following related hypotheses
              are being tested by this research team: 1) Intracellular DMSP concentrations in
              phytoplankton will increase in response to chronic oxidative stress, and will
              decrease in response to acute oxidative stress.  2) Turnover of cellular DMSP
              is induced by oxidative stress, resulting in increased production of putative
              antioxidants.  3) Phytoplankton with high DMSP content and high DMSP lyase
              activity will be more resistant to oxidative stress than phytoplankton with low
              DMSP or low lyase activity.  To test these hypotheses, axenic cultures of
              ecologically-important phytoplankton species and natural seawater populations
              are being exposed to various forms of oxidative stress, including high photon
              fluxes of visible light (400-700 nm) and/or UV radiation (290-400 nm), nutrient
              limitation (Fe and N), and addition of paraquat or copper.  During these
              exposures, changes in cellular DMSP and related compounds will be determined
              along with DMSP lyase activity.  Complementary measurements of other
              antioxidant defense systems (e.g., ascorbate, reduced and oxidized glutathione,
              ascorbate peroxidase, superoxide dismutase) will provide information on how the
              DMSP system varies in relation to these well-established antioxidant defenses. 
              This project will elucidate the mechanisms that control DMSP levels in the
              ocean and its rate of conversion to DMS, which is globally-significant because
              of the important role of DMS in atmospheric chemistry and, possibly, climate. 
              If the DMSP antioxidant hypothesis is correct, then an important, hitherto
              unknown, cellular function of DMSP will have been identified.  Understanding
              the cellular physiology of DMSP and its relationship to other poorly-understood
              algal antioxidant systems will increase our understanding of the factors that
              control the distribution of ecologically-important phytoplankton in the sea.
              This study will also result in the interdisciplinary training of advanced
              undergraduate and graduate students in algal physiological ecology and
              oceanography.  The PIs and students will disseminate results of this study
              through scholarly and public presentations, scientific journals, popular
              articles and freely-accessible web pages.         
