Title       : IGERT: Program for Interdisciplinary Mathematics, Ecology, and Statistics
               (PRIMES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0221595

Award Number: 0221595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2849765            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Davis rdavis@stat.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald J. Estep  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rick Miranda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              N. Thompson Hobbs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Ecological research is a traditional strength within many departments and
              colleges at Colorado State University. Nearby state and federal agencies also
              interact with CSU faculty to monitor and model ecological resources. Much of
              this research activity is interdisciplinary and uses advanced mathematical and
              statistical tools. But, due to disciplinary boundaries in our graduate
              programs, neither ecology students with interests in quantitative methods, nor
              mathematics/statistics students with interests in ecology, are receiving the
              education they need to work on such interdisciplinary research. The vision of
              PRIMES is to break down these boundaries through early and uninterrupted
              exposure to interdisciplinary research projects, via a course called Team
              Research in Ecology (TREE). Students will obtain the tools they need to work
              effectively in TREE through reciprocal course offerings among the graduate
              programs, through modular courses on Advanced Quantitative Methods in Ecology
              (AQME), and through colloquia, workshops, and conferences. Teaching
              assistantships, research assistantships, and internships with nearby state and
              federal agencies will reinforce the interdisciplinary training of PRIMES and
              leverage IGERT fellowships. Existing projects in quantitative ecology at CSU
              will shape the curriculum of PRIMES, drive the interdisciplinary collaborations
              among faculty members and students, and lead to topics for Ph.D. theses.
              Projects will be organized into five Research Focus Groups to allow sharing of
              resources and ideas on related problems: Ecology of Managed Ecosystems, Ecology
              of Global Change, Dynamics of Introduced Disease, Aquatic Resources Modeling,
              and Evolution in Structured Populations. The PRIMES Council, with
              representatives from Biology, Mathematics, Statistics, and other participating
              departments, as well as an external agency, will guide the program toward the
              goal of making PRIMES a permanent fixture in graduate education at CSU.
              

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating
              U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and
              the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands
              of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in
              graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education
              and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that
              collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

