Title       : IGERT: Molecular Engineering of Microdevices (MEMD)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0221678

Award Number: 0221678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2910000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ly James Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
              Prabir K. Dutta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mauro Ferrari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Giorgio Rizzoni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hendrik Verweij  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In recent years the demand has been growing rapidly for non-silicon miniature
              devices with highly-precise features. At the same time, commercialization of
              these devices is hindered by a great need for novel molecular engineering and
              miniaturization techniques. Progress will require highly interdisciplinary
              collaboration between engineers, chemists, physicists, and biologists. Four
              centers at OSU have organized an inter-center IGERT program uniting the broad
              range of expertise necessary to foster new manufacturing technologies. These
              technologies will be achieved by integrating molecular self-assembly with
              micro/nano-manufacturing of polymeric and ceramic materials. A unifying
              molecular engineering protocol will be developed and applyed to the design,
              fabrication, and testing of devices in two major areas:  (a) polymer- and
              ceramic-based biomedical devices (i.e. BioMEMS), and (b) high performance
              ceramic sensors, sensor arrays, and membranes for transportation and
              environmental applications. Although a few inter-center research projects have
              been conducted among these four centers, they are isolated cases having limited
              scope. The technical breadth and complexity of this integration, to our
              knowledge, has not been previously attempted on this scale. A natural outgrowth
              will be the development of a broad-based, cross-center educational program. The
              vision is to integrate the latest research developments into a practical
              student curriculum, and to impart to doctoral students the necessary
              multidisciplinary skills and global awareness needed to catalyze broader
              impacts on society. The key elements of the inter-center education and training
              program include four to five new MEMD courses (multipurpose seminar course,
              overview course, sensor technology, nanotechnology and/or membrane science and
              technology); an interdisciplinary curriculum; dedicated research at two or more
              centers; industry internships and internships at national laboratories; travel
              to national and international meetings; tours and visits to research labs in
              the U.S. and abroad; and a web-based dissemination plan. The recruitment and
              retention of minorities and women will be emphasized in the award of thirty
              IGERT-MEMD fellowships. Each institution will commit to providing the necessary
              infrastructure, including appropriate laboratory and/or clean room and common
              space and sharing of equipment, in support of an external user
              community.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of
              educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary
              backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
              career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
              change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that
              collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.


