Title       : Environmental Molecular Science Institute: Actinides and Heavy Metals in the
               Environment - The Formation, Stability, and Impact of Nano- and Micro-Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0221966

Award Number: 0221966
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachael G. Craig                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy B. Fein fein.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Burns  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia A. Maurice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1629,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of the Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI)
              centered at the Univesity of Notre Dame will be to provide a quantitative,
              mechanistic, molecular-scale understanding of the factors affecting the
              formation, stability, and impact of nano- and micro-particles.  This EMSI has
              strong links with collaborators at several National Laboratories (Argonne, Oak
              Ridge, Sandia) and in industry (DuPont Engineering Technologies).  Research
              conducted at the Instititue will provide a molecular-scale understanding of
              heavy-metal (Cd, Cu, Pb) and actinide (U, Np) interactions with nano- and
              micro-particles in the environment. The scientific activities of the Institute
              will integrate traditional macroscopic and microscopic techniques with
              state-of-the-art molecular-scale approaches such as x-ray absorption
              spectroscopy, atomic force microscopy, and molecular dynamics modeling. 
              Concurrent with these scientific activities, the Institute will serve as a
              focus for a range of innovative educational programs with the purpose being: 1)
              to disseminate state-of-the-art understanding of environmental chemistry to an
              audience outside of the scientific community; 2) to provide broad,
              interdisciplinary educational experiences to a large number of undergraduate
              and graduate environmental molecular science students, and 3) to train students
              from traditionally underrepresented groups in environmental molecular science. 
              We will set up a M.Sc. program specifically aimed at talented undergraduate
              students from underrepresented groups whose pre-requisites fall slightly below
              regular admissions standards.  We feel that admission to a M.Sc. program will
              enable a large fraction of these students to blossom, and these successful
              students will then continue on in a Ph.D. program, either at University of
              Notre Dame, or elsewhere. In either case, our Institute will have played a key
              role in increasing the number of underrepresented minorities working at the
              highest levels in environmental molecular science.
