Title       : BE/GEN-EN: Development of Methods Linking Genomic and Ecological Responses in a
               Freshwater Sentinel Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0221837

Award Number: 0221837
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua W. Hamilton Joshua.W.Hamilton@Dartmouth.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carol L. Folt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Celia Y. Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Shaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1689,1693,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Previous studies assessing the impact of environmental stresses on
              ecosystems have typically focused on either the individual or population level.
              However, there is growing awareness that to more fully understand and predict
              environmental impacts on natural systems, one must link biological responses to
              environmental challenges across different levels of biological organization. 
              The overall goal of this study is to integrate the genomic and population-level
              responses of a model sentinel species in aquatic systems (Daphnia pulex) to
              specific environmental stresses by developing and applying genomic tools to
              ecological studies.  

Natural populations of aquatic organisms are known to
              survive and even adapt to sub-lethal metal exposures, but little is known about
              the genomic basis of this response.  Metal exposures typical of those
              encountered in aquatic environments will be studied to characterize the
              physiological, demographic, and adaptive responses of Daphnia in naive and
              metal pre-conditioned populations.  This project has the following specific
              aims: 1) identification and characterization of the expressed genome of D.
              pulex and development of genomic resources for application in ecological
              studies, 2) characterization of the genomic and population-level responses of
              D. pulex to a range of exposure conditions studies using individual metals as
              model stressors, 3) assessment of whether the effects of metal combinations on
              genomic and population level responses combine in a linear or non-linear
              fashion, 4) characterization of genetic and ecological variation in response to
              metals among natural populations of Daphnia.  A strong interdisciplinary team
              of researchers including specialists in ecology, toxicology, genomics,
              evolution, and statistics will conduct this research.  The anticipated benefits
              of this research will be to provide tools for rapid, sensitive and specific
              assessment of environmental effects in natural systems.   


