Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecosystem Commodification Through Commercial
               Wetland Mitigation Banking Practice in the United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0221397

Award Number: 0221397
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11555              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew D. Turner turner@geography.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9186,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Commercial wetland mitigation banking is a market-based environmental policy
              that has developed in the United States since 1992.  The policy allows
              individuals to fulfill the requirements of Section 404 of the Clean Water Act
              by purchasing credits from a wetland bank rather than building their own
              wetland restoration to mitigate their proposed impact to a wetland.  Commercial
              wetland banks are large tracts of restored wetland created by private
              developers in anticipation of credit demand.  The general objectives of this
              doctoral dissertation research project are to clarify the unique problems of
              creating a market for wetlands, conceived of as a bundle of ecosystem services,
              in contrast with the now-common markets for units of individual air or water
              pollutants.  This research will use ecological fieldwork, key informant
              interviews, documentary histories, and spatial analysis to investigate the
              process by which a market in wetland functions has been created and stabilized
              over the past decade.  It will focus on two regions that adopted banking
              practices early, but in sharply contrasting ways:  the state of Minnesota and
              the Chicago District of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.  While wetland
              mitigation banking is a very promising policy tool with a number of
              enthusiastic supporters, both its ecological and economic features are largely
              assumed rather than investigated.  This project will examine these related
              features together.  This project will be both quantitative and qualitative in
              nature  The investigation will be composed of a regional study and an extended
              case study of a single transaction and a single bank in each region.  The
              regional study will describe broadly the development of social networks,
              technologies, landscape functional changes, and business strategies that have
              accompanied the rise of a wetland mitigation banking industry in both the
              Chicago area and in Minnesota.  Documentary research and interview-based work
              will map the social and political networks between regulators, private capital,
              and wetland scientists that have created, spread, and institutionalized the
              conventions of banking.  GIS-based spatial analysis will provide information on
              the structural and functional changes in the wetland landscape of the region. 
              The case study of a single transaction is intended to give practical content to
              the broad outlines sketched by the regional study.  Research activities will
              closely examine the process of "moving" wetland functions from the site of
              impact to the bank site.  Metrics of landscape analysis, hydrologic modeling,
              and fieldwork-based comparison with reference sites will be used to explore the
              physical basis for the creation of "equivalence" between the impact and
              mitigation sites of the transaction.

Results of this research will indicate
              the potential for banking practices to create a stable market for wetland
              functions within the larger trend in United States environmental policy towards
              using market forces to create private interests in public goods such as clean
              air and clean water.  The project will make a timely contribution to a very
              active and ongoing debate about the future of wetlands policy in the United
              States.  Recent years have seen the expansion of "pollution credits trading" to
              a broad range of air and water pollutants, and an expansion across national
              borders as trade agreements guide the expansion of market relations into the
              domain of ecosystem services, which have usually been conceived of as public
              non-market goods.  The current Administration recently reinforced its
              commitment to establishing market-based policy tools as the primary way of
              resolving environmental policy problems.  In general, such policies are a
              departure from the historical trends of environmental management in the United
              States, and their successful implementation requires a thorough understanding
              of the process of creating markets in ecosystem services.  Specifically, the
              results of this study will be of interest to the large population of regulators
              involved in Clean Water Act administration, many of whom have only recently
              encountered banking practices.  Because banking is a complex regulatory
              arrangement that has not yet attracted a great deal of attention from the
              public or from non-profit environmental groups, the results of this study will
              be disseminated among these groups to foster an understanding of the features
              of banking policy.  Furthermore, wetland mitigation banking has received little
              scholarly attention.  This project will be one of the first to examine banking
              using integrated approaches of the social and natural sciences.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

