Title       : Organic Crystal Growth on Flexible Templates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0221586

Award Number: 0221586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guangzhao Mao gzmao@chem1.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1084,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Guangzhao Mao, Wayne State University

"Organic Crystal Growth on Flexible
              Templates"

This project will to explore the possibility of morphological
              control and confinement of organic crystals using polymeric templates. The
              nucleation and crystallization of model organic dyes will be studied on
              two-dimensional (2-D) polyelectrolyte templates, and in three-dimensional (3-D)
              polyelectrolyte shells by atomic force microscopy and other in situ methods.
              The proposed research aims at (1) understanding the effect of polyelectrolytes
              on organic crystallization; and (2) encapsulating organic crystals in
              polyelectrolyte shells.

This research explores the rich interplay between
              the surface structure of polyelectrolytes and the habit of nascent crystals.
              Polyelectrolytes exert templating effect via preconcentration of lattice ions,
              geometric and stereochemical match, specific interactions, and
              adsorption-induced stabilization. Polymeric substrates differ from inorganic
              templates in that they do not show the order and rigidity implicit in the
              epitaxial mechanisms. However natural polymers are known to induce crystals of
              a uniform habit that is different from those grown without the polymers.
              Research in biomineralization has shown that the templating effect of
              polyelectrolytes does not require the same degree of geometric match as the
              inorganic counterparts. Polyelectrolytes may display rich stereochemical
              control because of their many surface conformations. There may exist several
              geometric matches for a given crystal face. Segments protruding into solution
              may stabilize side faces of the nascent crystal. 

Based on the above
              notions, an approach consisting primarily of experiments, but also utilizing
              the Cerius2 program, will be used to study the interfacial structure between
              the polyelectrolyte template and the nascent dye crystal. Initial experiments
              will focus on the crystallization of dyes on 2-D thin films so that the
              kinetics and crystal habit modification can be probed at the molecular scale.
              The kinetic parameters include critical supersaturation, pH, induction time,
              and rate of crystallization. The crystal habit variables include size, shape
              orientation, and correlation to the template structure. In the second stage,
              the study will focus on the dye crystallization inside the polyelectrolyte
              shell. The shell will consist of polyelectrolyte multilayers permeable to small
              polar molecules but not their crystals. In addition to the polyelectrolytes,
              supported phospholipid bilayers will be used as templates because they provide
              intermediate order and flexibility. This project is intended as a
              proof-of-concept study. Future work can go beyond the generic polyelectrolytes
              using polymers with higher architectural definitions such as amphiphilic
              polymers, ionomers, and biopolymers.

This research may have broader impact
              in terms of its relationship to the concept of nano-science and technology
              especially in areas such as materials processing, color displays, information
              storage, nanocomposites, drug encapsulation, and sensors.  For example, the
              encapsulated colloids can be used as tips for micropipettes, as chemical
              sensors to detect pollutants, and as heterogeneous catalysts.

Also, the
              support will allow the P.I. to continue exploring the molecular mechanisms in
              the templated growth of organic with potential applications in encapsulation,
              coatings, and materials processing. It will also help the P.L to establish
              long-term collaboration and exchanges with a foreign research institution: the
              Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interfaces. Some experiments will be
              conducted at the Institute with a number of characterization methods not
              present at the P.I.'s home institution.
 
The planned educational and
              outreach activities include incorporation of research topics into materials
              engineering curricula, global education associated with the World Bridge
              program, mentoring of Detroit high school students in the Science Summer Camp
              program, and training science teachers from local community colleges.

