Title       : BE/CBC: Coupling of Carbon and Water Cycles in a Cold, Dry Ecosystem:
               Integrative Physical, Chemical and Biological Processes and their Controls on
               CO2 Exchange
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0221606

Award Number: 0221606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Welker jwelker@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bernard Hallet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua P. Schimel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald S. Sletten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jace T. Fahnestock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1689,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Welker
0221606

This research effort will quantify the coupling of the carbon
              and water cycles and the interacting physical, chemical and biological (PCB)
              processes that control C exchange between cold, dry terrestrial ecosystems and
              the atmosphere. They are focusing on cold, dry ecosystems because: (1)
              understanding of carbon and water interrelationships and net C exchange is only
              rudimentary for this extreme environment, making it impossible to predict the
              vulnerability of this ecosystem to the expected anthropogenically-exacerbated
              warming; (2) these tundra systems are sufficiently simple allowing the
              quantification of all key components and the development of a system behavior
              conceptual model and (3) the vital role of unfrozen water in this cold, dry
              environment underlies the importance of thresholds and highly nonlinear
              interactions between PCB processes. Results will contribute to the
              understanding and the quantification of global carbon and water cycling, as
              well as to the understanding of extreme habitats on Earth, and possibly on
              other cold, dry planetary bodies.

They will quantify the seasonal changes in
              the coupling of C and water at the leaf and ecosystem scales using in situ
              isotopic approaches, evaluate and quantify how the seasonal patterns of
              physical, chemical and biological processes interact to regulate the dynamics
              of net C exchange, and use a biogeochemical model to investigate net CO2
              exchange and the complex PCB interactions under current climates and a range of
              likely future climate change scenarios and integrate these with arctic and
              global carbon budget estimates. The program will be based on articulating the
              complexities of carbon and water coupling under current conditions, but also on
              the responses of the biological, chemical and physical processes and
              interactions in response to field manipulations of winter and summer
              precipitation and warming. 

They anticipate that the study will result in a
              new insight into the adaptations of plant and microbial life in cold, dry
              ecosystems and the coupled nature of carbon and water in an ecosystem that is
              very different from more temperate ecosystems where most current understanding
              of these processes has originated. Furthermore, they expect to gain a more
              precise understanding of the extent to which this ecosystem responds to future
              climate change and the consequences of these changes for arctic and global C
              budgets. 


