Title       : IGERT: Sensory Knowledge-based Interface Science (SKINS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0221681

Award Number: 0221681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2910000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Shekhar Bhansali Bhansali@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Don Hilbelink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Weller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              N. Ranganathan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Srikanth Hariharan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this IGERT proposal is to develop a fellowship program in the
              multidisciplinary area of Sensory Knowledge-based INterface Science (SKINS).
              This program investigates the dynamic, information-rich molecular structure of
              the ultimate smart interface - human skin - by coupling advances in biomedical
              engineering, microsystems, and information technology. The interdisciplinary
              approach that is required to understand the signal processing, chemical
              synthesis and microfluidics of this unique biological interface forms the
              innovative theme of this proposal. Another compelling aspect of this program is
              to investigate the technology transfer/development cycle through collaboration
              with USF's College of Business Administration, industrial internships and
              international exchange. Research outcomes of this proposal would facilitate the
              understanding and optimizing of the science and technology of MEMS,
              nanotechnology and information processing for cells and tissue studies, and
              contribute towards the goal of transitioning the clinical laboratory into the
              point-of-care. The program will also facilitate the transformation of six
              traditionally strong research programs (from Colleges of Engineering, Medicine,
              Arts and Sciences, Business and Marine Science at USF and the Colleges of
              Engineering and Arts and Sciences at UCF) into a strong multi-disciplinary
              research program with a thematic focus that leverages the advances in bio,
              micro, nano, info and medical technologies. 
 
IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being
              made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas
              of science and engineering supported by NSF.

