Title       : Evolution of Biogenic Exopolymer Concentrations and Interaction with Physical
               Structure in Arctic Sea Ice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0221055

Award Number: 0221055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Krembs ckrembs@apl.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Wettlaufer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Winebrenner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Krembs
0221055

Exopolymeric substances (EPS) comprise a suite of microbially
              produced, structurally diverse polysaccharides that play important roles in
              organismal physiology, aquatic ecology, and the oceanic "biological carbon
              pump". High concentrations of EPS are known to significantly alter the physical
              properties of water containing habitats as diverse as rocks, aquifers and
              sediments.

EPS have long been observed in high concentrations in polar seas.
              They have recently been observed in high concentrations in arctic sea ice with
              an unknown variable, poorly understood balance of microbial production in the
              ice and loss via biochemical conversion and export at the ice-water interface.
              The PIs have also observed a relationship between EPS concentration and sea ice
              salinity, which indicates a fundamentally new and prospectively consequential
              interaction between biological processes and the physical structure of Arctic
              sea ice.

The difficulty of separating temporal from spatial variability in
              ice core observations impedes understanding of environmental forcing of the
              balance of EPS production and losses. Neither can ice core methods illuminate
              the key process of biomass incorporation at the ice-water interface, nor the
              mechanism (and thus environmental sensitivity) underlying the covariation of
              EPS concentration and salinity. Thus effects of changing arctic climate on
              marine ecology, carbon cycling, and sea ice properties via EPS production
              cannot be assessed.

This grant sets out to investigate the environmental
              factors leading to high EPS production and interaction with arctic sea ice
              physical properties using a combination of field observations and theory for
              sea ice growth. The group will collect and analyze fast ice core samples over
              the course of three ice seasons to track the evolution of the autotrophic
              community and the organic material pool. They will apply theory for the growth
              of sea ice to investigate the mechanism(s) of salt retention and biological
              influence on ice physical properties, and develop and apply nondestructive, in
              situ fluorometric measurements of Chlorophyll a in the water column and in the
              ice to observe the key process of biomass incorporation at the ice-water
              interface. This work will build a basis for automated in situ acquisition of
              time series of the dynamic of sea ice biota across the ice-water interface,
              which will be essential for future investigations of large scale polar marine
              ecological changes in response to varying climate.

