Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Terahertz and Infrared Studies of 6.1-Angstrom
               Semiconductor Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2002     
File        : a0221704

Award Number: 0221704
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Junichiro Kono kono@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0221704
Kono

This award supports a two-year collaborative research project
              between Professor Junichiro Kono at Rice University in Houston, Texas and
              Professor Noboru Miura at the University of Tokyo in Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake studies on structures fabricated from the 6 Angstrom III-V
              semiconductors.  Their goal is to increase the fundamental understanding of
              these quantum structures.  They will be undertaking magneto-optic studies in
              very high (up to 600 T) magnetic fields at Rice University and carrying out
              additional experiments utilizing the Free Electron Lasers at the University of
              California at Santa Barbara and at Stanford.  They will also be performing
              ultrahigh field magneto-optics experiments at the Megagauss Laboratory (MGL) in
              Tokyo.  This is a unique high field facility where different types of
              high-field magnets are available.  Finally, theoretical efforts at
              understanding and interpreting the spectroscopy experiments will be provided by
              some of the researchers that have expertise in optical, transport, and
              electronic properties of bulk and quantum confined semiconductors and devices. 
                   

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  The U.S. researchers have
              expertise in optical spectroscopy of semiconductors, THz dynamics of
              semiconductors using free electron lasers and theoretical input.  The Japanese
              researchers have expertise in the growth of magnetic structures, knowledge of
              electronic and optoelectronic devices, growth of mesoscopic structures,
              high-speed electron transport and optical properties and devices.  
It is
              likely that some of the interesting properties/phenomena learned in these
              systems will be used in future semi-conducting devices.  The research will
              offer a good opportunity to join efforts between the two countries.  Through
              the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
              basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.  A
              number of postdocs, graduate students and undergraduate students from the
              participating institutions will also be participating in the research.  The
              researchers plan to distribute the results of their findings through the Web,
              publications and presentations at conferences.  


