Title       : RUI: Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Two Putative Rad51 Paralogs in Drosophila
               melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0221892

Award Number: 0221892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Wrischnik lwrischnik@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Using sequence information gathered from the Drosophila Genome Project and
              Celera/Applied Biosystems, the Drosophila DNA Repair project has identified
              several paralogs of the yeast Rad51 gene.  These paralogs are thought to
              promote Rad51-dependent strand exchange during the process of homologous
              recombinational repair (HRR) of DNA damage in cells.  An analysis of hamster
              cell mutations, coupled with targeted knockout experiments in chicken cells,
              has shown that these genes play an important role in providing resistance to
              ionizing radiation and chemical mutagens.  The focus of this research project
              is the study of DmRad51D and DmXRCC2 and their role in mitotic homologous
              recombination repair in fruit flies.  The long-term goals include the use of
              genetic screens to identify other genes that interact with DmRad51D and DmXRCC2
              in the process of HRR.  The objectives of the research include 1) confirming
              the functional role of these putative D. melanogaster Rad51 paralogs by
              assaying functional knockouts in Drosophila culture cells, 2) examining the
              protein-protein interactions among these genes, 3) examining the expression
              pattern of these genes in flies, and 4) using P-element excision to generate
              loss of function mutations in the DmXRCC2 gene.
	DNA contains the instructions
              that allow cells to function correctly.  However, DNA is constantly damaged by
              chemicals in cells and by radiation such as UV or gamma rays.  Cells with
              damaged DNA do not always work properly and aberrations can result.  A large
              group of genes repairs damaged DNA.  This project focuses on the roles of two
              related genes in DNA repair.  While scientists have some understanding of how
              these genes work in the test tube or in single cells, they still do not know
              much about how they work in a whole organism.  This project will use molecular
              and genetic tools to study the role of these DNA repair genes in the fruit fly,
              where the activity of these genes can be studied in the entire animal.  Almost
              all of the genes that fruit flies use during growth and development play an
              important role in all animals.  This project will not only use the fruit fly to
              explore questions that are inherently interesting, but will also help to
              elucidate the function of related genes in other organisms, including humans.

