Title       : Evolutionary Genetics and the Ecology of Speciation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0221262

Award Number: 0221262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Funk daniel.j.funk@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Why are there so many animal species? Why are so many species ecologically
              specialized, using a narrow range of resources and habitats?  Biologists have
              long suspected that ecological specialization and species formation (=
              speciation) are causally connected. However, empirical tests of "ecological
              speciation" models are extremely rare.  This project evaluates populations of
              Neochlamisus bebbianae leaf beetles that are associated with different tree
              species (host plants) in eastern North America.  Specifically, it
              experimentally quantifies the ability of beetle populations associated with
              different tree species to use each other's host plants and their willingness to
              mate with each other, and it evaluates patterns of genetic exchange among these
              populations by collecting DNA sequences and protein polymorphism data.  These
              data are integrated and analyzed at the individual and population levels to
              test a variety of hypotheses on the diverse genetic and environmental
              mechanisms by which ecological divergence may drive speciation and biological
              diversification.  

Such investigations on speciation ecology are rare yet
              critical for understanding the origins of Earth's tremendous biodiversity. 
              Because many herbivorous insects (including some Neochlamisus species) are also
              economic pests, understanding the factors that determine which plants an insect
              uses, how plants are used, and how new herbivorous insect populations and
              species form is of applied as well as academic importance.  Ecological
              principles underlying insect-plant relationships are increasingly being used to
              develop agricultural strategies.  The current proposal will provide insights
              into these principles as well as their consequences for speciation.

