Title       : An Investigation of Impurities in Greenland Ice Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0221120

Award Number: 0221120
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121607             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Baker ian.baker@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Baker                                                      
0221120

This
              proposal will be jointly funded by the Arctic Natural Sciences Program and
              Antarctic Glaciology Program.  Several Greenland and Antarctic ice cores have
              revealed considerable information about the concentration and depth
              distribution of particles, trace gases and impurities. In order to accurately
              model phenomena such as diffusion and grain growth, and the electrical and
              mechanical properties of natural polycrystalline ice, including the impacts of
              temperature changes, it is necessary to know the concentrations of these
              impurities and their microstructural location.   For example, understanding if
              the impurities are in the grain boundaries, triple junctions, or the lattice
              will enable the electrical conductivity to be modeled accurately with a clear
              physical basis. Thus far, the microstructural location of impurities in natural
              ice has received little attention.  Recently, the Principal Investigator
              developed a new technique, using a low-vacuum scanning electron microscope,
              energy-dispersive x-ray microanalysis, a cold stage and controlled sublimation,
              to determine the microstructural location of impurities in polycrystalline ice.
               Preliminary work on ice cores from the Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2)
              showed that sodium chloride was located in the grain boundaries while most of
              the sulfate was in the lattice.  Other impurities such as magnesium, calcium,
              aluminum, potassium, and silicon, were occasionally observed in either
              location. In contrast, examinations of ice core specimens from both Byrd
              Station and Vostok Station, Antarctica do not have sodium chloride at the grain
              boundaries, although magnesium sulfate has sometimes been observed there. The
              purpose of the research is to apply this novel technique to determine how the
              microstructural location of impurities changes with depth/age and impurity
              content in ice cores from three sites (Dye 3, Camp Century and GISP2) in the
              Greenland ice sheet and three sites in Antarctica (Siple Dome, Vostok and
              Taylor Dome).  Comparison between the different sites is important because they
              are in different locations,  at different elevations, have different snow
              accumulation rates, and are at different temperatures. Electrical conductivity
              measurements and simple mechanical tests will also be performed on specific
              grain boundaries from the cores prior to their microstructural characterization
              in the scanning electron microscope.

