Title       : Creation of National Forum for Synergistic Program Development in Smart
               Structures and Sensor Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0221484

Award Number: 0221484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rahmatallah A. Shoureshi rshoures@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fu-Kuo Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darryll J. Pines  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Sensing Systems is an emerging topic of national and international interest in a
              variety of fields from living systems, e.g. biological, to non-living, e.g.
              engineered systems, to energy systems and infrastructures.  Convergence of
              sensor technologies, communications, and computing has the potential to
              overcome barriers of time, scale, materials and environment.  The scope of this
              program development in sensor technology encompasses the needs, the current and
              emerging technologies, and efficacious partnerships required to develop and
              implement future sensing systems.

The main objective of this proposal is to
              create national forums for the development of R&D programs in smart structures
              and sensor technologies. Through a series of strategically crafted forum
              activities industry in sensors and devices and users community can be pulled
              together behind NSF's program aimed at advancing the emerging technologies
              expanding the commercial products and markets, and broadening the applications
              of advanced sensors and smart structures. These forums include a series of
              strategic programs in panel discussions, special interest topics, seminars,
              workshops, exhibitions, demonstrations, and projects that will be primarily
              held in conjunction with major conferences that address 'state-of-the-art'
              research, education and development projects in the areas of smart structures
              and sensor technologies.  Such conferences include the Smart Structures and
              Materials with SPIE (The International Society for Optical Engineering), ASCE
              (American Society of Civil Engineers) and ASME (American Society of Mechanical
              Engineers) annual meetings, AIAA (American Institute of Aeronautics and
              Astronautics) Adaptive Structures Forum, Modal Analysis, etc.  As anticipated,
              the state-of-the-art technology and the state of the practices in these
              emerging disciplines will also be rapidly advancing.  Thus, this three-year
              effort will update the research community about these technological
              advances.

These forums will also focus on educational needs, curriculum
              modifications, laboratory developments and innovative pedagogy at both the
              undergraduate and graduate levels in the area of sensor technology and smart
              structures.


