Title       : SGER: Holocene and Modern Climate Change in the High Arctic: Evaluating the
               Feasibility of Running an REU site on Svalbard.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0221199

Award Number: 0221199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Al Werner awerner@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross D. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Retelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Brigham-Grette  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0221199
Werner

This recommendation for an award is being made as a Small
              Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER).  This is a collaborative proposal among
              Principal Investigators at the Universities of Massachusetts and Illinois at
              Chicago, Bates College, and Mt. Holyoke College.  The Principal Investigators
              will determine the feasibility of establishing an Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates (REU) Site in Svalbard that focuses on studying modern physical
              processes and proxy records of Holocene environmental change in glacial,
              lacustrine, fjord, and near shore marine environments.  Svalbard is an
              important location for understanding climate and geophysical feedbacks on
              global scales where, in the 20th century, there have been profound reductions
              in sea ice and retreating glacier margins associated with atmospheric warming.
              Proxy records indicate that Svalbard experienced significant climatic
              fluctuations during the Late Holocene, culminating with the Little Ice Age at
              the end of the 19th century.  This area should offer excellent opportunities
              for marine and terrestrial paleoenvironmental research to understand the
              ocean/atmosphere system on a variety of spatial and temporal timescales due to
              its excellent record of Late Holocene climate.  There are currently no REU
              Sites in the Arctic that focus on Late Holocene environmental change. The
              Principal Investigators anticipate that students will participate in modules or
              projects at several sites and that the projects undertaken will become senior
              thesis projects during the subsequent academic year.  They will conduct an
              annual symposium where the students will present their research results. An
              important goal is to inspire a diverse group of undergraduate students
              (especially women, underrepresented minorities, and if possible, persons with
              disabilities) to the rewards and challenges of conducting climate change
              research in the Arctic. 

