Title       : BE/CBC: Geomicrobiological Interactions and Carbon Flow in Extreme Thermal
               Springs: Kamchatka, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0221905

Award Number: 0221905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30378              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherry L. Cady cadys@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Juergen Wiegel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0221905
Cady

A grant has been awarded to analyze the structural and chemical
              fidelity of biocomplexity indicators preserved in siliceous hydrothermal
              deposits in Yellowstone National Park, USA.  Biocomplexity indicators
              characteristic of thermophilic microbes in ancient hydrothermal mineral
              deposits include organic and inorganic chemical fossils (e.g., carbon and
              sulfur isotopes, biominerals, trace element anomalies), carbonaceous
              microfossils, and microbially influenced sedimentary structures (stromatolites,
              microbialites, biofabrics). The structural and chemical fidelity of these
              biocomplexity indicators depend on the size of carbon reservoirs available to
              the microbes. This work is significant in that biocomplexity information
              gleaned from ancient siliceous hydrothermal deposits will provide details
              regarding the earliest life on Earth. This study provides a framework for
              analyzing surficial and subsurface hydrothermal silica deposits in Uzon
              Caldera, Kamchatka, Russia.

The analysis of biocomplexity indicators in
              Yellowstone hot springs provides a means to study the preservation of Bacteria
              in silica deposits. The dataset acquired during this one-year study also
              establishes a baseline for interpreting how biocomplexity information
              indicative of mixed Bacterial and Archaeal thermophilic communities is
              preserved in the siliceous hydrothermal deposits of Uzon Caldera. Molecular
              phylogenetic analysis suggests that high-temperature microbial communities
              comprised of Bacteria and Archaea are more appropriate homologs for ancient
              hydrothermal ecosystems. By quantifying how carbon cycles through the various
              subsystems (fluids and gases, microbial communities, and mineral deposits) of
              active silica-depositing hot springs, this research addresses one of the
              central challenges of environmental research: understanding how the physical,
              chemical, geological, hydrological and biological processes that comprise the
              Earth's natural systems are functionally interrelated.


