Title       : Evaluating the Last Glacial Maximum Ice-Sheet Extent in the Northen Kara Sea and
               its Effect on the Siberian River Drainage.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0221468

Award Number: 0221468
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345762             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Polyak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Polyak
0221468

The Principal Investigator will investigate the stratigraphy
              and morphology of Quaternary deposits in the northern part of the Kara Sea in
              order to delineate the ice-sheet limits at the Eurasian Arctic margin during
              the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM).  This will test whether voluminous West
              Siberian rivers were dammed by the ice on the Kara Sea continental shelf and
              thus, prevented from discharging into the Arctic Ocean.

He will conduct a
              study based on seismic-reflection data, including sparker, subbottom sonar and
              sidescan sonar records and sediment cores collected from the northern Kara Sea.
               A pre-evaluation of these data reveals a complex system of glacigenic
              deposits, riverine networks, extended on the shelf during low sea level and
              proglacial/prodeltaic basins.  A detailed investigation of these data,
              preferably supplemented by additional transects to be run in 2003, and their
              comparison with glacial-geological results from adjacent land areas will allow
              them to answer whether the Barents-Kara ice sheet expanded across the entire
              northern Kara Sea during the LGM.

This study will involve processing and
              interpretation of seismic-reflection records, construction of detailed digital
              bathymetric and seismo-stratigraphic models and determination of age and
              depositional environments of sediment-core material. The resulting products
              will include stratigraphically-controlled, three-dimensional terrain models or
              morainic deposits, adjacent depositional basins, and major paleo-river
              channels.  Sidescan data will provide additional information on seafloor
              texture.  These results will provide necessary boundary conditions for modeling
              the paleohydrology of the Eurasian Arctic for the last glacial cycle. 
              Generated data on the configuration of the ice-sheet margin and the
              distribution of glacigenic erosional and sedimentary features will help
              understand the patterns of glacial development in northern Eurasia and the
              potential role of ice shelves in the Arctic Ocean.  In addition, generated
              bathymetric grid models will improve the international bathymetric data base
              for the Arctic.

