Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fission and Fusion: Amerindian Environmental
               Politics and Resource Justice in Guyana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2002      
File        : a0221246

Award Number: 0221246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia J. Carr cjcarr@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research project will utilize a political ecology
              framework to investigate the relationship between domestic racial conflicts,
              industrial and conservation globalization, and Amerindian political
              differentiation in Guyana.  New mining, timber, and conservation development
              pressures are the basis for multiple legal and political actions of Amerindian
              organizations.  In contrast to unified federations and ethnic based politics,
              however, the panoply of resource conflicts in Guyana has not catalyzed
              political unity among Amerindians thus far.  The richness in this movement's
              diversification provokes a reconsideration of important meta-questions in
              debates of human and environmental change:  What is the relationship between
              land and ethnicity?  How do histories of environmental uncertainty affect the
              modes of social movements?  What is the connection between environmental
              changes and political space that restricts ethnic discourses?  Has the practice
              of development and conservation become more accountable to indigenous
              communities?   In pursuit of the idea that different community histories of
              economic security and resource access since liberalization are the primary
              variables affecting political activity and organization, fieldwork will be
              conducted in the capital of Georgetown and two Amerindian regions in the
              interior.  A blend of qualitative research methods drawing on archival
              documents, interviews, participant observation, and legal case analysis will be
              employed.  The research findings will illuminate complex community associations
              that intersect contours of ethnic boundaries within the Amerindian movement of
              Guyana, perhaps reflecting more critical alliances based on specific histories
              of ecological change and economic security.  

This doctoral dissertation
              research will engage a variety of literature, including studies in political
              ecology, accountability in international development, the political economy of
              the Caribbean, and social movements of indigenous peoples and other
              marginalized groups.  This research most distinguishes itself, however, from
              those cases and studies that collapse environmental crises with homogeneous
              ethnic politics.  The research will reveal some general constraints and
              opportunities of alternative indigenous political strategies and approaches to
              survival, potentially illuminating unusual tactics for engaging the
              development-conservation nexus.  It will also be a challenging discourse to
              dominant resource management agencies, international NGOs, and development
              institutions.  As such, this research on the context of Amerindian politics in
              Guyana will also inform other marginal groups experiencing similar ecological,
              social, and economic marginalization in other countries.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

