Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Credentials and Markets: An Inquiry into the
               Structure of Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0221390

Award Number: 0221390
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4480               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles E. Bidwell cbidwell@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              ES-0221390
Charles Bidwell
Robert Petrin
University of Chicago


This
              Doctoral Dissertation Improvement project examines ways in which post-secondary
              educational institutions (PSEIs) contribute to stratification of technical
              personnel in the contemporary American economy.  Among the specific questions
              it seeks to address are: (1) do PSEIs that science and engineering graduates
              attend have pervasive effects on subsequent occupational outcomes, and  (2)
              does the functional differentiation among science and engineering graduates
              reflect differences in their social backgrounds and the regional clustering of
              technologies and industries.  In order to shed light on these questions this
              research will develop a framework for embedding post secondary educational
              institutions in labor market analyses by providing a description of labor
              markets and career structures segmented by relations between PSEIs and
              regions.

Several post-industrial trends have led to the re-evaluation of
              structuralist concepts from economics and sociology and contributed to a
              resurgent interest in theories of labor market segmentation.  The role of
              regions and education in science and engineering suggests that PSEIs might play
              a role in structuring labor markets.  Indeed, prior research on science and
              engineering has found that rewards in technical subsystems are often products
              of institutions' positions in networks of information and resource exchanges. 
              Therefore, in the proposed research the structure of science and engineering
              practice is posited as manifest, at the individual-level, in the distribution
              of individuals from various social backgrounds and with various educational
              credentials across fields and functional roles in the economy.  At the college
              and university-level, the structure of practice is believed to be manifest in
              enduring relationships between PSEIs and other key actors in their environments
              which shape the opportunities available to graduates over the course of their
              careers.

The primary data for this research will be drawn from selected
              national data on college graduates collected by the Nations Science Foundation
              (i.e., Scientists and Engineers Statistical Data System and Survey of Earned
              Doctorates).  These data will be matched to a number of other sources to
              generate a composite data set linking science and engineering graduates to
              relevant information on the PSEIs they attended, as well as economic data on
              regional and sectoral conditions believed to be correlated with labor market
              processes.  Since employer characteristics play important roles in determining
              returns to education, it will be necessary to collect and include these types
              of supplementary data in analysis, as well as data on PSEIs' relationships with
              key actors in their environments.  Analysis will consist of two major phases. 
              The first will provide a description of PSEIs' positions in labor markets.  The
              second will examine individuals' functional roles in the economy as correlates
              of their socioeconomic background and characteristics of their degree granting
              institutions.  Career trajectories will be similarly analyzed using appropriate
              methods for multicohort data.


