Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Global Climate Change: Risk Perceptions
               and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0221896

Award Number: 0221896
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11414              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Slovic   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the roles of affective imagery and
              cultural
worldviews in risk perception, decision-making and behavior, using
              global
climate change as a case study. Past research has focused on the role
              of
cognitive factors like knowledge, mental models and general
              environmental
beliefs in risk perceptions of climate change. Recent research,
              however, has
also begun to focus on the role of affective factors. This
              project will
develop and test affective image analysis as an innovative method
              to study
public risk perceptions along both cognitive and affective
              dimensions.
Additionally, cultural theorists argue that cultural worldviews
              are also
important factors and need to be included as explanatory variables.
              This
project will operationalize and test the predictions of cultural
              theory.
Finally, many researchers assume that risk perceptions and
              behaviors
correlate, yet little focused research has been done. This research
              will
test this assumption, using climate change as a case study.

This
              project also addresses several applied questions: Does the American
public
              perceive global climate change as a serious risk? What specifically
do they
              fear about it? Do these risk perceptions translate into personal
actions
              and/or support for mitigation policies?  This research will
contribute to the
              continuing discussion on global climate change, as
scientists and policymakers
              attempt to find scientifically appropriate and
publicly acceptable solutions
              to this global problem.
