Title       : Mesoscale Variability and Processes in an Eddy-Resolving Global POP Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0221781

Award Number: 0221781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Theresa Paluszkiewicz                   
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391168             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie L. McClean mcclean@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    831/656-2099

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mesoscale Variability and Processes in an Eddy-Resolving Global POP
              Simulation
Julie McClean
NPS

    A high-resolution global configuration of
              the Parallel Ocean Program (POP) model will be analyzed to determine the
              mescoscale transfer of properties between basins, hemispheres, and gyres with
              the goal of identifying the role of these fluctuations with thermohaline
              properties.  Global eddy variability will be quantified by calculating energy
              levels and intrinsic length scales (Eularian and Lagrangian) to allow
              comparison with global or near-global coverage (drifters, altimetry, and
              floats). Meridional heat transports, their components, and divergence and time
              variability will be calculated. Particular emphasis will be placed on eddy heat
              transports.  The western boundary current and tropics will be regions of
              interest for the analysis of the characteristics, generation and dissipation
              mechanisms, and dynamics and property fluxes associated with mesoscale eddies. 
              The studies will be coordinated with those of the Kuroshio Extension System
              Study (KESS).  Mixing rates along isopycnals will be computed from the model
              eddy and dispersion statistics and then will be compared with rates obtained
              from the Southern Ocean Floats on Isopycnal Experiment (SOFIE).  A web-based
              autonomous extraction system will be set up to disseminate subsets of model
              output to help facilitate collaborations and community use.


