Title       : Linking Bioturbation and Sensory Biology: Chemoreception Mechanisms in
               Deposit-Feeding Polychaetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0221229

Award Number: 0221229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sara M. Lindsay slindsay@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Rawson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Soft-sediment benthic habitats are ubiquitous in the marine environment and
              typically
feature macrofaunal assemblages that include large numbers of
              deposit-feeding invertebrates
such as polychaetes, bivalves, gastropods,
              crustaceans, holothurians, and hemichordates. Via
their feeding, modulated in
              part by chemoreception, these organisms have profound effects on
the ecology,
              biology, geology, and chemistry of their habitats. Very little is known,
              however,
concerning the physiology and molecular biology of chemoreception in
              deposit feeders. 
	This research is a comprehensive investigation of the
              sensory mechanisms coordinating
chemoreception in deposit feeding spionid
              polychaetes. It directly addresses this lack of
information and will therefore
              have a significant impact on the current understanding of
chemoreception in
              polychaetes and other marine invertebrates. In the first of three objectives,
              the ultrastructure and innervation of putative sensory structures on spionid
              polychaete palps will be described using electron and confocal
              microscopy.
	Second, the chemoreceptive capacity of palp sensory cells and
              nuchal organs will be tested with
behavioral assays and activity-dependent
              cell labeling studies. The behavioral assays will identify chemical cues that
              elicit significant feeding responses and establish their threshold
              sensitivities. Complementary immunocytochemistry experiments will determine (1)
              if the chemicals that elicit behavioral responses activate the sensory cells
              described in objective 1; (2) the sensitivity of the sensory cells (i.e.,
              stimulation thresholds); and (3) the distribution of cells responding to a
              particular chemical cue. 
	Third, a functional biochemical approach will be
              used to characterize and isolate candidate chemoreceptor proteins associated
              with the peripheral sensory cells and nuchal organs. Several outcomes of the
              research are of particular significance. First, the cell-labeling method will
              be further refined for use with small invertebrates, and will provide a
              powerful tool for future studies of the neural mechanisms coordinating habitat
              selection by many species of marine invertebrate larvae. Second, the sequence
              information and purified receptor will set the stage for development of mRNA
              and antibody probes that can be used to examine gene expression and detail the
              chemosensory transduction pathways in polychaetes and other marine
              invertebrates. Such information will be useful to researchers interested in the
              evolutionary relationships among invertebrate phyla and the in evolution of
              sensory structures.
	In addition to its scientific relevance, the project
              provides significant opportunities for graduate and undergraduate student
              training. Three K-12 educators or high school students will also participate
              through the Maine Research Internships for Teachers and Students program. Their
              participation not only increases the capacity of this over subscribed program,
              but also strengthens the links between the local K-12 community and the
              University of Maine. Internet activities and resources will be created that
              focus on sensory perception and ecology in the marine environment. These
              materials will extend the research to an even larger Internet audience and
              facilitate the incorporation of ocean science examples into topics typically
              approached only from a terrestrial and human perspective.

