Title       : Geography-Based Exposure Assessment for Urban Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0221949

Award Number: 0221949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Griffith griffith@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Hunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Although lead is a naturally occurring element present in many parts of the
              environment, human activities have dramatically increased lead levels in many
              locales, especially older parts of urban areas.  Whereas lead normally
              constitutes about 0.002 percent of the Earth's crust, in cities, soil lead
              levels can be from five to 25 times as great.  The heightened presence of lead
              translates into significantly increased exposure to lead contamination among
              urban residents, especially children.  The average background lead level of the
              U.S. population is 2.8 micrograms per deciliter, but in many cities,
              substantial numbers of children have baseline blood lead levels in excess of 10
              micrograms per deciliter.  This research project will develop new methods for
              exploring spatial dimensions of pediatric lead poisoning.  A multidisciplinary
              investigative team will study spatial relationships among urban environmental
              contaminants, the biogeochemical processes of their origin in soils and dust,
              and the potential for adverse public health risks associated with human
              exposure to them.  A primary goal of this project is to quantitatively assess
              the community health risks associated with exposure to soils and interior
              household dusts that have been contaminated by heavy metals.  A second major
              goal is to determine the feasibility of carrying out such assessments through
              the use of non-intrusive, ecological techniques.  To accomplish these goals,
              the investigators will develop a geography-based lead-exposure assessment model
              for Syracuse, New York.  Inputs to this model will be the blood lead monitoring
              results, population and housing census data, heavy-metal measurements for soils
              and dust, and other georeferenced data.

This research will make a number of
              contributions to the spatial analysis literature.  For example, it will extend
              small area estimation techniques to a nesting situation and establish a
              trade-off curve between effective sample size and accuracy/precision of sample
              statistics.  It will improve understanding of geographic dimensions of lead
              dispersal, and it will test new approaches for monitoring contamination.  This
              project also will have a significant policy impacts for the public health
              arena.  In particular, it will provide a widely applicable, cost-effective,
              childhood lead poisoning assessment tool for urban environments; it will foster
              a geographically explicit interpretive framework for evaluating intervention
              measures; and it will help contribute to improvements in EPA exposure modeling
              capabilities.

