Title       : High Performance P/M Components Conference; Coimbra, Portugal; April 28 - May 3,
               2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0221884

Award Number: 0221884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis H. Froes imap@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9150,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the International Conference on High Performance P/M
              Components, to be held in April 28 to May 3, 2002 in Coimbra, Portugal. The
              object of the meeting is to provide a forum for discussions in the area of
              powder and particulate materials. Senior scientists and engineers from the
              United States and Europe, and from other parts of the world will participate.
              In addition, it is intended to encourage young professors and students to
              attend and funds are sought through this proposal. Both conventional powder
              metallurgy such as pressing and sintering for production of cost-effective
              components for use in various transportation and energy industries, as well as
              new and cutting edge particulate materials such as nanotechnology for
              structural and device uses, are covered. The conference is organized with
              United Engineering Foundation with mainly invited overview presentations by
              experts followed by shorter more specific papers and posters solicited and
              selected from submitted abstracts. The conference will thus provide a forum for
              young scientists and research students to learn the past and current aspects
              related to particulate materials. The NSF funds are used to pay for travel and
              registration expenses for the appropriate personnel to attend and participate
              in the conference.

The conference addresses the production of high
              performance powder metallurgy components using traditional and new techniques
              that include rapid solidification, mechanical alloying, thermal spraying and
              sputtering, cold spraying, vapor deposition, laser forming, metal injection
              molding, hot isostatic pressing, high strain rate compaction, loose sintering
              and powder forging, etc. In addition, new grades of alloys with higher
              densities and enhanced behavior will be discussed. The conference is expected
              to have over l150 participants from different countries; about 120 participants
              from Europe, 30 from the USA, and 20 from other countries. This conference will
              allow Portuguese researchers to present their work on powder metallurgy, and
              hear of developments in other parts of the world, and this will probably give
              rise to new scientific collaborations between Portugal and the United States.
              Because of the format that includes mainly invited talks followed by shorter
              more specific papers, the young scientists and students will have an excellent
              opportunity to develop new ideas on the related subject.

