Title       : IGERT: Multiscale Phenomena in Soft Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  2002  
File        : a0221589

Award Number: 0221589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2910000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Morton M. Denn denn@levdec.engr.ccny.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey T. Koberstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/650-5418

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes an inter-institutional IGERT program in soft materials
              to be offered jointly at City College of CUNY and Columbia University, which
              are in close proximity. De Gennes defines soft materials as organic media that
              organize on supramolecular length scales via weak associative interactions.
              Examples include thin polymeric films for sensors, organic blends for
              electronic displays, and natural and artificial tissue, spanning the range from
              complex fluids to soft solids. They are intrinsically multi-scale, molecular to
              macroscopic. A stunning variety of structures and morphologies can emerge,
              enabling a wide range of new technologies, and all scales impact processing and
              use. The Ph.D. program will be built around joint seminars, an industrial
              internship, collaborative thesis research, and a core of joint course
              offerings, including two new laboratory courses. The research will be in three
              complementary areas: effects of confinement on polymer statics and dynamics,
              chemical and physical patterning, and multi-scale phenomena in bio-related
              materials. The proposed core curriculum will be taken in addition to the core
              disciplinary requirements in the student's major department. Our proposal is
              consistent with existing Ph.D. requirements for all five participating
              departments, and does not add in any way to the degree requirements or faculty
              teaching loads; the soft materials courses will satisfy existing elective
              requirements, but will enable the students to focus these electives within a
              coordinated program. The proposed collaborative program is unique in two
              respects: First, it leverages the intellectual and material resources of two
              neighboring, urban, public/private institutions with complementary faculty and
              diverse student bodies. Second, it creates a unique, synergistic environment
              for research and graduate education in a niche area that is at the heart of
              numerous technologies essential to industries based in the greater New York
              regional area.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
              of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary
              backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
              career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
              change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that
              collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

