Title       : Extraction and Analysis of Halocarbons and Other Trace Gases in Greenland Ice
               Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0221480

Award Number: 0221480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric S. Saltzman esaltzma@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0221480
Saltzman

The gases trapped in polar ice cores are a unique and
              invaluable archive for investigating paleoatmospheric composition and
              variability. To date, efforts have focused on carbon dioxide, oxygen, methane,
              and nitrous oxide, which occur at mixing ratios in air of parts-per-billion and
              above. There are many more trace gases present at lower concentrations in ice
              cores that contain a wealth of information about biogeochemical cycles and
              atmospheric chemistry. In particular, ice cores potentially contain a record of
              natural variability of halocarbons such as methyl chloride (CH3Cl) and methyl
              bromide (CH3Br) that are major contributors to the atmospheric halogen burden
              and to stratospheric ozone loss. Ice cores also contain a record of
              paleoatmospheric carbonyl sulfide (OCS), the most abundant sulfur gas in the
              atmosphere and a precursor to the stratospheric sulfate layer.  

The
              Principal Investigator will measure CH3Cl, CH3Br, and a number of other trace
              gases on ice core samples from shallow and deep Greenland ice cores. Trace
              gases will be extracted by mechanically shredding ice core samples, with
              analysis by gas chromatography with mass spectrometric detection. Preliminary
              ice core measurements indicate that: 1) paleoatmospheric levels of CH3Cl and
              OCS can be obtained from ice core samples using dry extraction with analysis by
              gas chromatography/mass spectrometric detection, and 2) the interpretation of
              ice core CH3Br measurements is more complex, as this gas is contained both in
              gas bubbles and in the ice matrix. Experiments will be carried out to
              differentiate between gas stored in the air and in the ice matrix, and to
              understand the factors controlling the partitioning of this gas between these
              phases. 

The objective is to provide new baseline data for the concentration
              of halocarbons and other gases in pre-industrial northern hemisphere air. These
              data will provide strong constraints on the anthropogenic contribution to their
              atmospheric budgets. This study will also provide insight into the relationship
              between the atmospheric levels of halocarbons and climate variability, over
              periods of widely varying climate conditions and rapid climate change. In terms
              of broader impacts on society, this research will help to provide a stronger
              scientific basis for policy decisions regulating the production and use of
              ozone-depleting and climate-active gases.








