Title       : IGERT: Institutions, Diversity, Emergence, Adaptations and Structures (IDEAS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0221611

Award Number: 0221611
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2898927            (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Page spage@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl P. Simon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas B. Kepler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Axelrod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Michigan and The Santa Fe Institute, two leading institutions
              in the study of complex adaptive systems, are jointly organizing and supporting
              an IGERT graduate program for social scientists interested in institutional
              performance and design. The analytic core of the curricula borrows from
              multiple disciplines: economics, political science, computer science, physics,
              and sociology. The emphasis will be on how collections of diverse agents behave
              and adapt when their interactions are structured by formal and informal
              institutional constraints. Student researchers will study how formal
              institutions adapt and respond, how informal institutions emerge, how the
              structure of relationships between and within institutions affects performance
              and robustness, and when and how cultural, social, economic and behavioral
              diversity matter for institutions. The program will be housed at the University
              of Michigan but students will have the opportunity to visit the Santa Fe
              Institute for a semester. The IDEAS IGERT will enable students to become active
              members in the social science research communities at both institutions through
              seminars, research assistantships, interdisciplinary courses, and interactions
              with faculty. IDEAS students will also take courses and attend seminars with
              students enrolled in STIET (another NSF sponsored IGERT at UM).

IGERT is an
              NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
              are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
              the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

