Title       : Activity-Dependent Growth Cone Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0221140

Award Number: 0221140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Lnenicka gregL@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lay Summary
	Experience plays an important role in the development,
              maintenance, and modification of the nervous system. Activity-dependent changes
              in the nervous system are responsible for the strong effect of early experience
              on adult behavior and the modifications in behavior (learning) that continue
              throughout life.  A major goal of brain research is to understand how
              electrical activity influences the properties of individual brain cells
              (neurons) and their interconnections (synapses) .  It is very difficult to
              study single neurons and synapses in the vertebrate brain; this is much easier
              in the simpler invertebrate nervous system.  In the crayfish neuromuscular
              system, single axons (elongated portion of the neuron), which form synaptic
              connections on the muscle, can be studied in the living animal or in a culture
              dish.  Here axons with different levels of electrical activity develop
              differences in synaptic structure and function.  The proposed research examines
              the activity-dependent development of intracellular calcium ([Ca2+]i)
              regulation and the formation of synaptic structures at the axon terminal: both
              of these are important for the release of neurotransmitter, the signal used at
              synapses.  The regulation of [Ca2+]i is very important since [Ca2+]i also
              controls gene regulation, as well as neuronal growth and death.  The
              developmental effect of electrical activity will be examined by removing the
              crayfish nerve cord and studying regenerating (developing) axons in a culture
              dish over a period of days.  Pharmacological agents will be used to alter
              electrical activity, calcium influx, and perturb intracellular
              signal-transduction pathways. Calcium regulation will then be examined at the
              growing tip of the axon (growth cone) using fluorescent calcium indicators and
              electrophysiological techniques, and synaptic structures will be visualized
              with electron microscopy.  To determine whether similar activity-dependent
              changes occur in mature axons, the electrical activity of axons will be altered
              in an intact, adult crayfish, and the axon terminal will again be examined. 
              Findings from these studies will add to our knowledge of the basic mechanisms
              responsible for nervous system development.  In particular, these results will
              further define the role of experience in specifying neuronal structure and
              function, and the range of adaptation of the nervous system to altered use.


