Title       : Collaborative Research: Diversity and Biogeography of Marine Oligotrich and
               Choreotrich Ciliates Assessed by Morphological and Molecular Markers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2002 
File        : a0221062

Award Number: 0221062
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura A. Katz lkatz@science.smith.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Oona L. Snoeyenbos-West  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smith College
	      Elm Street
	      Northampton, MA  01063    413/584-2700

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 5946,9117,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Microzooplankton assemblages in the sea are often dominated by oligotrich and
              choretrich ciliates.  Ciliate communities are diverse and dynamic, with rapid
              changes in abundance and species composition over short time scales. 
              Understanding the nature and implications of diversity in ciliate communities
              is critical if we are to extrapolate measurements (e.g. grazing, growth)
              obtained with one ciliate community or a few species in culture to regional or
              global models of food webs.  In addition, the degree of inter- and
              intraspecific genetic variability across spatial and temporal scales is unknown
              for these ciliates.  Finally, analysis of morphological markers alone has
              generated considerable debate between researchers who argue that all ciliates
              are cosmopolitan versus those who believe that there is limited gene flow
              between geographically isolated ciliate populations.  One key to addressing all
              of these issues is to quantify the correspondence between molecular markers and
              morphology within and between populations.  At present, however, molecular data
              are sparse for these ecologically important groups.  
This project combines
              molecular and morphological methods to elucidate the diversity of marine
              ciliates in the subclasses Choreotrichia and Oligotrichia (Cl: Spirotrichea).
              This large group of planktonic grazers comprises an important trophic link
              between phytoplankton and bacterial production and higher consumers.  The main
              focus of the study is to collect DNA sequence data from natural populations of
              choreotrichs and oligotrichs, and to relate these sequences to morphospecies
              determined by traditional methods.  A combination of techniques will be applied
              to handpicked cells from natural assemblages to evaluate diversity across a
              range of scales from meters to thousands of kilometers, with intensive sampling
              of ciliates along the southern coast of New England and the western coast of
              the United Kingdom.  Intraspecific genetic variability will also be quantified
              as changes within populations over short temporal and spatial scales. 
 The 
              study has two objectives: 1) to quantify diversity within a subset of marine
              oligotrich and choreotrich species sampled from nearshore environments using
              both morphology and molecular markers, and 2) to assess patterns of
              intraspecific variation on short spatial and temporal scales in a few abundant
              species of oligotrich and choreotrich ciliates.  For both objectives,
              individual cells will be picked for genetic analysis and preserved for species
              identification.  For objective one, small subunit ribosomal gene sequences will
              be compared.  For the second objective, more variable markers will be analyzed,
              including the internally transcribed spacer regions  (ITS1 and ITS2) of the
              ribosomal genes and an intervening sequence between histones H3 and H4
              (H3H4IS).  Combining molecular and morphological approaches, this study will
              produce comprehensive data on genetic diversity of populations of oligotrichs
              and choreotrichs.  These data are an essential first step for connecting
              information on individual species abundances sampled across time and space to
              whole communities of ciliates. In addition, this work will provide the first
              test using molecular data on marine ciliate endemism and will train graduate
              students in relevant morphological and molecular techniques.  The resulting
              data will have broader implications for questions regarding global protist
              diversity and biogeography and will be necessary to fully explore the role of
              ciliates in energy flow and nutrient cycling in marine systems. 


