Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examination of Local-Scale Spatial Variability
               of Heat Fluxes Across an Urban Area: Integration of Measurements, Remote
               Sensing, and Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0221105

Award Number: 0221105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Grimmond grimmon@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1325,1352,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Urban energy consumption and land-surface modification create distinct patterns
              of urban climates by altering the exchange of energy, mass and momentum with
              the atmosphere. These processes are linked to phenomena such as the urban heat
              island, the transport and dispersion of pollutants and are fundamental to
              understanding urban impacts on weather and climate. This doctoral dissertation
              research will investigate the transfer of energy between the urban landscape
              and the atmosphere through a combination of meteorological measurements, remote
              sensing and numerical modeling. This combination of methods generates accurate
              measurement of exchanges over the local-scale (~1 km, e.g. neighborhoods) and
              extends them to the scale of a city. Previous studies, conducted mostly in
              North America, were limited by short-duration campaigns or lacked direct
              measurements by which to evaluate models. The study will be conducted in Lodz,
              Poland; selected because it experiences a different seasonal climatic regime to
              those sites already studied, large amounts of anthropogenic heat are released
              in the winter-time, and the building style (density and morphology) of the city
              is distinct from North American cities but typical of many cities in central
              Europe. This research will enhance existing long-term measurements in Lodz and
              address the lack of understanding of within urban variability by adding direct
              measurements in areas with differing building densities and land-uses. These
              sets of measurements will provide the basis for calibrating remote sensing and
              numerical models of the exchange processes. The patterns and magnitudes of
              fluxes predicted by the two approaches can be interpreted in the context of
              emerging understanding of heat exchange across the urban landscape given that
              direct observations on this large an extent are not possible.

Urban areas,
              although small in terms of total land surface area, are growing and contain an
              increasingly large share of the world's population. Thus urban-atmosphere
              interactions disproportionately impact humans with implications for human
              health, safety and comfort. Moreover, urban effects extend beyond the
              boundaries of cities, with implications for regional and larger-scale
              atmospheric conditions and climates. With increases in computing capacity,
              numerical weather forecasting, air pollution and long-term climate models now
              run with greater spatial resolution and can explicitly incorporate urban areas.
              This research will contribute directly to the development of such models, by
              producing a methodology by which to study local urban impacts as well as
              providing data against which to evaluate predictions.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

