Title       : Collaborative Research: Toward Environmental Genomics: Can We Estimate Bacterial
               Diversity in the Ocean?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0221224

Award Number: 0221224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161880             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. Distel distel@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Environmental genomics, wherein the total genomic diversity of a natural
              community may be sampled and analyzed in an ecological context, remains an
              elusive goal.  This is due, at least in part, to (I) a lack of reliable
              estimates of total community diversity and (II) a lack of information regarding
              the exact phylogenetic, genomic and ecological units measured by commonly used
              diversity estimators.  Although ribosomal RNA approaches have provided the
              first steps towards diversity estimation, and are widely used as a proxy for
              unique bacterial types in natural populations, the genomic unit a ribotype
              measures remains largely unexplored.  It is generally believed that ribotype is
              a poor indicator of ecotype because its slow molecular clock does not track
              many other genomic changes that are significant with respect to physiological
              functions and ecological roles.  Further, there are reasons to believe microbes
              in typical natural environments encounter forces much different from those that
              shape genome evolution among the cultivated opportunists and pathogens that
              predominate in genomic studies. 

 This project is using an approach that
              will allow the systematic sampling of environmental genomes by capturing large
              gene fragments anchored to ribosomal genes (the current standard biomarker for
              diversity estimation) as well as methods by which this approach can be extended
              to reassembling larger genome regions of uncultivated bacteria.  The goals of
              this investigation are: 1) to estimate total ribotype diversity in a coastal
              marine environment taking into account new developments in understanding of PCR
              artifacts and new statistical approaches toward estimating sampling coverage,
              2) to explore the relationship of ribotype diversity to genome diversity by
              sampling sequences contiguous to rRNA genes in abundant ribotypes, 3) to
              explore the mechanisms that may contribute to shaping genomes in natural
              communities, and 4) to continue development of methods to automate and extend
              the reach of genomic research in natural communities.  This research will
              provide (I) boundaries for bacterial diversity estimates in the environment and
              (II) insights into how processes that are important in shaping the structure
              and dynamics of microbial communities may also be influential in shaping the
              evolution of microbial genomes.
