Title       : Isotopic Constraints on the Origin of Bioaccumulating Halogenated Organic
               Compounds in the Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0221181

Award Number: 0221181
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378025             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. Reddy creddy@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-01221181


The presence of thousands of halogen and
              especially chlorine containing secondary metabolites in marine organisms has
              long been documented by marine natural products chemists. However, the presence
              in marine biota of many halogenated organic compounds very close in structure
              to specific man-made chemicals leaves their ultimate source in question. A
              multi-isotopic abundance measurement approach is suggested as a means of
              differentiating anthropogenic halogenated organic compounds (HOCs) from those
              arising naturally in the marine environment. This investigation seeks to
              measure the compound specific isotopic 14C abundance of several HOCs  whose
              anthropogenic vs natural origin is uncertain, using the expected isotopic
              depletion of any fossil fuel derived carbon implied for anthropogenically
              sourced compounds. Further source discrimination may be afforded by
              consideration of the stable chlorine isotopic ratios of HOCs. Stable isotopic
              chlorine (d 37Cl) ratios, as yet only preliminarily studied for this purpose,
              may be expected to exhibit larger, or simply different, chlorine isotope
              effects during enzymically controlled biochlorinations compared to those
              observed during industrial synthesis. A dual isotope approach may be
              additionally useful in unraveling both the complex sources, widespread
              distribution and chemical transformations that these molecules may undergo in
              the natural environment. 
Proposed activities to be undertaken include
              graduate student training, employing unique analytical capabilities and
              infrastructure and enabling continuance of international collaborations on a
              problem of high scientific interest. The recalcitrance or reactivity of HOCs in
              the marine environment has important implications for societal concern and
              policy as to the environmental persistence, bioaccumulative properties and
              toxic effects of HOCs in the environment, in marine life, and in humans.


