Title       : Collaborative Research: Estuarine Crab Transport: Linking Post-Settlement
               Dispersal, Bio-Physical Mechanisms and Hydrodynamic Corridors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0221086

Award Number: 0221086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $470542             (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Eggleston eggleston@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas S. Hopkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Forward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Secondary pelagic dispersal of juvenile benthic organisms following initial
              larval settlement may strongly influence local and regional population
              dynamics, yet secondary dispersal is rarely considered in recruitment studies. 
              While the relative importance of post-settlement blue crab dispersal in
              determining recruitment patterns in Pamlico Sound, NC, is presently recognized,
              the factors initiating movement by early juvenile blue crabs away from
              settlement habitats, the mechanisms mediating across-sound transport, and the
              population-level consequences of redistribution to alternative habitats, have
              not yet been explored.  This project will address these issues through an
              interdisciplinary study that incorporates: (1) small-scale field measurements
              in seagrass beds along the sound-side of the Outer Banks to identify the
              factors cueing initial movement from settlement habitats, (2) laboratory
              experiments to test the behavioral mechanisms that drive pelagic emigration,
              and (3) sound-wide hydrographic surveys to characterize Pamlico Sound
              circulation coupled with synoptic measurements of the spatiotemporal
              distribution of postlarval and juvenile blue crabs. The project will be
              conducted during 2002-2003 to take advantage of concurrent postlarval and
              juvenile sampling supported by another NSF award. 

This project will
              contribute to the understanding of how pelagic dispersal occurs in estuaries
              that are not dominated by tidal motions, but by irregular or persistent
              wind-induced motions.  Generalizations of recruitment dynamics from past work
              on systems with strong tidal signals (e.g., Chesapeake and Delaware Bays) may
              not accurately characterize patterns of estuarine recruitment in predominantly
              large, wind-driven systems such as Pamlico Sound.  

