Title       : Collaborative Research: Beyond BGP: Flexible and Scalable Interdomain Routing
               (BGGP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0221453

Award Number: 0221453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lixia Zhang lixia@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Interdomain  routing  performs  the  critical  function  of  gluing  together
              individual  pieces of  the  Internet topology to create a connected data
              delivery infrastructure.  Today this critical function is performed by the
              Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) [rfc1771] which establishes  reachability
              information among Autonomous Systems (ASes).   However despite its importance,
              current measurements and analysis have not led to a basic understanding  of 
              BGP's  dynamics,  performance  under  stress,  fundamental  weaknesses,  and 
              potential breaking  points  (if  any).  Although  a  few  data  collection 
              points  have  been  set  up  in  the  last  few  years 
[ipe,routeviews],  the
               routing  data  collected  by  these  measurement  points  are  mixed  with 
              measurement artifacts [ftntalk], thus the data do not necessarily reflect the
              protocol's behavior in actual operation. 
 
In  order  for  the  Internet  to
               continue  its  unprecedented  growth,  the  interdomain  routing  protocol 
              must continue  to  evolve  to  meet  ever  increasing  and  sometimes 
              contradictory  requirements.  There  is  a  general belief  that  the  current 
              BGP  routing  protocol  may  be  unable  to  meet  its  new  requirements  (for
               instance, accomodating  the  sharp  increase  in  use  of  site  multi-homing,
               which  keeps  routing  tables  from  optimally small 
              sizes[huston:scale:2001]).  BGP  is generally  thought  to  be  reaching  the 
              end  of  its  useful  lifetime, although  this  has  not  been  validated  by 
              analysis  or  measurements [nimrod,irtfrr,huitema:ipng,huston:scale:2001].  Due
              to the lack of a shared understanding of the problem and lack  of  sufficient 
              data  and  analysis,  there  is  no  consensus  on  where/when  BGP  collapses 
              and  what  (if anything) should be done.  
 
To address the above critical
              questions facing interdomain routing, the researchres have assembled a team
              with research and operational experience, and expertise in network protocols,
              algorithms, modeling and analysis.  The resarchers have identified the
              following fundamental technical requirements that the global routing must meet:
              it must scale in order to handle the growth (both in the number of users and in
              the richness of connectivity); security and resilience are critical issues, so
              it must continue to function in face of ever increasing faults and attacks; it
              must be able to fully utilize the rich Internet connectivity; and it must both
              allow network operators to apply various policy constraints and implementors to
              easily extend the protocol's functionality when needed. 
 
Based on the above
              criteria the researchers propose to tackle the challenge with the following 3
              steps.  (1) Develop measurement methodologies and collect data necessary to
              understand the current BGP operation, its overhead, dynamics under stress,
              potential vulnerabilities, inadequacies in functionality.  The research  will
              base this measurement effort on precise requirements that is identiied as
              lacking in existing data, such as for the data not to be collected over
              vulnerable multihop links [ftntalk].  A new effort at University of Oregon,
              separate from this proposal, is the measurement companion, if funded.  (2)
              Guided by our measurement and analysis, evaluate several proposed design
              approaches, including meeting the requirements by tinkering with BGP, by a
              NIMROD-like [nimrod] maps-approach, by two different approaches to handling
              multihoming scalability, and by a Clean Slate approach of a complete BGP
              replacement.  Each of these approaches emphasizes different aspects of the
              interdomain routing problem.  The researchers believe there are fundamental
              trade-offs between many of the desired technical requirements and that these
              trade-offs are currently not well understood.  The combination of measurement
              and rigorous analysis with a team including operations expertise will bring
              these trade-offs into clear view.  (3) Based on the data analysis and design
              evaluations the researchers will produce a final approach as the recommendation
              for moving forward.   
 
Through  iterations  of  the  above  steps,  the
              proposed  research  undertaking  is  expected  to  produce  new understanding 
              of  current  interdomain  routing  operations,  their  dynamics  and 
              resilience  (or lack  of  it), and vulnerabilities;  a  new  analysis will also
              be produced that  draws  on  direct  and  intensive  measurement  and
              operations  knowledge  to capture  the  fundamental  trade-offs  among 
              interdomain  routing  requirements;  and a conclusion will be reached on how to
              meet the future Internet's interdomain routing needs.
