Title       : IGERT: Integrated Graduate Education and Research in Biogeochemistry and
               Environmental Biocomplexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0221658

Award Number: 0221658
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2909853            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis A. Derry lad9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth A. Ahner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Fahey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Zinder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart E. Findlay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT project is an integrated program of education and research in the
              area of Biogeochemistry and Environmental Biocomplexity. Conceptual, technical,
              and computational developments are driving a major convergence among the
              biological, earth, and physical sciences. Over the next several decades, this
              disciplinary convergence will transform understanding of basic processes that
              control the stability and sustainability of natural environments. These
              insights will have extraordinary implications for the ability to predict and
              manage the effects of modern human activities on the structure and function of
              ecosystems across local, regional, and global scales. Such new knowledge is
              critical in planning for a safe, sustainable, and prosperous future. The IGERT
              project goals are to create an environment where researchers from ecology and
              evolutionary biology, biogeochemistry, environmental engineering, hydrology,
              environmental microbiology, and materials science come together to create novel
              interdisciplinary approaches to major questions in environmental science, and
              to train the next generation of leaders in this new interdisciplinary science.
              Emphasis will be on intellectual diversity and non-traditional pedagogies in
              training students across disciplinary boundaries, while deliberately enhancing
              connections with international and non-university partners. Workshop and
              seminar style learning will be employed, as well as active involvement of
              students in the management and implementation of the program. The intellectual
              foci will be the interaction of biological and physico-chemical controls on the
              cycling of metals and nutrients, especially terrestrial nitrogen; the role of
              microbiological processes in mediating biogeochemical cycling; and the effects
              of variation in genotype and phenotype on ecosystem functioning. Ultimately,
              the program will consider how complex behavior arises from the interaction of
              individually simple relationships in natural and managed ecosystems. Cornell
              University has outstanding resources in individual disciplines, and the IGERT
              program offers a unique opportunity to bring together many of these individual
              efforts into an integrated whole.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

