Title       : IGERT: Nanoscale Engineering and Science: One Campus, Two- University Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2002   
File        : a0221664

Award Number: 0221664
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2909845            (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury Gogotsi gogotsi@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Ko  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn A. Bonnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cato T. Laurencin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan G. MacDiarmid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The motivation for this IGERT project is to educate a new class of engineers and
              scientists who will participate in multi-disciplinary, team-based research
              projects that are at the forefront of the emerging field of nanoscale
              engineering and science. Research in this area will lead to the ability to
              manipulate matter at the molecular and atomic levels in order to produce
              materials and devices with unique and controllable properties. Undertaking a
              timely response through an integrated and cohesive program of education and
              training in the area of nanoscale engineering and science will provide the
              IGERT Fellows with the unique opportunity of being at the forefront of the
              developments in this exciting platform. Drexel University and the University of
              Pennsylvania will support 14 doctoral students (7 at each university) through
              the NSF IGERT program every year. The unique opportunities, capabilities, and
              strengths of each institution will be enhanced through an integrated graduate
              educational program. IGERT Fellows enrolled at Drexel University and the
              University of Pennsylvania will have access to about 30 faculty members
              representing disciplines encompassing chemistry, physics, chemical engineering,
              biomedical engineering, materials science and engineering, mechanical
              engineering, electrical engineering, and education. IGERT Fellows will be
              encouraged to select topics of research that are co-advised by faculty members
              from both institutions. There are four major activities that comprise this
              IGERT project: (1) interdisciplinary research and training; (2) new courses and
              seminars; (3) internships in industry, federal research laboratories and
              leading universities in Europe, Asia and South Africa; (4) career-integrated
              education. The pooling of talent, resources, and efforts from the two
              institutions will result in a one-campus, two-institution approach that
              effectively integrates education and research training. The proximity of the
              two contiguous campuses  is ideal for developing and delivering joint courses
              on nanoscale engineering and science and allowing for reciprocal use of
              laboratory facilities.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

