Title       : IGERT: Graduate Training in Biologically Inspired Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0221632

Award Number: 0221632
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2900819            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Clark rclark@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Needham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin L. Crumbliss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold P. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The vision of the Center for Biologically Inspired Materials and Material
              Systems research and educational program is to map traditional engineering onto
              biology. Through this approach, the IGERT project seeks to establish a new
              curriculum for graduate education in Biologically Inspired Materials and
              Materials Systems. The curriculum serves as an integration of natural science,
              life science, and engineering. This program will create a new graduate training
              program that uses biologically inspired approaches to bridge a gap in current
              biomedical and bioengineering programs. The Center's vision is to bring
              nature's engineering into the engineering curriculum and engineering principles
              into the study of materials, revolutionizing the way engineering and life
              sciences are taught at the graduate student level. Thus, this IGERT project
              will develop a new paradigm for education and research, using nature as an
              example for engineering, while explaining nature using engineering principles
              and rigor. This program focuses on three specific areas: (1) Bio-NanoScience
              and Engineering (single molecules and self-assembly), (2) Encapsulation,
              Coatings, and Surface Patterning (materials at the cellular scale where the
              lipid bilayer serves as the defining basis of all life), and (3) Hierarchical
              Systems (larger, more macroscopic, functional organisms). This focused approach
              will allow students and faculty to develop mapping concepts to the leading edge
              of knowledge and to explore the intellectual and practical aspects of creating
              a new curriculum at the interfaces of biology, medicine, engineering, and basic
              physical and chemical sciences. This is an initial step towards establishing a
              new paradigm in science and engineering education that explores life's
              mechanisms at the molecular level and translates these findings up through
              hierarchical scales of structure and organization to bring greater
              understanding of mechanism to the biological organism and unique designs to
              engineered devices.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

