Title       : Integration of Wear-resistant and Anti-stiction Coatings Deposited from
               Waterborne Chemistries into Micro-electromechanical System Fabrication
               Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0221865

Award Number: 0221865
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Srini Raghavan srini@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre A. Deymier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the proposed research is to develop the chemistry and
              techniques for the application of duplex wear resistant and anti-stiction
              coatings; onto polysilicon MEMS based structures from aqueous media. The
              anti-stiction properties will be evaluated through a characterization of the
              hydrophobicity of the coated surfaces under different temperature and humidly
              conditions. Friction and wear properties of the deposited coatings will be
              investigated using friction force microscopy. By working in collaboration with
              Sandia National Laboratories, a GOALI partner in the proposed research,
              coatings will be applied to test structures and the wear between coated
              surfaces will be measured using a microtribometer device. Using atomistic
              computer simulation methods, viz. molecular dynamics, the relation between the
              chemical structure of coatings and their friction/wear properties will be
              explored. Designing anti-stiction and wear resistant coating begins with
              linking molecular structures, coating structure and morphology to film
              properties. Objectives of molecular level simulations are to understand the
              evolution of the coating structure during sliding as well as shedding light on
              the tribo-chemical processes in the anti-stiction film under dynamic rubbing
              conditions. The modeling work is driven by a need to compare simulated friction
              and wear properties of anti-stiction coating with experimental observations and
              gaining further insight into the physics and chemistry at scales inaccessible
              by experiments.

The research project will provide educational and research
              opportunities to graduate, undergraduate and post-doctoral students. The
              principal investigators of the research program have a strong history of
              involving underrepresented minority and female students in their research
              program through regular and REU research programs. The results from this work
              will be used to enhance the content of courses in applied surface chemistry and
              atomistic computation techniques taught in the department of Materials Science
              and Engineering as well as a teaching module for use in an IC fabrication class
              taught at the University of Arizona.

