Title       : BE/CBC: Biogeochemistry of Fe(III) and Sulfate Reduction in Extreme Acidic
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0221791

Award Number: 0221791
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1590000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard F. Yuretich yuretich@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sarina J. Ergas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Ahlfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klaus   Rudolf L. Nuesslein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Richard Yuretich of the University of Massachusetts Amherst and
              coworkers are supported by the Biocomplexity-Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles
              program to study the microbiology, hydrology and environmental science of acid
              mine drainage (AMD) sites.  The team will study the processes of Fe(III) and
              sulfate reduction in an AMD site in western Massachusetts through field
              studies, modeling and laboratory experiments, and will quantify the roles of
              acidophilic and acid-tolerant anaerobic microorganisms.  Changes in hydrology
              and geochemistry of the stream and groundwater will be monitored as a function
              of distance from the AMD source.  Sediment from the stream and surrounding
              aquifer will be examined for anaerobic microorganisms, for iron and sulfate
              reducing microorganisms and for the metabolic potential of these species.  A
              variety of molecular genetic probes and polymerase chain reactions (PCR) will
              be used in the identification of species.  Additional experiments will involve
              in situ microcosms in the laboratory that will be modeled in order to study
              attenuation.  International collaboration will enable comparisons with similar
              mines in the United Kingdom.   K12 teachers in training will act as research
              assistants, and real pedagogical work will be done on the effects of teaching
              style.

Acid mine drainage results from the oxidation of pyrite and other
              sulfide minerals in streams and shallow groundwater.  Much research has been
              directed toward understanding the formation of these conditions, however, the
              biogeochemistry of natural attenuation is relatively unknown.   Organisms
              discovered here might have global significance in the reduction of iron and
              sulfate in other environments.  Knowledge about microbial cycling of iron and
              sulfur can be applied to other ecosystems.
