Title       : IGERT: Graduate Education Program in Computational Science and Engineering with
               Emphasis on Multiscale Problems in Fluids and Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0221715

Award Number: 0221715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2894749            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda R. Petzold petzold@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bjorn Birnir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Homsy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eckart Meiburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitrios Maroudas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT program is structured to provide a unique Ph.D. program in
              interdisciplinary research and education in Computational Science and
              Engineering (CSE). The vision is to educate students for whom working in
              interdisciplinary teams is the norm, and who have the ability to acquire
              knowledge, ways of thinking, and perspectives from other disciplines. The
              proposed IGERT PhD experience is different from one in a traditional
              discipline, and possibly unique among CSE programs in the USA. The IGERT PhD
              theses will be jointly supervised, and those students with a particular
              disciplinary orientation will share resources, knowledge, and approaches with
              IGERT students with other orientations. While a typical IGERT PhD thesis will
              still have a strong focus in a discipline, it will contain major elements of
              independent creative work in other disciplines relevant to the general problem
              area under study. IGERT students and faculty will work together in three Focus
              Groups: Microscale Engineering, Complex Fluids, and Computational Materials
              Science, to solve a wide range of important and timely problems that depend
              deeply on integration of information from the smaller scales to the larger
              scales. These multiscale problems require a strong foundation in both
              engineering and the mathematical and computational sciences. The curriculum
              ensures depth in one area and a significant exposure to high level courses in
              one or more ancillary areas.  It includes new courses in atomic-scale computer
              simulation, and computing for high performance, to specifically address the
              multiscale nature of the Focus Group problems and their computational
              requirements. An internship is required to broaden and reinforce the
              interdisciplinary research experience, and a required series of workshops and
              seminars will give IGERT students a significant exposure to important aspects
              of career development and ethics.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to
              meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.



