Title       : The Florida A&M University Computer Science, Engineering, Engineering Technology
               and Mathematics Scholarship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0221402

Award Number: 0221402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roselyn Williams rwilliams3@famu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deidre W. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida A&M University
	      400 Foote Hilyer Administration
	      Tallahassee, FL  32307    850/599-3531

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The faculty at Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University proposes to
              continue their NSF Computer Science, Engineering, Engineering Technology and
              Mathematics Scholarship (CSEMS) Program to provide an additional thirty
              talented students, who are majoring in these disciplines, with individual
              scholarships of up to $3,125 per year. Award amounts will be based upon
              academic achievement and will provide supplementary income to students with
              financial need. Their participating major departments are electrical,
              mechanical, civil, chemical, industrial engineering, electrical engineering
              technology, construction engineering technology, computer and information
              sciences, biological and agricultural engineering systems and mathematics.
              

Their CSEMS program will also provide scholars with the necessary support
              and experiences to be successful and competitive in graduate schools or in
              careers of the CSEM disciplines. The program will continue to assist the CSEM
              scholars for two years following the receipt of the academic degree to assure a
              successful transition to graduate programs or career paths. CSEM Scholars will
              be selected in Spring 2002 and will commence activities in Fall 2002. Their
              program includes faculty advising mentoring as well as technical professional
              development seminar series. In addition they provide summer internships in
              industrial or governmental setting and graduate school/career counseling and
              placement. These program enhancement activities and scholarship funds are
              expected to enable their CSEMS Scholars to complete the degree requirements
              within the appropriate time frame as determined by the academic level, up to
              four years.

