Title       : SGER: Testing the Viability of (U-Th)/He Thermochronology in Complex Tectonic
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0221133

Award Number: 0221133
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin P. Furlong kevin@geodyn.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Exhumation in the northern California Coast Ranges, and orogens in general,
              results from
the interplay of geodynamic processes that drive uplift and
              surface processes that respond to the
rates and patterns of uplift. A variety
              of approaches have been used to determine patterns of
exhumation, but placing
              robust, quantifiable constraints on these estimates is difficult because
              of
the feedbacks and linkages among large scale geodynamic, thermal, and
              landscape evolution
processes. There is a critical need for a technique to
              constrain the trajectory of rocks at shallow-
crustal (low-temperature) levels
              to constrain uplift and exhumation in active orogenic belts. Most
recently,
              (U-Th)/He thermochronometry has been identified as a potential tool to
              help
quantitatively constrain exhumation and uplift. The (U-Th)/He system has
              the advantage of a low
closure temperature (~ 60-70 C for apatite) and thus in
              principal it records the last few
kilometers of unroofing. As a low-T
              thermochronometer the same characteristics that make (U-
Th)/He so appealing
              for geomorphic studies also raise questions about its utility in regions
              of
complex thermal and/or tectonic histories. It is uncertain whether this
              tool can extract meaningful
information from a complex signal that
              incorporates both the exhumation history and the
inevitable thermal feedbacks
              driven by that exhumation. In this project we will apply
              (U-Th)/He
thermochronometry coupled with landscape evolution, thermal and
              geodynamic modeling, to
evaluate if (U-Th)/He dating can be confidently
              applied in regions of active tectonism that are not
in thermal or geomorphic
              steady-state.
