Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Territory Identity and Geopolitical Visions of
               Russians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0221256

Award Number: 0221256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John V. O'Loughlin johno@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,5939,5979,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the geopolitical perceptions of Russian citizens and how
              these perceptions are tied to their collective sense of national identity and
              Russia's sphere of influence.  While much is known about the geopolitical
              attitudes and ideologies of Russian elites, less is known about the views of
              ordinary Russians.  Entirely absent from the literature is the "meta-geography"
              or the regional and global mental maps of ordinary Russians.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will map the perceptual geography of Russians in
              order to understand how they regard and conceive of the Russian geopolitical
              spheres and how these territorial domains relate to their perceptions of
              Russian national identity.   A large, representative, nation-wide survey
              (sample size of 1200) conducted across Russia in 202 sampling points will gauge
              opinions on various geopolitical and national issues, as well as measure
              socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents.  Using regression
              analysis, the survey data will be used to account for the variation in
              nationalist beliefs and geopolitical mental maps.  Because the sample is large,
              comparison of the mental maps of national groups in Russia, as well as
              difference by ideology, gender, income, age, occupation, religion, education
              and region of residence, can be carried out.  It is expected that Russian
              citizens will have varying perceptions and conceptions of territory that
              parallel those of Russian elites, but they will have a more practical sense of
              the importance of territorial/national issues and the limitations of Russia in
              the framework of the difficult economic transition.  


This doctoral
              dissertation research seeks to make an impact on four broad areas of research. 
              First, it expands the use of mental mapping within political geography beyond
              textual analysis or small sampling of particular groups.  By expanding the use
              of cognitive mapping techniques to large groups of ordinary citizens, this
              research will provide a framework for future work using mental maps beyond this
              research's focus on Russian nationalism and geopolitics.  Second, this research
              engages the gaps and similarities between ordinary Russians and Russian elites
              on contemporary political matters and attitudes.  The geopolitical conceptions
              and territorial perceptions of Russians has not been examined thoroughly and in
              a democratizing society, these attitudes increasingly matter. Third, the new
              geopolitical relationship between Russia and the West in the post-September
              11th world depends on the popular support of the Putin Administration's
              rapprochement with the US.  This study will indicate if the new pro-West
              positioning matches the beliefs of the average Russian.  Fourth, the strength
              of ordinary Russians' feelings towards the Russian near abroad (the countries
              of the former Soviet Union) is necessary for understanding the long-term
              prospects of Russian-U.S. cooperation or potential conflict in Eurasia,
              particularly in the Trans-Caucasus region and in Central Asia.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.


