Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultivation and Conservation: Exploring Pattern
               and the Potential for Coexistence in Northern Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0221254

Award Number: 0221254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Leslie pwleslie@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5209,9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In many parts of the developing world, societies that traditionally engaged in
              pastoralism, small-field farming, and other livelihoods that had relatively
              minor impacts on the natural environment have been adopting more modern forms
              of economic activity, often with more profound impacts on natural systems. 
              With these changes, the need has grown to better understand how biodiversity
              and other qualities of the natural environment can be maintained in landscapes
              being impacted more significantly by humans.  This Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement project will investigate the interplay between cultivation
              and conservation along one of the most important remaining wildlife corridors
              in Northern Tanzania's Tarangire Region.  These corridors are used by several
              large species to reach fertile rainy season pastures east of Tarangire National
              Park.  The region is also undergoing social and land-use change as pastoral
              Maasai adopt cultivation and engage in mixed farming methods.  It is
              hypothesized that constraints to production vary across both the social and
              physical landscapes.  The research will determine which constraints most
              strongly impact cultivation decisions, the relationships between landscape
              structure and agricultural change in the corridor area, and the way that
              changing land use alters vegetation composition and habitat structure. 
              Responses to constraints may impact long term sustainability and resilience by
              reducing effort to counteract other constraints to higher yields.  Changes will
              be reflected spatially in the pattern of species composition and in the
              temporal pattern of field establishment, fallowing, and abandonment. 
              Methodologies from the natural and social sciences will be used within a
              landscape ecology framework.  Participant observation and social surveys will
              be used to understand food production strategies of Maasai.  A cluster sampling
              design using the boma (a group of households that live as a unit, sharing
              herding and sometimes cultivation decisions) will be used to interview
              households.  Constraints to cultivation will be measured through survey of crop
              losses to predation, disease, and drought as well as soil analysis.  Vegetation
              sampling will examine the physical impact of cultivation across the landscape,
              verifying verbal responses.  The vegetation of a nearby village with a less
              developed cultivation system will also be surveyed and both will be compared to
              available surveys from the 1970s.  This village will provide a baseline for
              water table and climate driven changes in vegetation composition.

This
              project will provide valuable insights into the processes through which natural
              systems are impacted by human activity as well as the processes through which
              people experiencing change monitor and respond to environmental change.  These
              insights will have significant utility both for academic discourse and for land
              and resource managers in this region and elsewhere.  The broader impacts of the
              research include contributing to knowledge of how pastoralists diversify their
              economies, while adding ecological data to the impact of changes on natural
              resources.  This research will also enhance the integration of social and
              natural science data within the context of landscape ecology.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

