Title       : TBC Bond Coat Properties and Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0221532

Award Number: 0221532
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  2003  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183940             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Hemker hemker@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1734,5914,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This grant undertakes an experimental study to elucidate and model the
              mechanical behavior and thermal stability of a new class of bond coat materials
              for thermal barrier coatings (TBCs). One of the key components of a TBC is its
              bond coat, and there is clear empirical evidence that platinum additions to
              aluminide bond coats enhance the overall performance and reliability of these
              coatings. Other platinum group metals (Pd, Ru, Ir, Rh, and Os) are believed to
              provide similar or even greater benefits, but the mechanisms that govern bond
              coat performance are currently not well understood. The proposed study will
              parallel and compliment a larger NSF-EC collaborative program on the dynamics
              of layered multifunctional surfaces. One aspect of the NSF-EC study involves
              processing and phase equilibria aspects of platinum group metal bond coats, and
              the current study will be conducted in close collaboration with the NSF-EC team
              to characterize the mechanical behavior and microstructural evolution of
              Ru-based alloys and bond coats. The grant supports for the principal
              investigator and graduate students to participate in annual workshops and
              collaborations with the NSF-EC team with extended reciprocal visits of students
              between European Countries and US. 

The overall focus of this research
              program will be to measure single-phase Ru-Ni-Al-Xn and ruthenium modified bond
              coat properties, to develop a fundamental understanding of the substrate-bond
              coat interactions that occur during thermal cycling (inter-diffusion,
              viscoplasticity, morphological evolution, crack formation, etc.) and to derive
              a science-based protocol for assessing the potential and assisting in the
              development of ruthenium modified bond coats. The microsample tensile testing
              approach to be used in this study permits characterization of small-scale and
              highly scale-specific coatings and properties (elastic modulus, yield and creep
              strength) in a way not possible by conventional means. The technological
              motivation for this proposal is rooted in the fact that TBCs offer tremendous
              opportunities for increasing the temperature capabilities and durability of gas
              turbine engines. Through the proposed participation in annual workshops and
              extended reciprocal visits, the students working on this project will gain
              valuable experience into how research is conducted in both the U.S. and
              Europe.

