Title       : EMSI: Stony Brook-BNL Collaboration to Establish a Center for Environmental
               Molecular Science (CEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0221934

Award Number: 0221934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5700000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Reeder rjreeder@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clare P. Grey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Parise  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Schoonen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas S. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,1629,5918,5950,9156,9179,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Richard J. Reeder, Nicholas S. Fisher, Clare P. Grey, Gary Halada, Christopher
              Jacobsen, John B. Parise, Brian Phillips and Martin A. Schoonen of SUNY Stony
              Brook, James Kubicki of Penn State University and Daniel R. Strongin of Temple
              University are jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Division
              of Earth Sciences for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at
              significantly advancing our understanding of the fundamental molecular basis
              for the sequestration of hazardous contaminants and radionuclide species in
              natural geomaterials and engineered materials. This award includes
              collaborations with five scientists at Brookhaven National Laboratory and the
              National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven receiving parallel
              funding from the DOE. The team will be focusing on molecular-scale reaction
              mechanisms that govern the interaction of selected contaminant species
              (including actinides, toxic metals and metalliods, CFC's) with minerals and
              mineral-like phases. Enhanced understanding of the stability and lability of
              molecular contaminant species bound by mineral and organic phases is needed to
              ensure effective long-term sequestration of contaminants.  The collaborations
              between researchers at Stony Brook, Brookhaven and selected industrial partners
              offers unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for the students and
              postdoctoral researchers involved with this work. 

Environmental Molecular
              Science Institute (EMSI) awards are given to interdisciplinary teams of
              university, industrial and/or national laboratory scientists working on
              problems aimed at increasing fundamental understanding of natural processes and
              processes resulting from human activities in the environment at the molecular
              level. The emphasis in these awards is on collaborative research among teams
              with complementary research interests and the creation of broad educational
              experiences for students.

