Title       : Consortium for Maize Genomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0221536

Award Number: 0221536
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Jane Silverthorne                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5928755            (Estimated)
Investigator: Karel R. Schubert kschubert@danforthcenter.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger N. Beachy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Quackenbush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Whitelaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Danforth Plant Sci Center
	      975 N. Warson Rd.
	      St. Louis, MO  63132    314/587-1048

NSF Program : 1329      PLANT GENOME RESEARCH PROJECT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Maize is both a classical genetic model for plant research and an economically
              important crop.  Having a sequence of the genes of maize will have a
              fundamental impact on maize genetics and crop improvement.  However, the maize
              genome is large and complex, comprising a sea of highly repetitive DNA
              containing islands of genes.  Current estimates indicate that the gene islands
              only make up 15-20% of the genome.  Selective sequencing of just the gene
              islands would thus be a rapid and cost-effective alternative to sequencing the
              whole genome.  

The overall goal of this project is to develop and evaluate
              high-throughput and robust strategies to isolate and sequence maize genes.  Two
              promising approaches will be tested.  The first, termed
              "methylation-filtering", is based on the finding that the highly repetitive DNA
              is modified (methylated) while the genes are largely free of such modification.
               The second, termed "high Cot selection", exploits the relatively low abundance
              of the gene sequences, which are present in a small number of copies in the
              genome.  Each method yields a fraction of the genome highly enriched for the
              genes.  Libraries of these DNA fragments will be sequenced and the sequences
              assembled and annotated to give a first picture of the sequence and
              organization of maize genes.   All sequence information will be released
              immediately into GenBank and project data analyses will be available through
              web-based resources.  

The outcomes of this project will provide the
              research community with a powerful resource for maize genetics, biology, and
              breeding.  They will also facilitate determination of the best strategy for
              attempting large-scale sequencing of maize genes.

