Title       : Terminus Dynamics and Active Deformation of Proglacial Sediments at an Advancing
               Glacier: Taku Glacier, Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0221307

Award Number: 0221307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356463             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roman Motyka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin Truffer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Motyka
00221307
Taku Glacier has been steadily advancing for the last several
              decades, excavating its bed and entrenching itself into glaciomarine, fluvial,
              tidal, sediments and glacier outwash deposits.  The cause of this advance is
              related to the advance phase of the "tidewater glacier cycle". A 19th century
              calving retreat resulted in a high area accumulation ratio (AAR) during most of
              the 20th century (~ 0.90). The high AAR and gradual diminishment of calving due
              to infilling of the fjord by glacial and fluvial sediments resulted in a
              positive net balance for several decades, driving the current advance 7
              kilometers (km) since 1890. Taku Glacier therefore presents an ideal setting
              and rare opportunity for the study of slow glacier advance onto and into soft
              sediments. Continued thickening of ice in the terminus region indicates this
              advance should continue over the next several years. Reconnaissance
              observations have documented contemporaneous deformation of proglacial
              sediments about 200 meters (m) in front of the terminus and prominent bulges up
              to 10 m high have formed in the compressed sediments with buckling of the
              overlying soil and vegetation. The Principal Investigators will study the
              dynamics of the advancing glacier terminus and investigate the effects of this
              advance on the proglacial geomorphology.  Surface velocities, strain rates, and
              surface elevation changes will be measured both on the glacier terminus and on
              proglacial features, along with measurements of changes in terminus position.
              Ground penetrating radar (GPR) and radio echo sounding (RES) will be used to
              define the glacier geometry and the nature of the bed. They will repeat RES
              surveys to investigate ongoing subglacial sediment excavation and entrenchment.
              GPR will also be used to develop a 3-dimensional picture of the structure of
              the proglacial sediments and their deformation. Existing and new markers on the
              sediments will measure motion and strain. A key feature of this study will be
              simultaneous measurement of short-term changes in terminus ice speed and
              proglacial sediments using precision GPS over several months. Terminus dynamics
              and the mass balance are integral parts of glacier response theories, but they
              are poorly understood. The Principal Investigators will use finite element
              analyses to investigate the deformation and stress fields in the terminal ice
              wedge and of the sub- and proglacial sediments, using strain data and geometry
              as constraints. Their aim is to understand the detailed dynamics of terminus
              advance and the rheological properties of the sediments and the ice near the
              terminus. They will also investigate the relation between glacier thickening
              and terminus advance, using our continuing airborne altimetry and
              photogrammetric measurements of surface elevation.



