Title       : IGERT: Predoctoral Training in Functional Genomics of Model Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0221625

Award Number: 0221625
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2689401            (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Knowles   (Principal Investigator current)
              Keith W. Hutchison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this IGERT project is to initiate an interdisciplinary,
              inter-institutional degree program in Functional Genomics of Model Organisms
              supported by an interactive faculty from the University of Maine, the Jackson
              Laboratory, and the Maine Medical Center Research Institute. The major
              challenge for biological and biomedical research for the foreseeable future is
              to understand how the information encoded within a genome determines the
              development and functioning of a living organism. To move from the level of DNA
              sequence to an understanding of the molecular interplay producing the final
              traits of an individual will require a continuum of experimental approaches
              ranging from experimental genomics, molecular biology, and novel biophysical
              methodologies, to advanced data screening schemes and computational techniques.
              Traditional alignments of the biologically based disciplines will be
              insufficient to solve the complex problems associated with functional genomics.
              Genome projects, regardless of the organism, will rely increasingly on the
              physical and computational sciences. The increased need for interdisciplinary
              research will require scientists trained to work interactively in multiple
              disciplines. This program introduces a new educational paradigm, developed to
              train students to move freely among the disciplines needed to investigate
              genome function. Students receive training in the biological, physical and
              computational sciences through a combination of core and advanced courses,
              intensive workshops, and research seminars. Emphasis is placed on a
              high-quality research environment and a tutorial relationship between the
              student and her/his mentors and program committee. Central to the students'
              training in interdisciplinary research will be the use of a paired mentoring
              system, a concept referred to as twinning. The primary mentor plays a role
              similar to the traditional graduate advisor and comes from the student's
              primary area of research. The secondary mentor comes from a second discipline,
              and each student develops a research project dependent upon interdisciplinary
              collaborations.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
              of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary
              backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
              career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
              change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that
              collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

