Title       : Collaborative Research: Mid-Latitude Modes of Climate Variability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a0221066

Award Number: 0221066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $429434             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Ghil ghil@atmos.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pavel S. Berloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sergey Kravtsov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James C. McWilliams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1324,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0221066/0220700 Ghil/Dewar

It is proposed to study coupled mid-latitude
              climate variability on decadal and longer time scales. The main hypothesis is
              that a critical component of this variability arises from intrinsic ocean
              sources. This hypothesis will be analyzed using a numerical model of the
              coupled ocean-atmosphere system, focusing on the oceans' wind-driven
              variability, rather than on that of the thermohaline circulation. An
              intermediate complexity model is ideally suited to test this hypothesis. The
              model consists of an oceanic and an atmospheric component, each of which
              captures the turbulent nature of the corresponding fluid. The new feature of
              our proposal is in coupling these two models, and analyzing the nature of the
              coupled turbulence that results. To achieve turbulence simultaneously in the
              two fluids requires working with reduced models of each. One fundamental
              problem faced by more dynamically complete models in achieving this same goal
              is insufficient computer power. Parameterization of small-scale oceanic
              variability as a feedback on the ocean's general circulation and on climate
              thus stands as a critical problem for understanding and predicting coupled
              climate variability. Initial steps will be taken towards formulating such
              parameterizations and testing them within this model. Coupled general
              circulation models also face the problem that the phenomenology of coupled
              behavior is not currently known, thus complicating the analysis and
              interpretation of model results. This work will contribute to a solution of
              this problem by providing a conceptual paradigm for coupled system behavior.
              The intellectual merit of this proposal is to analyze a viable hypothesis
              relevant to the coupled climate problem on inter-decadal timescales. The
              broader impacts of the work lie in developing scientific partnerships between
              two leading institutions (UCLA and FSU) in this field, broadly disseminating
              the results of our work by means of publications, seminars and presentations at
              national and international meetings, and addressing a problem of crucial
              societal importance in climate prediction.


