Title       : Collaborative Research: Organic Compounds in Hydrothermal Systems: A Framework
               for Investigating Heterotrophy at High Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0221417

Award Number: 0221417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174820             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan P. Amend amend@levee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0221417
OCE-0221113

This study sets out  to make chemical
              measurements of inorganic and organic carbon compounds found in a complex and
              poorly understood environment, shallow water marine hydrothermal systems. Due
              in part to limited sampling opportunities, our understanding of marine
              hydrothermal microbial systems and especially of their organic geochemistry is
              lacking. The metabolic energy requirements of microbial lifeforms in these
              environments is also unclear. Determination of the chemical structures and
              concentrations of a series of aqueous low molecular weight organic compounds
              (amino acids, carbohydrates and organic acids) will allow the modeling of  the
              energetic bounds associated with the metabolism of these substrates by
              heterotrophic thermophiles. A series of studies, including using direct SCUBA
              field sampling of the study site (Aeolian Islands, Sicily), will allow
              hydrothermal vent fluid collection including temporal variation. Thermophilic
              bacteria are known to be metabolically opportunistic, having the capability of
              utilizing a variety of carbon sources present in their environment along with
              one or more electron acceptors. How these organisms perform such metabolic
              manipulations and how they dynamically adapt to changes in their chemical and
              physical environment is not yet known. These investigators will employ a
              thermodynamic modeling approach, using known concentrations of specific
              substrates at known temperatures, to calculate the possible bioenergetic energy
              yields of the respiratory and fermentative reactions these organisms use in
              hydrothermal environments. This in turn will increase our understanding of the
              biogeochemical processes that may fuel the microbial energetics in the deeper
              subsurface biosphere.


