Title       : BE/CBC: Biocomplexity of Marine Stromatolites: Biogeochemical Cycling, Microbial
               Population Dynamics, and Mineral Formation in a Three Billion Year Old
               Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0221796

Award Number: 0221796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1998097            (Estimated)
Investigator: R. P. Reid preid@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan W. Decho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Stolz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pieter T. Visscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roberta L. Marinelli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Modern marine stromatolites are a highly organized, yet compact
              ecosystem that is uniquely appropriate for studies of coupled
              biosphere-geosphere interactions. Results from recently funded NSF research
              indicate that these living examples of Earth's oldest macrofossi s form by
              repeated transitions among three distinct microbial communities, whose
              predominance appears to be driven by interactions between microbial population
              dynamics, biogeochemical cycling, and mineral deposition. The compact nature of
              this ecosystem allows components to be sampled, experimentally manipulated, and
              modeled, such that the sensitivity of the system to internal and external
              perturbations can be evaluated and biogeochemical cycling and minera formation
              can be quantified. It is thus an ideal model system for investigating
              functional linkages between microbes, minerals, and the environment and for
              addressing fundamental questions such as "what is the role of biodiversity in
              biogeochemical processes and what are the effects of geochemical processes on
              species richness ?how do microorganisms modify and adapt to their abiotic
              environment? what constrains a seemingly 'equilibrium 'state and what are the
              forces that produce ecosystem transitions?" 

The proposed research will use
              diverse but highly complementary methodologies to investigate the complexity of
              the stromatolite ecosystem over spatial scales ranging from single cells (m) to
              kilometers and temporal scales ranging from minutes to seasonal and
              multi-annual. The program adopts a powerful approach to the investigation of
              linkages between 'populations processes and products' through integration of
              field studies of
natural systems, experimental studies, and quantitative
              modeling. Our studies of microbial populations will focus on composition,
              abundance, and distribution of species in four main functional groups
              (cyanobacteria, aerobic heterotrophs, sulfate reducers, and sulfide oxidizers)
              using a variety of techniques including 16S rDNA, Terminal Restriction Fragment
              Length Polymorphism analysis, and fluorescent in situ hybridization coupled to
              confocal microscopy. A combination of field measurements and flume experiments
              will determine the response of populations, metabolic rates, and chemical
              gradients to variations in hydrodynamic conditions, sedimentation and light;
              chemical gradients will be measured in situ using microelectrodes. As
              exopolymeric secretions (EPS) are likely to regulate mass transport and so the
              exchange within the stromatolites, EPS structure and composition will be
              measured using a variety of techniques, including Fourier-Transform Infrared
              and Raman spectroscopies, atomic force microscopy, and GC-MS; solute flux will
              be measured using benthic chambers. Effects of EPS properties and elemental
              cycling on mineral deposition will be determined through construction of C, O
              and S budgets, complemented by studies of Ca 2+ binding, microscopy analyses to
              define micrometer-scale relationships between activities and microstructure,
              and culture studies of precipitation by species. Flume and field studies will
              determine critical erosion thresholds and erosion rates of emergent
              macrostructures. Finally, we will look for 'fingerprints'of microbial and
              environmental processes preserved in the rock record through analyses of stable
              isotopes, morphometric parameters, and intracrystalline organic matter.
              Ultimately, a full understanding of the stromatolite system will rely on
              development of quantitative models.

Three separate modeling approaches,
              which relate to different aspects of the stromatolite ecosystem, will be
              developed -(1)a diagenetic model, which will quantify elemental cycles;(2) a
              simulation model, which will quantify the interactions between elemental
              cycles, populations of microbes and community status in the stromatolite and
              (3) a stage-based matrix model, which will attempt to relate environmental
              components to the distribution of, and transitions among, the microbial
              assemblages at the level of the ecosystem. These models will serve as critical
              tools for understanding the reciprocal interactions between elemental cycles,
              microbial populations, and sedimentation in past,present, and future
              environments on earth and beyond.

Educational activities that foster the
              integration of education and multidisciplinary research will include (1) active
              participation of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates
              in field and lab studies, and an international student exchange program (2)
              expansion and maintenance of the RIBS public web site; and (3)a field guide to
              Bahamian stromatolites for the general public. Participation by four European
              scientists will establish global networks for continuing collaborative studies
              in the emerging field of geomicrobiology.

