Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Fire Breaks: Conservation Planning, Place
               Making, and Fractured Identities in the Gran Sabana, Venezuela
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0221324

Award Number: 0221324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara D. Lynch bdl5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Garth A. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Terence S. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Because tropical forest fires are a threat to global biodiversity, developing
              nations are implementing increasingly aggressive fire-suppression policies. 
              Such management policies tend to reveal ignorance of indigenous fire-management
              strategies, such as those practiced by the Pemon in the Gran Sabana of
              Venezuela.  As a result of state fire-suppression policies, the Gran Sabana now
              appears to have "contradictory" patterns of fire, with too much burning in the
              "wrong" places, in particular near permanent communities.  At the same time,
              fire suppression combined with political-economic pressures and acculturation
              processes has led to a decline in traditional, prescriptive burning in
              forest/savanna boundaries.  This decrease in burning in the "right" places may
              ultimately lead to excessive fuel accumulations and contribute to damaging fire
              events.  To assess whether fire patterns in the Gran Sabana in fact are
              "contradictory," this doctoral dissertation research project will use
              participatory mapping and fuelbed, remote sensing, and statistical analysis to
              evaluate changes in fuel levels in the grasslands along riverine forests in the
              upper Rio Caroni river basin since roughly 1980.  To assess the
              political-economic and cultural reasons for these contradictory fire patterns,
              the doctoral student will employ ethnographic methods and reviews of state
              documents to uncover changes in indigenous and state practices, knowledge, and
              representations of fire since roughly 1950.  The project will integrate these
              biogeographical, technical, and ethnographic methods into a theoretical
              framework that draws from post-structural political ecology, landscape theory,
              and the work of social theorist Henri Lefebvre, and it will provide important
              primary data on fire patterns in savanna/forest boundaries in southeastern
              Venezuela.  

On a broader level, this study will contribute to the
              literature on social forestry, in particular to the emerging research on
              culturally sensitive and participatory forest fire management.  Although such
              participatory practices show great promise for biodiversity conservation,
              tropical fire management in Venezuela and elsewhere continues to rely on
              traditional, technical methods.  This conservatism is often inherent in the
              "institutional cultures" of state agencies, which may be influenced by social
              and political-economic imperatives, long-held notions of the inadequacy of
              indigenous knowledge, and erroneous but powerful ideas about the inherent
              danger of any sort of forest fire.  At the same time, indigenous people may
              respond in contradictory and often unexpected ways to socially insensitive fire
              suppression policies, depending on particular social contexts and cultural
              processes.  In the case of the Gran Sabana, some young Pemon now burn more in
              the "wrong" places to protest state policies, while many elders have abandoned
              prescriptive burning practices (such as in forest/savanna boundaries).  Other
              elders, bowing to pressures from state agencies, neglect to teach their
              children appropriate uses of fire, which occasionally leads community members
              to mistakenly start large dry season fires.  Ultimately, the case of the Gran
              Sabana suggests that fire management is not simply a technical issue but also a
              social, cultural, and political problem that can not be solved through
              fire-suppression strategies alone.  This study will advance understanding of
              the intricate cultural, social factors, and political-economic pressures and
              tensions that lead to contradictory and often destructive burning practices. 
              It therefore will make a fundamental contribution to biodiversity conservation
              and indigenous rights in tropical forest regions.  As a Doctoral Dissertation
              Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
              promising student to establish a strong independent research career.

