Title       : Transport Protocols for the Wired/Wireless NGI: Implementation and Experimental
               Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0221528

Award Number: 0221528
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $700000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Gerla gerla@cs.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M.Y. Sanadidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Next Generation Internet (NGI) poses scalability challenges to the efficient
              operation of 
the  transport  protocol  (TCP).  In  particular,  as  the 
              product  (bandwidth  x  delay)  grows,  the 
congestion window required to
              .fill the pipe. becomes quite large, especially on cross-country 
links. One
              well known  problem in TCP in this scenario is the selection of the .initial
              
window.. More recently, new challenges have emerged because of the increasing
              popularity 
of nomadic access to the Internet via wireless links (e.g.,
              wireless LANs, satellite links, 
UMTS, etc).  The data rates on wireless links
              have been constantly on the rise, approaching 
the 50Mbps on 802.11a wireless
              LANs and thus providing an effective extension of backbone 
services to mobile
              users. However, wireless links tend to introduce random packet errors and
              
loss  that are not correlated to congestion.  This creates problems to
              conventional TCP 
protocols (e.g., TCP New Reno and TCP SACK), which interpret
              any loss as a buffer overflow 
(i.e., as a symptom of congestion) and thus
              reduce the congestion window unnecessarily with 
consequent loss in
              performance. The drop in performance is proportional to the (bandwidth x
              
length) product  of the connection and can be quite significant in the high 
              bandwidth NGI 
environment, especially on cross country paths  including .last
              hop wireless LANs, UMTS 
links, or  high bandwidth satellites.   
Several 
              approaches  to  enhance TCP  congestion  control  over  high bandwidth 
              wireless  links 
have  been  reported  in  the  literature  (e.g.,  TCP 
              Peach,  TCP Westwood  (TCPW)).  Some  of 
these  enhancements  have  been 
              quite  successful.  For  example,  TCPW,  a  TCP  variant  that 
uses
              bottleneck bandwidth share estimation. to adjust the congestion window upon
              loss, has 
shown scalable properties and good link utilization in large leaky
              pipes., (i.e. large 
bandwidth delay product, and non negligible  random
              packet loss).  
This proposal is about carrying out a systematic, experimental
              investigation of performance 
of TCP over wired/wireless paths. This
              investigation will include the comparison of various 
TCP enhancements
              proposed so far in the literature. It will consider a representative set of
              
experimental  environments  and  application  scenarios.  The  proposed 
              project  is  in  part 
motivated  by  our  recent  positive  experience  with 
              TCPW  Internet  experiments  of  large  file 
transfers over lossy paths. In
              this project the researchers will broaden the scope to include a vast gamut of
              TCP wireless enhancement techniques. The researchers  will  identify the pros
              and cons of each scheme, characterize the traffic/network environment for which
              it is best suited, and, more generally, develop  models  that  relate  wireless
               media  characteristics,  TCP    congestion  control 
parameters and
              performance results.   
In summary, given:  (1) the increasing importance of
              nomadic computing and  wireless access  
to the high speed wired Internet; (2)
              the performance degradations observed in conventional 
TCP  protocols  over 
              wireless  path,  and  (3)  the  encouraging  improvements  offered  by
              
modified, wireless versions  of  TCP  (which  yet  retain  the  basic  end 
              to  end  paradigm),  the researchers believe this a very appropriate time to
              engage in a systematic, experimentally based 
evaluation of wireless TCP 
              protocols  by  a  team  that  includes  protocol  developers, 
applications
              developers and network measurement experts.
