Title       : IGERT: Public Policy and Nuclear Threats: Training the Next Generation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0221706

Award Number: 0221706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2910000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Shirk sshirk@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert F. York  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Nacht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tsuyoshi Hasegawa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC), a multi-campus research
              institute of the University of California, is establishing an IGERT program to
              train NSF Fellows on Public Policy and Nuclear Threats. IGCC will use its
              long-established programs on all nine campuses of the University of California
              and institutional ties with Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National
              Laboratories to implement this program. During the Cold War, nuclear threats
              drove investments and keen young minds into the study of nuclear weapons
              issues. Today, the incentive to become experts in nuclear matters is much
              reduced. Yet, the nuclear threat has not gone away. As has been underscored by
              the events of September 11, 2001 and their aftermath, it is time to build a new
              community of scholars and practitioners trained in strategic analysis, nuclear
              policy issues, the roles of nuclear weapons, the regional and global realities
              that comprise today's nuclear threats, and in traditional and prospective
              responses ranging from arms control to nonproliferation to
              counter-proliferation. The principal goals of the program are: to attract and
              train the next generation of strategic thinkers to address the public policy
              issues of tomorrow about nuclear threats; to produce new incentives for
              interdisciplinary research in the field of public policy and nuclear threats;
              to provide students with access to organizations and individuals engaged in
              nuclear policy development at home and abroad; to develop career opportunities
              at such organizations for post-doctoral employment; and, ultimately to provide
              the expertise the United States needs to develop sound nuclear policies in a
              changing international environment. Another important goal is to create an
              interdisciplinary and intergenerational community of scholars who can learn
              from one another and create synergies across disciplines that last well beyond
              this program. The IGERT program is designed to achieve these goals. Two groups
              of approximately ten UC doctoral dissertation students will be chosen by
              statewide competitive selection, and supported fully for five years each. IGERT
              Fellows will be supported for one of these years by their respective UC
              departments that will provide research or teaching assistantships in nuclear
              policy-related topics. IGCC will work with science, social science, and
              humanities departments to recruit new Ph.D. students for this program.
              Applications will be reviewed and Fellows selected by a statewide
              interdisciplinary subcommittee of the IGCC steering committee. IGCC, Ph.D.
              programs on the UC campuses, Lawrence Livermore and Los Alamos National
              Laboratories, and senior mentors will team to conduct this program. Students
              will receive their fundamental Ph.D. education in their home departments; this
              education will be enhanced by a series of required IGERT training activities: a
              four-week summer training seminar on the historical and current security
              implications of nuclear weapons both globally and regionally, including their
              strategic and political roles, arms control, nonproliferation, missile defense,
              terrorism, and related technology issues; a research or teaching assistantship;
              two-month summer internship at Lawrence Livermore or Los Alamos National
              Laboratory; an overseas fellowship in Asia or Europe; a summer policy
              internship at a governmental or non-governmental organization in Washington,
              DC; and monthly interdisciplinary video-conferences focused on contemporary
              research issues surrounding nuclear weapons and public policy. Where
              appropriate and possible, additional UC students will be invited to participate
              in IGERT training activities.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet
              the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.


