Title       : Health Monitoring of Multi-Strand Steel Tendons and Cable Stays for Civil
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0221707

Award Number: 0221707
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francesco Lanza di Scalea flanza@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frieder Seible  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              PI: 	Francesco Lanza di Scalea
Co-PI:	Frieder Seible
	University of
              California, San Diego
Proposal number:	0221707
Proposal title:	Health
              Monitoring of Multi-Strand Steel Tendons and Cable Stays for Civil
              Structures

Project Abstract

Monitoring the structural health of existing
              constructed facilities is becoming an increasingly relevant aspect of
              engineering.  Structural health monitoring includes ensuring proper structural
              performance and providing early detection of critical damage.  

This project
              is aimed at developing a health monitoring method for multi-wire steel strand
              tendons and cable stays that are widely used in civil structures such as
              cable-supported bridges and prestressed concrete members.  The ultimate
              purposes of the method are 1) real-time measurement of the applied loads and 2)
              detection of critical damage including corrosion and broken wires.  The project
              will investigate the use of ultrasonic stress waves as potential candidates to
              perform these tasks.

Intermediate objectives of the research include: 1) the
              characterization of the dispersive behavior (velocity/frequency relationship)
              of stress waves propagating in multi-wire strands; 2) the perfection of a
              method for load measurement based on monitoring the stress wave propagation
              velocities; 3) the assessment of the sensitivity of stress waves to structural
              damage in the strands; 4) the development of a method for correcting the
              effects of temperature on the measurement of load.   

Successful completion
              of the proposed activities will contribute to ensuring the safety of the
              Nation's critical civil infrastructure components, such as bridges.  Broader
              impacts of the project will include educational aspects. A graduate student
              will be directly involved in all of the research activities. An undergraduate
              assistant will also collaborate to the project.  The topics of structural
              health monitoring and non-destructive evaluation have been recently included in
              the curriculum development of UCSD's Structural Engineering department.  Two
              courses on these topics are being developed, one at the undergraduate level and
              the other at the graduate level.  Relevant findings resulting from the research
              activities will be incorporated into the classroom lectures for these courses. 
              Demonstrations on ultrasonic measurements in strands will be given as part of
              the courses' programmed laboratory sessions. 

