Title       : Early Detection of Corrosion in Steel Cables by Magnetoelastic Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0221131

Award Number: 0221131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. E. Indacochea JEIndaco@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ming-Liang Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              High tensile steel wires have structural applications as individual wires, or as
              tendons, cables or ropes. Typical structures include pre-tensioned and
              post-tensioned concrete bridges and buildings, cable-supported bridges and
              anchors in ground engineering. Structures and facilities exposed to the ambient
              deteriorate and eventually wear out or become unsafe. Understanding when to
              replace them and how to prolong their useful lifetimes is a critical issue. The
              objective of this investigation is to develop a magnetoelastic nondestructive
              technique that would detect corrosion early, and quantify its progress.
The
              magnetoelastic technique is based upon the dependence of the magnetic
              properties of structural steels on the state of stress and the magnetic
              permeability is the property that has been used as the parameter to precisely
              measure the internal stresses. It is recognized that high vibrations and
              fatigue, coupled with the existing stress state in these cables, are factors
              that can influence the progress and perhaps the initiation of corrosion in
              these cables. Hence the corrosion assessment will be monitored by how the
              magnetoelastic properties are altered by the onset of corrosion. To confirm the
              performance of the magnetoelastic sensor for early corrosion detection, two
              electrochemical techniques, DC electrochemical polarization and electrochemical
              impedance spectroscopy, will be used. 
The impact of the proposed
              investigation will be the development of a nondestructive technique for
              structural health monitoring and life extension. This will benefit society by
              improving the safety of bridges and other civil structures.

