Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Form and function of phytoplankton in unsteady, low
               Reynolds-number flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0221003

Award Number: 0221003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve T. Wereley wereley@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Small-scale flow dynamics at low Reynolds numbers (Re) are important to
              phytoplankton cells in delivery of nutrients, sensory detection by and physical
              encounter with herbivores, accumulation of bacterial populations in the
              "phycosphere" or region immediately surrounding phytoplankton cells and
              coagulation of cells themselves as a mechanism terminating blooms. In nature
              most phytoplankton experience unsteady flows, i.e., velocities near the cells
              that vary with time due to the intermittency of turbulence and to
              discontinuous, spatially distributed pumping by herbivores. This unsteadiness
              has not previously been taken into account in models or measurements with
              plankton.  Moreover, there have been decade- and century- long lags in moving
              relevant models of unsteady flow effects at low Re from applied mathematics and
              engineering to ecological applications.  Engineering models show unsteady
              effects due to the history of formation of spatially extensive flow
              perturbations or wakes should be important to unsteady motions of moderately
              small biota.  This project will address these affects.    Non-swimming
              phytoplankton, and in particular diatoms, will be used as the simplest case
              where important unsteady flow behaviors should arise.  This research activity
              will include a multi-level educational program, aimed at graduate research
              assistants, undergraduate research interns, undergraduate marine sciences
              majors and high-school teachers. Low-Re behaviors afford unusual opportunities
              to experience how mathematics, physics and biology inseparably catalyze
              understanding of phenomena that run counter to intuition.  This activity will
              also include international collaborations with world experts on organism-flow
              interaction in Cambridge (T.J. Pedley) and Copenhagen (T.  Kiorboe & A.W.
              Visser).  The overall goals of the activity are to accelerate the flow of
              understanding from modelers to measurers to users of the information and back
              again. Educational materials that project U.S. national standards will be
              developed during intensive summer workshops with the high-school teachers and
              be made available on the web. 
Unsteady flow effects on phytoplankton will be
              predicted with explicit models based on singularity solutions (that involve the
              useful simplification that force is applied to the fluid at a small number of
              points) and mathematical models that include both the near field at low Re and
              the far field over a range of Re, both representative of nature. Singularity
              solutions allow explicit treatment of the role of complex cell shapes.
              Scaled-up analog models will be placed in a large Couette vessel to better
              visualize behaviors for both the research and teaching efforts. Natural-scale,
              but simplified, unsteady flows will be produced in smaller Couettes (nested,
              counter-rotating cylinders with seawater in the gap between the two cylinders)
              containing live phytoplankton and will be quantified by magnifying,
              particle-imaging velocimetry (PIV). Image analysis will be used to measure
              translation, rotation and flexural deformation of the phytoplankton.  These
              studies will test various hypotheses derived from the general thesis that cell
              shapes and mechanical properties interact with unsteady flows to produce
              potentially fitness-enhancing, relative motions of the cell or chain and its
              surrounding fluids. A basic hypothesis is that unsteady fluid motion will
              interact with bending of cells to produce relative motion of fluid and
              phytoplankter. A very exciting prospect is that periodic instabilities known to
              arise at low Re may allow flexible organisms to act as "self-organizing
              engines" - through elasticity to harness energy from decaying turbulence and
              thereby move relative to the fluid. It is also expected that this study of
              passively bending structures in unsteady flows will help to understand the use
              of flexible appendages in swimming. The work is likely to aid significantly in
              associating functions with the shapes and spines of microplankton that are used
              in the identification of fossil specimens. By including relevant, unsteady
              fluid motions at low Re, the study will also provide firmer linkages between
              form and function in living plankton in the size range from 10 - 1000 mm that
              many large phytoplankton, invertebrate and fish larvae and other small
              zooplankton occupy.

