Title       : IGERT: Multidisciplinary Program in Wind Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2003   
File        : a0221688

Award Number: 0221688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2316196            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kishor C. Mehta Kishor.Mehta@wind.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jamie Kruse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Due to an increase in population and economic development along the coast, our
              society is increasingly exposed to natural hazards including hurricanes and
              tornadoes. Every year these hazards cause many fatalities and injuries; major
              disruption in community lifelines such as power, communication and
              transportation; and large amounts of property damage. The events of September
              11, 2001, showed us that man-made hazards are likely to be part of our lives.
              Since, such natural and man-made hazards are unpredictable, we can curb losses
              through careful planning, effective public policies, and good engineering. The
              objective of this IGERT program is to produce a cadre of professionals prepared
              for broader multidisciplinary research, comprehensive planning and balanced
              decision-making in the future. This objective will be met by integrating
              graduate research and training in a program that crosses the disciplines of
              atmospheric science, engineering, and economics leading to an interdisciplinary
              doctoral degree. The focus of the program is wind science and engineering and
              associated economics/risk management. Scientist and engineers at Texas Tech
              University have pursued wind-related research since 1970 when a devastating
              tornado struck near the university and destroyed much of downtown Lubbock. Over
              the past three decades the research program has continued to grow in the areas
              of building response and design, the atmospheric boundary layer and
              economics/risk management. With close to twenty faculty members participating
              in the program, a variety of research projects are in progress at a given time.
               Some of the research areas are wind characteristics in tornadoes and
              landfalling hurricanes, post-disaster investigation of building damage and
              economic losses, deign criteria for shelters, full-scale building response in
              the field, wind tunnel studies, simulation of damage, forecast for wind power,
              hurricane evacuation and others. NSF IGERT Fellows will take core courses in
              atmospheric sciences, wind-related engineering, economic/risk management,
              ethics and GIS. The fellows will also be trained through a rotation of three
              laboratory courses in meteorological measurement, wind-related engineering
              experimentation and statistical analysis of random phenomena. A one-semester
              internship in a national laboratory, industrial organization or governmental
              agency is part of the program.  This training along with selected courses in a
              specific discipline will prepare the Fellows to pursue multidisciplinary
              research in wind science and engineering. The goal is to complete a Ph.D.
              degree in four to five years after completion of the bachelors degree.

IGERT
              is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D.
              scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the
              technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of
              the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate
              education by establishing innovative new models for graduate education and
              training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends
              traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards
              are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span
              the areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.

