Title       : BE/CBC: Ecosystem Response to Elevated Arsenic Concentrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0221834

Award Number: 0221834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1490000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Pichler pichler@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan P. Amend  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Huxel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Garey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pamela Hallock-Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Thomas Pichler of the University of South Florida and coworkers are
              funded by the Biocomplexity-Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles program to study
              arsenic cycling in marine thermal vents in New Guinea.  Arsenic can function as
              a toxin or a nutrient and more work is needed to understand its roles in an
              ecosystem.  Little is known about arsenic biogeochemistry in vents; this site
              chosen was chosen because it is pristine and therefore the study will not be
              strongly affected by other pollutants.  The work combines biochemistry, geology
              and ecology.  Analyses include inorganic aqueous species, isotopes and
              dissolved organic matter from pore fluids and the water column.  In addition,
              microbial, foraminiferan, meiofaunal and macrofaunal invertebrate diversities
              and community strucutres will be investigated in the sediments using
              morphological, isotopic and PCR-based molecular methods.  Bioenergetic
              computations as well as mathematical models of biota will be performed.  
              Interactive broadcasts will link the research with middle school science
              classes.

The effects of arsenic on human health are a well-documented global
              concern.  Understanding how arsenic moves through the environment and whether
              it is bioavailable is crucial in evaluating water quality world-wide.  In the
              pristine environment in New Guinea, natural arsenic will be observed in
              relation to the biota.  The results will have applications in understanding
              trace arsenic in other ecosystems.


