Title       : SGER: Biocomplexity associated with controls of sensitivity and stability in
               tundra systems over decadal time scales.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0221587

Award Number: 0221587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98878              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick J. Webber webber@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig E. Tweedie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 1079,1689,5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A 5-day symposium will be convened to explore how biocomplexity controls the
              sensitivity and stability of tundra systems over decadal time scales. Experts
              in the field will be invited to give keynote presentations and participate in
              appraising existing knowledge and prepare a science plan to identify avenues of
              research examining the complexity, function and dynamics of tundra systems.
              Five themes and primary questions related to climate and the tundra will be
              addressed across multiple spatial and temporal scales. This includes drivers of
              change; patterns of change; sensitivity to change; responses to change; and
              implication of change. This symposium will bring together scientists involved
              in the North American tundra Experiment (NATEX) that is part of a larger
              network of scientists known as the International Tundra Experiment (ITEX). The
              ARCSS program supports ITEX work as part of the Land-Atmosphere-Ice
              Interactions (LAII) component. To enhance international and student
              participation, real time video web casting and teleconferencing will take
              place. These broadcasts will be forwarded to the Joint Office of Scientific
              Support for ultimate inclusion in the ARCSS Data Coordination Center. A
              synthesis report will be prepared and circulated. Key personnel identified
              during the symposium will draft a science plan similar to the LAII science plan
              and will include an outline for biocomplexity related research in Arctic
              terrestrial systems. A manuscript for publication in an appropriate
              internationally recognized journal is planned. 
