Title       : Species complexes in the sea: model systems for studying the biodiversity and
               evolutionary history of the Indo-West Pacific reef biota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0221382

Award Number: 0221382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gustav Paulay paulay@flmnh.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Coral reefs are arguably the most diverse and vulnerable coastal ecosystems and
              are 
currently undergoing unprecedented decline.  Both their diversity and
              vulnerability are 
influenced by genetic structuring, the spatio-temporal
              scale and pattern of geographic 
differentiation within and among species.  By
              documenting such structuring, we gain a better 
understanding of the origin
              and distribution of reef biodiversity.  Furthermore, data on the level 
and
              scale of genetic interconnections are crucial for predicting reef response in
              the face of 
stressors and for the design of appropriate conservation
              strategies.  
	On the basis of morphological species ranges, previous workers
              have generally 
characterized reef organisms as widespread, especially in the
              Indo-West Pacific (IWP), the 
largest and most diverse marine region.  Wide
              species ranges in the IWP imply dispersal across 
numerous, vast, open ocean
              barriers, supporting the belief that reef organisms have 
tremendous dispersal
              abilities.  Past molecular studies found IWP populations to be typically
              
interconnected over basinal to sub-basinal scales.  However recent studies on
              stomatopods in 
Indonesia and supratidal crustaceans in the Americas
              encountered finer levels of genetic 
differentiation.  These studies raise the
              question: is fine-scale genetic structuring common 
among reef organisms?
              
	Preliminary data show fine-scale genetic differentiation in several
              widespread, reef-
associated gastropods.  Each species is composed of
              numerous, divergent populations with 
ranges limited to archipelagoes or
              islands.  Their life history attributes are typical of many reef 
organisms,
              and initial data show considerable structuring in co-occurring taxa with
              different life 
history strategies.  The goals of this project are to document
              the extent of geographic, genetic 
structuring in selected reef-associated
              gastropods in the IWP, and to use these patterns to 
address questions about
              large-scale, spatio-temporal processes in the marine biosphere. 
              
Evolutionarily significant units (ESUs), the relevant conservation and
              evolutionary units, will be 
identified throughout the region.  Hypotheses
              about the source and dynamics of ESUs, and thus 
patterns of distribution and
              diversification, will be tested using sequence data. 
	The significance of the
              proposed work lies in the nature of fine scale genetic structuring
              
encountered in these taxa, which makes them model systems for studies of
              marine speciation 
and biogeography, and has major implications for reef
              management and conservation of 
biodiversity.  Fine-scale, but deeply
              divergent genetic structuring has rarely been encountered in 
marine taxa and
              only in continental settings; its occurrence on islands is unprecedented and
              
contrary to expectations.  How can organisms capable of dispersing far into
              Oceania 
differentiate on an archipelagic scale?  This conundrum implies that
              rare dispersal events may 
be highly important in the spread as well as
              differentiation of marine populations.  Exploring the 
phylogenetic nature of
              genetic structuring in independent gene trees will shed light on a variety 
of
              hypotheses about the origin of marine biodiversity and distribution of reef
              organisms.   
	High levels of genetic differentiation also imply that
              conservation and resource management strategies on reefs need to be
              appropriately scaled.  Understanding the size and distribution of genetically
              interconnected units is crucial for designing appropriate management units,
              such as marine protected areas.  Congruent genetic structuring delineates
              intrinsic breaks in the distribution of reef biota and thus identifies natural
              management units.  This project will lead to better management strategies for
              reef-associated marine resources, and will also have 
direct educational
              impact at several levels.  The project team will be interacting with resource
              
managers regularly.  The species studied are important food organisms, and
              provide an 
excellent venue to introduce implications for resource management
              and thus influence reef 
management strategies on numerous Pacific islands. 
              The results of this work will be 
disseminated regionally as well as in the
              scientific literature. 

