Title       : BE/CBC: Quantification and Modeling of DOC and DON Release in Marine Systems: A
               Study of Increasing Trophic Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0221825

Award Number: 0221825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1699795            (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Bronk bronk@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K. E. Wommack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raleigh R. Hood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah K. Steinberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1670,1689,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0221825


The study focus is to consider the range of
              dissolved organic matter (DOM) release processes exhibited by marine
              phytoplankton species, to describe how these processes regulate and couple to
              the cycling of fixed carbon and nitrogen species in the surface ocean, and to
              model, based upon both controlled laboratory and field experiments, the
              interactions of these chemical species between phytoplankton trophic structure,
              community succession and senescence as mediated by viral lysis, micro and
              macrozooplankton grazing and bacterial heterotrophy. A series of hypotheses,
              involving the production and consumption of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and
              nitrogen (DON) compounds, will be tested on each of a series of manipulable
              culture experiments and a program of seasonal cruises in both estuarine
              Chesapeake Bay and coastal upwelling dominated Monterey Bay as contrasting
              physical systems. Modeling objectives include a mechanistically informed
              simulation of field and culture experiments capable of descriptive and
              predictive insight as to DOC and DON composition, molecular weight and
              bio-availability as a function of trophic structure and complexity. Associated
              educational activities will be centered around highlighting the current
              research efforts of this multidisciplinary investigation in the context of
              public education programs coordinated by the Virginia Institute of Marine
              Sciences Mini-School program. This existing course development program has
              intensive participatory and outreach components and proposes to expand the
              opportunities of the pubic to learn about how contemporary scientific issues
              such as biocomplexity in marine environmental systems are being approached by
              research scientists.


