Title       : Development, Mortality and Sinking of Copepod Eggs, a Field Investigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a0221202

Award Number: 0221202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $574438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Miller cmiller@oce.orst.edu                    (207) 563-3146  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold P. Batchelder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eggs of free-spawning copepods are reported to have extremely high mortality
              rates.  Typical estimates of losses before hatching exceed 90%.  Most
              planktonic eggs of near-surface spawning plankton sink, rather than rise. 
              Thus, it is expected that embryo age will, on average, increase downward in the
              water column as numbers sharply decrease.  This study will quantify egg
              abundance as a function of developmental progress, thus producing estimates of
              egg mortality rates, and to examine the vertical distribution of egg
              development stage.   Sampling will be carried out with MEGAPUMP, an overside, 2
              m 3 min -1 pumping system that has nine sequential filters mounted in a
              carousel and an onboard CTD system.  Lowering MEGAPUMP through the water column
              with the pump off will produce temperature and salinity profiles.  Pumping on
              retrieval will produce a 9-level, stratified abundance profile of 50 mm
              zooplankton, including the eggs of all but the smallest calanoid copepods.
              
The study will be conducted in the calm waters of Dabob Bay, a fjord arm in
              Washington State, deploying MEGAPUMP from the UNOLS vessel R/V BARNES. Four
              cruises will be conducted in each of two years, 2003 and 2004. Two cruises in
              the first year will be in cooperation with a group at the Univ. of Washington
              headed by Dr. Bruce Frost. They are studying the mortality imposed on eggs by a
              diatom diet. Proposed OSU work will complement the UW project, since they do
              not propose water column sampling of eggs. UW sampling in Dabob Bay is
              scheduled weekly for February through April, intending to sample before, during
              and after the reliable diatom bloom that occurs in this fjord in March.  The
              two programs are compatible aboard.  Two OSU spring cruises are proposed for
              2004, and two summer cruises are proposed in each of 2003 and 2004.  In summer,
              female copepods will still be abundant and reproducing, but the water column
              will not have abundant diatoms. Target species for both OSU and UW programs
              will be Calanus pacificus and Metridia pacifica, the dominant free-spawning
              copepods in Dabob Bay.  Usual abundances and fecundities of both species are
              high enough to produce large numbers of eggs from samples of only a few cubic
              meters, readily done with MEGAPUMP.  These copepods have large, specifically
              recognizable eggs.  Egg development will be classified morphologically and by
              DNA content, which is a function of cell number.  Cell number in these, and at
              least some other copepods, is around 2000 at hatching.  Thus, DNA should
              increase through 10 doublings and provide a finely divided development stage
              series.  Mortality rates will be calculated from estimates of egg abundance in
              each stage.  
Broader Implications:  Copepods are the dominant zooplankters in
              both oceanic and coastal waters.  They are a main pipeline from primary
              production to fish suitable for harvest, often perhaps as the first consumers
              at the large-animal side of the microbial loop.  It is likely that a major part
              of the transfer in that pipeline is via copepod eggs.  For example, copepod
              eggs and early nauplii are the main food for larvae of North Atlantic cod. 
              Spawning female copepods are not just stocking future generations; they are
              feeding much of the food web above them.  Well quantified egg mortality rates
              will be data essential to accurate modeling of copepod population dynamics,
              rates for which few estimates exist.  A study in Dabob Bay will be a prelude to
              studies in more complex coastal and oceanic habitats.  The work will contribute
              to the overall goals of planktology at the present day, as exemplified in the
              U.S. and International GLOBEC programs. Training of a student by the project
              will contribute to the future of planktology.   

