Title       : IGERT: Integrated Graduate Training in Archaeological Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0221594

Award Number: 0221594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2909995            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Olsen olsenj@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey S. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joaquin Ruiz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9178,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Arizona's IGERT program is an outgrowth of the emergence of
              the interdisciplinary field of archaeological science, in which expertise in
              one or more fields of scientific inquiry is integrated with training in
              archaeological theory and method. The program will integrate archaeology,
              geosciences, physics, tree-ring studies, and materials science and engineering
              into a coherent program of field- and laboratory-based training that will
              prepare doctoral graduates for employment in academia as well as the public and
              private sectors. The study of archaeology, and of the environmental contexts
              within which the human species evolved and diversified, requires the
              application of multiple techniques drawn from the sciences and engineering.
              These include techniques for (a) dating archaeological and paleoecological
              records; (b) reconstructing past climates, plant, and animal communities; (c)
              locating buried and submarine sites; (d) reconstructing extinct technologies
              and their impacts on past environments; and (e) identifying past exchange
              systems by tracing inorganic materials to their geological sources.  Graduates
              of the IGERT program will acquire specific expertise in one or more of these
              areas, together with a knowledge of the broad range of archaeological sciences,
              plus a firm grounding in archaeological theory and techniques, blending
              experiences acquired in classrooms, laboratories and fieldwork. IGERT support
              will also provide minority undergraduate students and high school science
              teachers internships in archaeometric laboratories at the University, and will
              be paired with IGERT-supported graduate students to develop materials for
              school science curricula.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

