Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement: A Genetic Study of Prehistoric Chen Chen -
               Implications for the Genetic Relationships of Tiwanaku Peoples and the Peopling
               of South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  2002   
File        : a0221962

Award Number: 0221962
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2002   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Stone acstone@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The proposed research will use ancient DNA and mortuary data to examine the
              social organization, biological heritage, and cultural composition of the
              archaeological site of Chen Chen to determine whether the inhabitants of Chen
              Chen represent more than one distinct ethnic group and to compared Chen Chen to
              other modern and ancient Native American populations in order evaluate the
              population history of South America.
The potential biological relationships
              between the Chen Chen population and the people of the Andean highlands, the
              Peruvian coast, or other valleys has been an important topic in regional
              archaeological research, and although cultural and skeletal investigations have
              made important contributions, there are still several unresolved issues.
              Molecular genetic data can provide a fresh look at the ongoing study of the
              Tiwanaku expansion and the biological composition and structuring of Tiwanaku
              colonies. The data from the proposed research will provide the first large
              number of genetic sequences (=50) for the Osmore drainage and the Tiwanaku
              population in general. Furthermore, these data, in combination with spatial and
              mortuary data, are an effective means of evaluating the hypothesis that the
              Tiwanaku polity was a multi-ethnic society.

On a larger scale, these data
              will represent an ancient sample that can be compared to data from other native
              groups to make inferences regarding the time and nature of the peopling of the
              Americas in general and South America specifically. Ancient genetic data are
              particularly helpful in these studies because they provide information about
              the genetic composition for an indigenous population prior to Western
              influence. This is especially beneficial for the western coast of South America
              where direct colonization by Europeans, catalyzed by the rich geological and
              marine resources and arable land, had strong effects on the demography of
              native populations.

An additional benefit of this research will be
              understanding the connection between prehistoric and modern American Indians.
              The focus of this study is to illuminate the biological connections of Chen
              Chen peoples, both to their time frame and society, as well as to modern Native
              populations throughout the Americas. Studies of DNA diversity from ancient and
              modern Native Americans have determined a degree of continuity both temporally
              and spatially for some regions. Yet, the occurrence of continuity is not
              universal. By comparing modern native DNA sequences to those of prehistory, we
              gain better understanding of the degree of genetic continuity over time as well
              as a temporal framework for population events.  In conjunction with this
              research, a collaborative project between the Laboratorio Genetica at the
              Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos and the Stone Laboratory at the
              University of New Mexico has been formed to collection additional data on
              modern Native American populations throughout Peru so as to compare them with
              Chen Chen and other American Populations.

