Title       : Patterns of Variability in Alaskan Salmon Populations and Their Ecosystems
               During the Last Five Centuries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0221032

Award Number: 0221032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $527703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Schindler deschind@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul D. Quay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nathan J. Mantua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Francis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Understanding  the  causes  and  manifestations  of  biological  variability 
              over  long  time  scales 
remains a critical and elusive goal for ecosystem
              ecology.  In the Northeast Pacific, long-term variation in 
atmosphere-ocean 
              coupling  appears  to  have  organized  biological  production  into  a  series
               of  distinct 
interdecadal  regimes  during  the  last  century.  For 
              instance,  up  to  three-fold  changes  in  salmon  fishery catches in the
              Alaska Current were coindicent with shifts between interdecadal climate
              regimes. Despite this enormous temporal variability in fish population
              dynamics, we have only a weak understanding of the long-term climatic drivers
              that control biological productivity in this vast and important ecosystem. A
              
key hypothesis proposes that the main drivers of biological change in the
              Northeast Pacific involve the 
interactive  effects  of  pan-Pacific, 
              bi-decadal  and penta-decadal climate  oscillations.  Historical records of
              biological productivity prior to the 20th century have not been established for
              the Alaskan Current domain 
of the Northeast Pacific; their absence represents
              a major impediment towards understanding the temporal 
organization of
              biological productivity in this ecosystem.  Here, the investigators propose to
              quantify the fundamental modes  and magnitude  of  interdecadal  variability 
              in  sockeye  salmon  populations  of  the  Alaska  Current during the last 500
              years, to improve our understanding of the critical sources of temporal
              organization in the Northeast Pacific. 
  
These scientists will  use 
              paleoecology  to  characterize  the  long-term  patterns  of  biological 
              variability  in the Alaskan  Current  domain  of  the  Northeast  Pacific. 
              Specifically,  they  will  infer  historical  changes  in populations  of 
              sockeye  salmon  (Oncorhynchus  nerka)  by  tracking  variation  of  a  natural
               geochemical tracer (15N) that accumulates in the sediments of spawning lakes
              in proportion to salmon density. High resolution dating of sedimentary
              sequences will be accomplished through detailed radio-isotope analyses of 
              sediments  and  by  identifying  volcanic  ash  layers  with  known  ages. 
              Existing 35-to-100  year  long historical records of salmon population
              dynamics, climatic conditions, and lake production will enable them to 
              calibrate  sedimentary  chronologies  of  geochemical  and  biological markers.
               They will  also  use  carbon stable  isotopes  and  fossil  algal  pigments 
              from  sediments  to  quantify  the  impact  of  salmon-derived nutrients on
              lake productivity. They will use spectral analysis and temporal domain
              time-series models to quantify  the  frequency,  duration,  and  magnitude  of 
              historical  shifts  in  fish  production,  and  how  these relate  to 
              independent  proxies  of  paleoclimatic  conditions.  They  will  then  apply 
              the  time-series  models developed  from  sedimentary  and  other  existing 
              paleoclimate  records  to  forecast  future  changes  in  the biological
              productivity of the Northeast Pacific for the next century. 
 
This synthesis
              of new and existing data will provide a high-resolution, concrete description
              of the 
long-term variability in the biological productivity of the Alaska
              Current domain of the Northeast Pacific. 
They  will  test  the  hypothesis 
              that  the  biological  productivity  within  this  oceanic  domain  has  been
              
synchronized  by  inter-decadal  climate  regimes  associated  with 
              bidecadal  and  pentadecadal  climate 
oscillations.  These  data  will 
              provide  the  information  needed  to  investigate  the  spatial  and  temporal
              
coupling of biological productivity to climate oscillations throughout the
              Northeast Pacific. In particular, 
our work will provide the data needed to
              test the hypothesis that biological productivity in the Alaska and 
California
               current  domains  of  the  Northeast  Pacific  respond  synchronously,  but 
              out  of  phase,  to 
interdecadal  climatic  forcing.  The  synthesis  of 
              historical-  and  paleo-indicators  of  oceanic  conditions, 
climatic
              conditions, and biological productivity will place the recent century of
              ecosystem dynamics in a 
substantially longer temporal context than is
              currently available. This knowledge will provide a scientific 
basis for
              adapting management to the time scales relevant to the coastal marine,
              freshwater and riparian 
ecosystems of the Northeast Pacific. 



