Title       : BE/GEN-EN: Marine Viromics: The Interaction of Viral Genomes with the Marine
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a0221763

Award Number: 0221763
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1928141            (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Paul jpaul@seas.marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anca M. Segall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
 
Marine viruses (principally bacteriophages) are perhaps the most
              abundant form of life on the planet.  Active (lytic) viral infections cause
              cell to lyse and thus control carbon flow through marine microbial food webs,
              in some cases initiating the collapse of algal blooms.  In contrast, inactive
              (lysogenic) infections confer immunity to superinfection and cause conversion
              to a diverse array of phenotypes. The majority of marine bacteria in culture
              produce some type of virus-like particles (VLP.s), indicating that the
              occurrence of lysogeny is widespread.  Marine viral genomes are economical to
              study because of their small size (usually 50-100 kb). 

The biocomplexity of
              viromics arises from the interaction and response of viral genomes to
              environmental cues. This project will focus on lysogeny, whereby a viral genome
              establishes a stable interaction with its host. The occurrence of lysogeny in
              the marine environment is complex, as indicated by the seasonal distribution of
              lysogens observed in estuarine environments. The lytic-lsyogenic shift is
              hypothesized to occur when viral genes respond to environmental cues, and
              preliminary evidence suggests that phosphate levels and the pho genes may play
              a role in this interaction. Specific research objectives are to: 1) determine
              what physiological and environmental cues catalyze the shift from lysogenic to
              lytic lifestyles in cultures and natural microbial populations, 2) sequence the
              genomes of several temperate phages, 3) determine how phage genes work together
              to confer lytic or lysogenic existence in marine bacteria, and 4) incorporate
              the effects of temperate phage into models of the marine microbial food web.
              

The first objective will be addressed by employing cultures (cyanobacteria
              and heterotrophic 
bacteria) and natural populations to investigate cues that
              might control the "lysogenic decision". 
Cultures and natural populations will
              be exposed to shifts in temperature, nutrients, sunlight, 
salinity, and
              exposure to xenobiotics to elicit shift from lytic to lysogeny and vice versa.
              For the second objective, five of these phage-host systems will be sequenced.
              Comparative genomics will be used to identify common genes and modules. For the
              third objective, prophage gene expression will be quantified by northern
              analysis.  Differences in patterns of expression will yield information on
              genome response to shifting environmental conditions. If conserved lysogeny
              genes are found in cyanophage, their expression in natural bacterial
              populations of Tampa Bay will be measured. Finally, a computational model will
              be developed to describe the interaction of temperate phage with marine
              microbial food webs, based upon a 13 month seasonal study of lysogeny in Tampa
              Bay. The broader impacts of this research include educational outreach in the
              form of undergraduate workshops at San Diego State University, and
              participation in Oceanography Camp for Girls and Project Oceanography at the
              University of South Florida. 

