Title       : Biocomplexity in the Environment (BE), Coupled Biogeochemical Cycles (CBC):
               Complex Molecular to Global Interactions and Feedbacks in the Marine
               Dimethylsulfide (DMS) Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0221748

Award Number: 0221748
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1699886            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai pmatrai@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,1689,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Matrai
0221748

Ocean ecosystems are part of a complex
              geophysical-biogeochemical web that transforms matter and energy and sets the
              conditions for life. Feedback between different parts of this web is mediated
              to a significant degree by the exchange of radiatively important, biogenic
              trace gases. One such feedback involves marine plankton, the volatile sulfur
              compound dimethylsulfide (DMS), and global climate. In this feedback, DMS
              produced by marine phytoplankton and the food web enters the troposphere and is
              oxidized there to sulfate particles, which influence cloud albedo and,
              consequently, climate. Large-scale climate change, in turn, affects
              phytoplankton abundance and food web processes in the oceans and thereby closes
              the feedback loop. 

The strength-and even the sign-of this feedback loop is
              still unresolved, largely because of the exceedingly complex network of
              biogeochemical and ecological processes that affect the concentration of DMS.
              Fascinating new interactions in this cycle are still being discovered with some
              regularity, but mechanistic and prognostic mathematical models of this system
              have yet to incorporate many of these developments. Furthermore, there have
              been no field studies in which all of the relevant rates and concentrations in
              the marine DMS cycle have simultaneously been measured, nor have complex
              interactions or measurements been included for important geophysical or
              chemical parameters, hampering the ability of models to accurately map spatial
              and temporal variations in surface DMS concentrations. This effort will: 1)
              Measure and model all known relevant fluxes of concentrations of DMS and
              related species during intensive field studies in two ocean biomes: a
              subtropical gyre and the Southern Ocean; 2) Develop a global marine DMS model
              built upon the proposed field measurements and other existing measurements and
              models; and 3) Use such a model to evaluate the potential for feedbacks between
              climate and the marine DMS cycle. 

The DMS biogeochemical system represents
              a tractable research subject that can aid in understanding the complexities
              involved in biosphere-geosphere regulation at the regional and global scales.
              The DMS system also serves as an excellent, research- accessible model for
              food-web dependent biogeochemical processes. This investigation of the complex
              controls on the DMS  cycle should shed light on the critical factors
              influencing the ecological distributions of organisms in the sea and the
              biogeochemical cycles of major nutrient elements. Advancing the knowledge of
              DMS biogeochemistry will allow better predictions of the local, regional and
              global scale responses to anticipated shifts of climate, and provide valuable
              insights into the connections within the biogeochemical-geophysical web that
              sustains life on Earth. 

