Title       : BE/CBC: The Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment: Biocomplexity in Ecosystem
               Responses to Long-Term Environmental Changes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0221838

Award Number: 0221838
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry L. Gholz                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1900000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Field   (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Tiedje  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold A. Mooney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Vitousek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brendan J. Bohannan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

The Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment: Biocomplexity in
              Ecosystem Responses To Long-Term Environmental Changes

The research proposed
              here utilizes annual grassland as a model system to test four hypotheses
              concerning the regulation of the cycles of carbon, nitrogen, and water in
              response to global change. Specifically, the PIs will explore the mechanisms
              through which (1) plant physiology and species dynamics alter cycles of C, N,
              and H2O, (2) levels and dynamics of C, N, and H2O regulate plant species
              composition, (3) microorganisms control short-term and long-term N
              availability, and (4) plant chemical composition regulates structure and
              function of the soil microbial community. Together, these hypotheses dissect
              the complex web of feedbacks linking biogeochemical cycles and ecological
              dynamics. The research builds on the infrastructure and ongoing operations of
              the Jasper Ridge Global Change Experiment, a multi-factor, ecosystem-scale
              manipulation. The manipulations were initiated in 1998 with NSF support and are
              now supported by the Packard Foundation. They include two levels of
              temperature, two of CO2, two of N deposition, and two of precipitation, with
              single-factor manipulations as well as all of the possible 2-way, 3-way, and
              4-way combinations.

The team includes biogeochemists, ecophysiologists,
              population biologists, and microbial ecologists. The project will explore
              interactions between biogeochemical cycles and species dynamics across a range
              of time scales, from short-term physiological changes, through changes in
              species composition that unfold over several generations, to slow feedbacks
              from changes in soil stocks of C and N. The experiment's large array of
              treatments, plots that contain thousands of individuals of the dominant plants,
              and duration of several generations of the key species, provides a unique
              framework for addressing specific questions about biogeochemical responses to
              realistic global changes as well as fundamental questions about controls on
              major biogeochemical cycles. A modeling framework will be used that combines
              biogeochemistry, species changes, and species effects on biogeochemistry for
              synthesizing results across the project and integrating those results in the
              broader fabric of global-change research. This experiment is intended as a
              model system, where ease of manipulation and rapid responses can facilitate
              testing mechanistic hypotheses and establishing a framework for generalizing
              underlying principles to other ecosystems. 

The proposed research will have
              a range of broader impacts. Jasper Ridge provides a core for diverse projects
              led by students as well as independently funded researchers. Located on
              university campus in a major urban area, the project is highly visible and
              widely integrated in Stanford classes as well as organized activities for K-12
              students and the general public. It is an effective tool for communicating the
              nature of global changes, the diversity of their impacts, and the potential of
              biogeochemistry research. With the funding requested here, we will focus on
              increasing opportunities for secondary students, with an organized curriculum
              and internships.

