Title       : Developmental Functions of SNR1 and the BRM Chromatin Remodeling Complex in
               Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0221563

Award Number: 0221563
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew K. Dingwall akdingwa@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental challenge among all multicellular eukaryotes is coordinating the
              expression of critically important genes in different cells throughout
              development to produce a fully functional adult. This coordination is
              accomplished by short-range inductive signals between cells that rely on
              diffusible peptides and/or direct cell contacts to initiate intracellular
              signaling cascades that ultimately influence the expression of specific target
              genes. Chromatin has emerged as one of the primary obstacles with which the
              cell's transcription and replication machinery must contend. Factors necessary
              to transcribe or replicate DNA must gain access to regulatory sites that are
              packaged into nucleosomes and higher order structures. This is especially
              problematic when cells are in mitosis and chromatin is extremely condensed.
              Energy dependent chromatin remodeling complexes have evolved to locally
              decondense regions to assist in factor binding. The best studied of these
              complexes is the highly conserved SWI/SNF complex, found in yeast, flies and
              mammals, that is required for the activation of many, but not all genes. These
              complexes are very large (~2-MDa) and are composed of 8-11 polypeptides. Recent
              work with the purified yeast and mammalian complexes has elucidated many of the
              biochemical properties involved in chromatin remodeling; though many aspects
              regarding the in vivo biological functions are unclear. For example, while only
              one subunit has any identified catalytic activity, the remaining subunits are
              necessary for full in vivo function, modulating the complex activities or
              targeting it to specific genes or processes. Significant questions remain, such
              as why so many subunits and how do they individually contribute to the
              functions of the complex? Do any of the subunits have roles independent of the
              complex? Also, the complex appears to influence gene regulation both positively
              and negatively (activation and repression). How is this accomplished and is the
              regulation direct or indirect? What are the in vivo targets of the complex and
              how are they selected? Drosophila offers an ideal system for examining these
              questions, with the full array of genetic, biochemical and cell biological
              tools available, including a completed genome sequence and a wealth of existing
              mutations. Drosophila research also provides a detailed developmental framework
              to bridge these disciplines.
This project utilizes molecular, genetic and
              biochemical analysis of the Drosophila SWI/SNF complex, known as the Brahma
              (BRM) complex to address these questions. The efforts are focused on one of the
              most highly conserved and critically important components, known as SNR1. This
              subunit is crucial in both flies and humans for coordinating or targeting
              specific protein interactions between the complex and a variety of
              transcription factors and cell cycle regulatory proteins. A recently isolated
              temperature sensitive snr1 mutant allows for conditional removal of snr1
              function, and the project takes full advantage of this property to fully
              characterize the biological requirements for SNR1 during development. This is
              especially important as the snr1 gene is essential in flies and loss of its
              human counterpart has been strongly correlated with aggressive childhood
              cancers. In addition to genetic and biochemical studies, DNA microarray
              analyses using RNA isolated from homozygous mutants at the restrictive
              temperature will be used to gain a much needed view of the range of targets of
              the complex in higher eukaryotes, setting the stage for a full investigation of
              how those targets are selected and regulated in developing tissues. The broader
              impact of the research is that, through the use of a conditional mutation that
              is unique among the metazoan SWI/SNF complexes, the biological significance of
              chromatin remodeling in developmental processes can be better defined by
              examining in detail when and where the complex is required, and for what
              functions.
