Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: A New Stage in Global Innovation Networks? Why
               Multinational Corporations Locate Advanced Global Innovation Centers in Beijing
               and Shanghai
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0221058

Award Number: 0221058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Storper storper@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For many decades, a fundamental tenant of development economics is that
              developing countries have great difficulty becoming creators of technology. 
              This assumption has been based on the belief that multinational corporations
              (MNCs) function according to a "locational hierarchy" of global innovation
              networks, with "intellectual" activities located in more advanced countries
              while routine production is situated in developing countries.  Empirical
              evidence indicates that these traditional assumptions no longer are viable.  In
              recent years, many world-class MNCs now are locating advanced research and
              development (R&D) centers in Shanghai and Beijing, China.  This trend is
              typified by Microsoft's establishment of its first academic-style R&D center in
              Beijing in 1998, three years before it established a similar center in Silicon
              Valley in 2001.  Once principally a routine production site, China appears to
              have become a "center of excellence" in global innovation networks.  This
              advanced type of MNC activity represents not only an important turning point in
              China's development but a possible harbinger of developments that may occur in
              other large developing countries, thereby transforming the processes of
              globalization and economic development.  This doctoral dissertation research
              project will examine the processes that have been evident in China.  The focal
              questions of the project are:  Why are MNCs locating their R&D centers in
              developing countries like China?  How can a developing country like China
              integrate itself at the highest level of global innovation networks?  An
              ancillary question to be examined is:  Why have MNC R&D centers tended to
              concentrate in Beijing (a highly controlled political city) rather than
              Shanghai (a commercialized global city)?  The doctoral candidate will conduct
              case studies of a set of MNCs that have established R&D centers in China.  She
              will conduct surveys of company officials, and she will undertake statistical
              analyses of economic data.

This project will contribute to the understanding
              of how developing cities become integrated into global innovation networks. 
              This study will consider the increasingly important role of global (exogenous)
              factors in the study of knowledge-based development of city-regions.  Moreover,
              it will explore the thesis a developing nation's strategy for knowledge-based
              economic development no longer should rely solely on local and national
              (endogenous) factors.  This project will consider the relationship of local,
              national, and global variables, especially in developing countries or
              transitional economies.  Among the broader impacts of the project are practical
              insights regarding how cities and regions can mobilize its knowledge assets
              (human capital, specialized industrial clusters, local business networks,
              enabling industrial policies, and/or skilled labor policies) to bargain with
              both the central government and the MNCs to improve its competitiveness in the
              global economy.  Understanding the current direction of extensions of global
              innovation networks and the ways in which cities and regions can cultivate and
              capitalize on these processes will provide policy makers and investors alike
              with the tools necessary to support and maintain more dynamic forms of economic
              growth.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also
              will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
              independent research career.

