Title       : Conference: Analysis of Microbial Cells at the Single Cell Level
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0221943

Award Number: 0221943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5350               (Estimated)
Investigator: Friedrich Srienc FRIED@CBS.UMN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In March 1999 about 150 researchers gathered in Como, Italy for the first
              International Conference on "Analysis of Microbial Cells at the Single Cell
              Level". The beautiful surroundings of Como were an excellent setting for
              discussing the function of individual cells and how individual cells can be
              analyzed. The Conference participants, a mixture of biologists and engineers,
              addressed the three questions: 

WHY do we need to analyze at the single-cell
              level? This gives important information about cellular function, cell-cell
              interactions in different ecosystems, and because population dynamics, to a
              large extent, determines the overall function of large scale cultures used in
              the biotech industry.  

HOW do we analyze at the Single Cell level? Through
              the use of flow cytometry, image analysis, and mathematical models it is
              possible to analyze cellular function at the single-cell level.   

WHEN to
              analyze at the single-cell level? Both in basic research on cellular function
              and in applied research aimed at improving biotechnology processes.

In June
              2002, the second International Conference on this theme will take place in
              Vejle, Denmark. At the Conference, the focus will again be on the three
              questions: WHY, HOW and WHEN, and the latest developments within this
              interesting research field will be presented. With the advances in genomics,
              the rigorous analysis of the phenotype becomes an important and timely issue.
              The Conference also aims at further strengthening and enlarging the scientific
              network established at the first Conference, and to promote specifically
              communication between biologists and engineers.  

The organizing committee
              plans to submit a final report of the Conference to the National Science
              Foundation soon after the Conference.



