Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Century-Scale Forest Dynamics From 20,000-10,000
               Yr B.P. in the Western Klamath Mountains, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0221043

Award Number: 0221043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Byrne arbyrne@uclink4.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1324,1352,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Long pollen records of terrestrial vegetation change are used to quantify past
              climatic conditions, to identify mechanisms of past climatic variability, to
              verify model simulations of past climate, and to reconstruct past biogeographic
              patterns.  A gap currently exists in such records regarding glacial to recent
              conditions near the coast from central Oregon to central California.  The goal
              of this doctoral dissertation research project is to develop a high-resolution
              pollen record to reconstruct changes in vegetation in northwestern California
              over the past 45,000 years, with particular emphasis on the period between
              20,000 and 10,000 years ago.  A pollen record from Twin Lake, California, near
              the Oregon border, will partially fill this gap and provide an analysis of
              forest history and climate dynamics in the Klamath Mountains.  Lake sediments
              collected from Twin Lake indicate that the site contains a continuous record of
              local vegetation since at least 45,000 radiocarbon years ago.  This study will
              focus on high-resolution pollen analysis of sediments deposited between 20,000
              and 10,000 radiocarbon years ago, a period of rapid global and regional climate
              changes.  Sedimentary characteristics such as magnetic susceptibility, organic
              content, and pollen influx rates will also be measured to identify changes in
              productivity and erosion rates in the Twin Lake watershed.  Accurate
              chronological control will be ensured through 20 accelerator mass spectrometer
              radiocarbon dates on sedimentary charcoal and identifiable plant remains.  This
              century-resolution study will complement a 500-year resolution analysis already
              completed for the entire length of the record, from 45,000 years ago to the
              present.  Pollen data will be will be compared with modern pollen composition
              from 83 lake sites in the Klamath Region to attempt to quantify past climatic
              conditions at Twin Lake.

The results of this study will serve to fill
              spatial and temporal gaps in our understanding of the regional variation of
              past climate change as well as provide insight into mechanisms of climate
              variability.  In addition, the results will provide insight into the effects of
              rapid climate change on the forest systems of the west coast of North America. 
              The Klamath Mountains region is known for having an unusually high diversity of
              coniferous tree species (including several endemic species of limited range),
              and has been recognized as an ecosystem of global significance.  Rapid climate
              change at the end of the last glacial period may provide a reasonable analogue
              for projected carbon dioxide-induced climate change during the next century. 
              Understanding past forest dynamics may help to predict potential future threats
              to regional biodiversity due to climate change, and perhaps aid in mitigating
              their effects.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.

