Title       : Social welfare and gold mining: A comparative pilot study in Suriname and French
               Guiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0221646

Award Number: 0221646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo A. Godoy rgodoy@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marieke Heemskerk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The question of how support from social welfare systems affects a household's
              economic reliance on natural resources is of interest in many social contexts.
              This pilot research by a cultural anthropologist will ask how forest peoples in
              Suriname and French Guiana participate in small-scale gold mining given access
              to national social welfare systems. Previous research suggests that gold mining
              in this area attracts large numbers of poor people, who have few subsistence
              alternatives, and a small number of relatively well off people, who can earn
              revenues by investing in mining equipment. The research predicts a U-shaped
              relation between access to social welfare and participation in gold mining,
              with poor people with the least access to welfare and rich people being the
              most likely to engage in mining. This hypothesis will be tested in two adjacent
              countries that are culturally and environmentally similar but differ in their
              systems of social welfare.  The researchers will study three Maroon villages in
              Eastern Suriname and Western French Guiana, varying in their access to public
              services. Socioeconomic survey interviews will be carried out with fifty
              households in each village, ethnographic interviews and observations will be
              recorded at both sides of the border, and statistical information will be
              obtained from government offices and non-governmental organizations. Two U.S.
              graduate students will be trained in the fieldwork and will conduct their own
              research on comparative topics. Aside from contributing to the training of
              students in social science and advancing our understanding of the relation
              between access to welfare and work, the project will inform us about the
              relation between social welfare policy, socioeconomic development, and forest
              resource use and conservation.
