Title       : IGERT: Technological Innovation: Generating Economic Results (TI:GER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a0221600

Award Number: 0221600
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2910000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie C. Thursby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Terry C. Blum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anderson D. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Wepfer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George Shepherd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT project is a multidisciplinary training program addressing two needs
              that are critical if society is to benefit from technological discoveries: (i)
              preparation of a professional workforce with the knowledge and skills needed to
              facilitate innovation, and (ii) research that improves our understanding of how
              business organizations and economic, regulatory, and legal mechanisms promote
              or impede the development and diffusion of new technologies. Faculty from the
              joint Georgia Institute of Technology/Emory University Department of Biomedical
              Engineering and NSF-Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Engineering of Human
              Tissues, Manufacturing Research Center, Microelectronics Research Center,
              Microelectromechanical Systems, and NSF-ERC Packaging Research Center are
              collaborating with faculty in the Georgia Tech DuPree College of Management,
              Emory Law School, and Emory Economics Department. Central to the program are
              teams of NSF-funded PhD students, cost-shared Master of Business Administration
              (MBA), and Doctor of Jurisprudence students (JD) who participate over a two
              year period in activities focused on technical, market, and legal issues
              related to the science and engineering (S&E) students' research. This
              multidisciplinary team approach is designed to (i) provide S&E students with
              the skills and multidisciplinary perspective needed to succeed in industry,
              (ii) produce S&E dissertations of technical merit and market relevance, (iii)
              facilitate dissertations in management and law & economics that improve our
              understanding of innovation, and (iv) provide MBAs and JDs with practical
              experience in a technical research environment. Educational features include
              two graduate level courses on the Fundamentals of Innovation and a case course
              developed specifically for this IGERT that all student participants take as a
              community of students, universities-wide seminar & workshop on Innovation
              Fundamentals, Intellectual Property Track for the JDs and PhDs in Law &
              Economics, a Minor in the Management of Innovation for S&E PhDs, a formal
              mechanism to initiate management and law & economics research at the doctoral
              level on innovation, internships and frequent interaction with industrial
              partners, and an annual Doctoral Research Institute on Innovation for graduate
              students invited from universities nationwide.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program
              intended to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and
              engineers with the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical,
              professional, and personal skills needed for the career demands of the future.
              The program is intended to catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by
              establishing innovative new models for graduate education and training in a
              fertile environment for collaborative research that transcends traditional
              disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the program, awards are being
              made to twenty-one institutions for programs that collectively span the areas
              of science and engineering supported by NSF.

