Title       : Spatial information technology and society: Ethics, values, and practice (Asia,
               January 2003; Honolulu, Hawaii, January 2004)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0221912

Award Number: 0221912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118142             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jefferson M. Fox foxj@ewc.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter Hershock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krisnawati Suryanata  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Cult&Tech Interchange
	      
	      Honolulu, HI  96801    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,9150,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project involves case studies and workshops to assess ethical,
              organizational, and socioeconomic issues involved in using spatial information
              technology for promoting community-based resource management in the
              Asia/Pacific region.  Recent growth in availability of modem spatial
              information technology such as geographic information systems (GIS), low-cost
              global positioning systems (GPS), and remote sensing image analysis software
              has empowered those traditionally disenfranchised by maps to record and control
              mapped information, a privilege formerly available only to state-funded
              mapmakers. At the same time, this newly acquired authority to define and exert
              control over the use of space compromises the customary uses it is intended to
              protect. Spatial information technology and mapping generally promote practices
              that shift attention and concern away from qualities of human/environment
              relationship to quantifiable limits on that relationship implied by
              boundaries/borders. 

The project's primary objectives are to: 1) analyze the
              impact of mapping technologies and activities on the cultural and social
              dynamics of rural communities, 2) understand the social and political dynamics
              involved in enrolling in and employing/deploying new technologies, and 3)
              develop a general strategy for critically evaluating the ethical,
              organizational, and socio-political impacts of technology transfer.  Since most
              research on the implications of spatial information technology has been
              conducted in North America, this project fills a gap in understanding the
              impact of importing technology conceived and developed in societies with
              different developmental histories. 

Participants are from seven Asian
              organizations currently involved in NGO projects that use spatial information
              technology for promoting community-based resource management in the
              Asia/Pacific region will participate, and from Canadian and U.S. projects that
              have relevant prior experience.  The project is structured to allow
              participants to learn from each other's experiences, and to develop a more
              realistic understanding of the challenges and opportunities involved in
              adopting spatial information technology for promoting community based resource
              management. Workshop discussions will be distilled into a publication that will
              provide a state-of-the-art survey of methodology and issues as well as specify
              specific technologies and how they should be used.  Project activities are
              designed to provide social activists with conceptual tools to assist them in
              evaluating the roles of spatial information technology in advancing their
              goals. 





