Title       : Speciation and Gene Flow in the Open Ocean: the Phylogeography of an Oceanic
               Copepod Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0221063

Award Number: 0221063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158135             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Ohman mohman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop a model system for the study of speciation in marine
              holozooplankton populations, to examine the biogeographic and ecological
              factors important during speciation in the open ocean.  The calanoid copepod
              family Eucalanidae is oceanic in distribution, and component species are likely
              to have evolved entirely in the open ocean.  The 23 extant species in this
              family will serve as our model system.  The research will consist of two parts.
              First, a species level molecular phylogeny based on one mitochondrial (16s
              rDNA) and one nuclear (Elongation Factor-1-a) gene locus will be developed,
              including all known species within the family.  Sister species pairs will be
              identified based on the phylogeny.  Three central hypotheses are being tested
              regarding the comparative biogeographic distributions, morphological
              characteristics, and genetic diversity of these sister species pairs. Results
              will elucidate patterns in the extent of biogeographic range overlap,
              post-speciational range evolution, divergence in reproductive morphological
              characteristics, divergence in ecological characteristics, and differences in
              historical population sizes.  Such results will provide insight into those
              factors that play a role in the speciation process. The second, intraspecific,
              part of the study will examine geographic distributions of genetic lineages in
              circumglobal Eucalanus hyalinus s.l. and Rhincalanus nasutus s.l.  This
              component will identify oceanographic features that create boundaries to gene
              flow between conspecific populations on a global scale.  Intraspecific
              haplotype networks will be generated based on the mitochondrial gene locus
              Cytochrome Oxidase I (COI). The goal of this second portion of the research is
              to understand how populations undergo the initial differentiation process, a
              step critical to speciation models. Initial results demonstrate the tremendous
              potential value of the proposed work.  At least three previously cryptic
              species have been uncovered within the family, and current understanding of the
              biogeographic distributions of existing species has been modified.  Half of the
              DNA sequencing for the mtDNA molecular phylogeny has been completed, and most
              of the specimens required for this work have already been collected. 
The
              sequences resulting from this research will be deposited in GenBank, and thus
              disseminated broadly to all interested parties.  The proposed research is the
              doctoral study.  In addition to answering the specific questions posed, this
              proposal will contribute to the training of a new generation of oceanographers
              with abilities in systematics and modern molecular techniques. 


