Title       : BE/GEN-EN: Genome Sequence and Functional Analysis of an Uncultured Bacterium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2002 
File        : a0221798

Award Number: 0221798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $862958             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen E. Nelson kenelson@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1693,4444,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

At 80 by 600 microns, Epulopiscium is the largest heterotrophic
              bacterium that has been identified to date.  It also has the unusual ability to
              produce multiple live offspring internally.  This project takes an aggressive
              approach to increase our understanding of the biology of this organism by
              determining the complete genome sequence, and identifying the unique features
              of Epulopiscium that have allowed these exceptional bacteria to attain cellular
              sizes that are orders of magnitude larger than most bacteria.  These analyses
              will identify genomic and cellular modifications that may have been employed in
              the progenitor of all eukaryotes as a first step toward the development of the
              contemporary eukaryotic cell.  Comparative analyses with the complete genome
              sequences of endospore-forming bacteria will identify sporulation gene
              homologues in the Epulopiscium genome that can serve as targets of future
              analyses to determine the role of these genes in intracellular offspring
              production.  Finally, this project will generate a physiological profile of
              Epulopiscium sp. based on the complete genome sequence.  This component will
              address how the normal environment of this species (the guts of surgeonfish)
              may have enabled the evolution of these life-style novelties, and serve as a
              framework for developing culture media to grow Epulopiscium in the laboratory
              so that more detailed experiments on this species can be conducted. 
              

Collaborations, discussions, and data exchange with both domestic and
              international groups that are studying Epulopiscium biology, spore-forming
              bacteria, and extremely large bacteria will be encouraged. Training and
              educational workshops will be held at The Institute for Genomic Research (TIGR)
              in Rockville, Maryland for these biologists.  The project team will make every
              attempt to ensure that underrepresented groups are included in the students and
              post-doctoral candidates who will be involved for the duration of the proposed
              study.  Sequence and microarray data will be continuously posted and updated on
              our public web site (www.tigr.org).  


