Title       : A Modeling Study of the Intrinsic Variability of the Gulf-Stream and Kuroshio
               Extension Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0221516

Award Number: 0221516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric C. Itsweire                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois W. Primeau fprimeau@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1610      PHYSICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0221516 Primeau
The purpose of this project is to test the hypothesis that the
              observed variability is a manifestation of intrinsic variability associated
              with the transitions between multiple equilibria. To do this the investigators
              will apply the recently developed methods of numerical bifurcation analysis to
              a hierarchy of ocean models with increasing realism to compute the solution
              branches found in the simpler model. The following clear criteria will be
              tested. If they are not met, the hypothesis must be rejected. 
1. The
              equilibria with elongated recirculation gyres should be relatively less
              unstable than the equilibria with elongated gyres to be consistent with the
              observation that eddy activity decreases during periods of elongated gyres 
2.
              The unstable modes associated with elongated recirculation gyres should have
              amplitude patterns that dominate in the downstream region of the jet, and those
              for the contracted recirculation gyres should have amplitude patterns that
              dominate in the upstream region, to be consistent with the observation that the
              eddy variability moves downstream during elongated states.
3. The mean zonal
              path of the jet extension should be further north for equilibria with elongated
              recirculation gyres to be consistent with the observation that the zonal mean
              path of the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio Extension moves northward during elongated
              states.
Through this study a Ph.D. student will be trained in ocean modeling
              and in the application of dynamical systems theory to climate problems. In
              addition a software package to do numerical bifurcation analysis of ocean
              models will be produced and made available to the community. The possibility
              that the observed large-scale patterns of low-frequency variability are the
              result of intrinsic variability is an exciting one because observations show
              that these current changes are signi?cant contributors to the maintenance sea
              surface temperature anomalies and thus could contribute to mid-latitude climate
              variability.

