Title       : Uncultivated microorganisms and their domestication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0221267

Award Number: 0221267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $596336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Slava S. Epstein s.epstein@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Vouros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on marine uncultivable microorganisms.  The uncultivables
              represent one of the largest reservoirs of biological diversity in the ocean. 
              The project will answer the following two questions: 1) what is the nature of
              uncultivability and why do the uncultivables not grow in the laboratory? and 2)
              how to change this and domesticate the uncultivables?  Answering these
              questions is the long-term aim of the research and this project is a
              contribution towards this goal.  With support from an NSF SGER, the PIs
              developed a novel approach for growing uncultivable microorganisms in pure
              culture in situ.  The current research builds on these results and has the
              following objectives: Objective 1: to resolve the nature of uncultivability in
              selected microorganisms.  Using their new technique, they isolated individual
              members of several consortia in pure culture in situ, and maintained their
              co-cultures in vitro.  Using an array of fine chemical tools, the PIs plan to
              resolve the chemical nature of the interactions within these microbial
              synergisms.  The PIs have designed the chemical analyses such that the
              objective will be achieved whether these microbial interactions are based on
              cross-feeding, removal of inhibitors, signaling, or other kinds of chemical
              exchange.  Objective 2: to domesticate selected uncultivable microorganisms.
              Once the PIs have resolved the nature of chemical interactions between the
              members of microbial consortia, they plan to chemically mimic the presence of
              synergistic partners in Petri dish.  The domestication process may prove highly
              specific to each microbe, or it may be applicable across a wider range of
              different microorganisms.  Objective 3: to initiate a new culture collection of
              previously uncultivable microorganisms.  The PIs see the detailed study of
              these "uncultivable" microorganisms as their long-term goal and, at this point,
              plan to make use of the newly isolated strains by building a new collection of
              novel microorganisms. The PIs plan to make this collection open to everyone so
              that their characterization will proceed in a timely manner.  Broader impact of
              this research includes training of two graduate students, involvement of
              undergraduate students through work-study and honors programs, and data
              dissemination to the public at large through meetings with local residents.  
