Title       : Synthetic Routes to Main-Group Inorganic Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  2002  
File        : a0221993

Award Number: 0221993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350709             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kouvetakis jkouvetakis@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the synthesis of novel solid-state inorganic materials,
              including epitaxial growth of device-quality thin-film heterostructures and
              nanostructures. These materials will have applications in microelectronics,
              optoelectronics, and refractory ceramics. A unique aspect of this effort in
              materials design and synthesis is the ability to build in precise atomic
              arrangements primarily via molecular chemistry so as to overcome thermodynamic
              impediments arising from differences in atomic sizes, electronic level filling
              and electronegativities of constituent atoms and thereby form new and
              metastable materials that cannot be obtained by conventional routes.  The range
              of target materials includes: (a) New semiconductors in the C-Si-Ge-Sn system,
              which are intended for integration of Si-based microelectronics with optical
              components;  (b) Quaternary wide bandgap optical materials based on covalent
              carbides and nitrides of the main group;  (c) Si based superhard dielectric
              materials and diamond-like compounds comprising light elements.  The electronic
              structure, band structure, optical, dielectric, mechanical and structural
              properties of these materials are thoroughly investigated by experimental as
              well as theoretical methods.  The work is well suited to provide broad
              preparation and state-of-the-art skills to undergraduate, graduate and
              postdoctoral student researchers in synthetic solid-state chemistry and
              materials science.

This research has significant potential for high impact
              in important areas of national interest including areas such as new optical,
              semiconducting, and superhard/ultrastrong materials, which are of interest to
              microelectronics and defense industries.  The research provides fundamental
              knowledge in novel device chemistry and physics, and thus makes important
              contributions to emerging and future technologies such as, high-speed
              computers, full color displays and communication and detection systems.  In
              addition to significant research and technological accomplishments which
              include US and international patents, the work provides graduate and
              postdoctoral training to new generations of scientists and engineers in the
              preparation and processing of new materials and in the art of chemical vapor
              deposition, which is a vital field in the microelectronics industry. 
              Collaborations are ongoing with local industries to develop materials for use
              in silicon-based high-speed electronic devices as well as new generations of
              solid-state lighting systems that are energy efficient and environmentally
              safe. The group maintains international collaborations and outreach with
              researchers in Germany, Norway, Mexico, and the Czech Republic.

