Title       : Is There an Ocean Primary Production Paradox(OP3)?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0221247

Award Number: 0221247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1675000            (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Jenkins wjenkins@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0221247

Primary production and remineralization in
              oligotrophic ocean waters like those around Bermuda are phenomena of central
              importance in the ocean carbon-cycle and figure prominently in climate change
              impact modeling. Geochemical constraints on primary production at Bermuda,
              characterized by annual and longer time-scales and based on three fundamentally
              different systems, lead to quantitatively consistent estimates of new, net
              community and export production.  This agreement between the three types of
              primary production would at first seem to be expected on such time-scales, but
              leads to the basic "Redfield Paradox ":  nutrients advected or mixed upward
              into the euphotic zone must carry with them an associated oxygen debt (AOU) and
              dissolved inorganic carbon sufficient to negate largely the observed seasonal
              photosynthetic oxygen buildup and carbon drawdown.   An exhaustive
              consideration of various explanations and scenarios that can be offered fail to
              explain the observations -- a dilemma here referred to as the "Ocean Primary
              Production Paradox (OP3)".

A team of researchers at the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution will re-examine the OP3  by simultaneously and
              definitively measuring all three geochemical systems over a period of three to
              four years.  These three systems are, specifically, euphotic zone oxygen
              production, aphotic zone oxygen consumption, and nutrient flux-gauge
              determinations.  The euphotic zone oxygen system will be constrained by the
              time-series measurement of the full suite of noble gases (He-Xe) plus O2 and
              N2,with emphasis on precision measurements of O2 and Ar (to 0.1%),the latter as
              a biogenic analog of oxygen.  The other gases will be used to more completely
              constrain and refine the air-sea gas exchange and upper ocean model. 

Aside
              from addressing fundamental problem in ocean biogeochemistry, this work is
              expected to have considerably broader impact in the field of ocean geochemistry
              by providing the oceanographic community with new sampling technology (the
              noble gas sampler) that can be used in a broad variety of biogeochemical
              problems.  The design and expertise will be made freely available to those who
              request it.  

