Title       : Research and Infrastructure Development for Public-Resource Scientific Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0221529

Award Number: 0221529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey W. Marcy gmarcy@etoile.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Korpela  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dan J. Werthimer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The SETI@home project has pioneered public-resource computing, using millions of
              computers in homes and offices around the world to perform scientific
              computing. This approach, though it presents some difficulties, has provided
              unprecedented computing power and has led to a unique public involvement in
              science.
The researchers  propose research in which anew software
              infrastructure for public-resource computing will be developed.  The
              researchers call this the Berkeley Infrastructure for Distributed Computing
              (BIDC). Among the design goals of  BIDC, two are of special importance:
 BIDC
              will provide mechanisms for efficiently and economically distributing data from
              project servers to participant hosts, which typically have commercial ISP
              connections. The mechanisms will use noncommercial networks like Abilene and
              organizational LANs where possible, and will use idle link capacity, similarly
              to the use of idle CPU cycles, with little or no impact on regular network
              usage.
 BIDC will be open-source, and will have an open architecture that will
              allow multiple independent
projects to share a single participant base.
              Participants have fine-grain control over how much of their resources are used,
              and how they are divided among the projects. New projects can be started
              easily, and function even if existing projects fail.
The researchers  will use
              BIDC for upcoming SETI projects, including new searches using the Parkes
              observatory in Australia, the future multibeam receiver at Arecibo, and wider
              frequency bands from the current receiver at Arecibo. In addition the
              researchers will encourage and support the use of BIDC by other distributed
              projects; there are potential users in numerous areas including climatology,
              oceanography, physics, mathematics, and ecological science.
There will be
              social and educational components as well. Public-resource computing projects
              succeed only if they attract and retain participants. In SETI@home, the
              researchers have developed a number of schemes for encouraging and harnessing
              friendly competition among users, and for keeping users informed and interested
              about the contributions of their computers to research. BIDC will include
              variants of these schemes that can be used within and across the projects based
              on it.
The proposed research will advance knowledge in Internet-scale
              public-resource computing, which has emerged as an important direction both in
              Computer Science and in numerous application areas. In particular, the research
              will expand the range of applications for which public-resource computing is
              effective, including applications that involve large data. It will allow
              projects to develop and deploy these applications easily, and will allow many
              such projects to efficiently share a single resource pool.
By carrying out the
              SETI@home project the researchers have demonstrated their qualification to do
              this research, and  are in a unique position to connect new projects with their
              user base of 3,500,000 people worldwide.
The research will have a broad
              impact. It will enable computational techniques that were
              previously
impractical because of their resource requirements, and will
              therefore make possible new types of research in many scientific areas. It will
              provide a framework for experimental research in other types of Internetscale
              systems (storage, semantic-based searching, security and communication). By
              enabling new scientific computing projects, it will help educate and inform the
              worldwide public in multiple scientific areas, it will directly involve the
              public in science, and will give the public a voice in the directions of
              science research.
