Title       : Center for Environmental BioInorganic Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0221978

Award Number: 0221978
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn F. Schneemeyer                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5450000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois M. Morel morel@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1991      Chemistry Projects
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9156,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Francois M. Morel, Ward, Groves, Spiro and Stiefel at Princeton; Moffett at
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute; Young, and Zylstra at Rutgers; and Bruland,
              Butle, and Haygood at The University of California are supported by the
              Division of Chemistry for their interdisciplinary collaboration aimed at
              elucidating the molecular mechanisms of the function, fate, and effect of trace
              elements in the environment. This award includes collaborations between
              Princeton, Rutgers and ExxonMobil to work on hydrocarbon degradation, among
              three University of California campuses, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and
              Rutgers to work on iron and Trichodesmium, and between McGill and Princeton to
              work on the isolation of metalloenzymes from marine diatoms.  The team will be
              focusing on the structure and function of important natural metalloenzymes and
              metal-binding compounds at the molecular level and creating new tools to study
              them in the environment. Enhanced understanding of the local and global effects
              of metals in the environment will lead to a more precise and predictive
              understanding of and establish the basic knowledge necessary to develop better
              technologies for pollution control, mitigation and remediation. The
              interdisciplinary collaborations between researchers at Princeton, Rutgers,
              three University of California campuses, the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute
              and Exxon-Mobil offer unique interdisciplinary training opportunities for the
              students and postdoctoral researchers involved with this work.
              

Environmental Molecular Science Institute (EMSI) awards are given to
              interdisciplinary teams of university, industrial and/or national laboratory
              scientists working on problems aimed at increasing fundamental understanding of
              natural processes and processes resulting from human activities in the
              environment at the molecular level. The emphasis in these awards is on
              collaborative research among teams with complementary research interests and
              the creation of broad educational experiences for students.
