Title       : BE/CBC: The Vertical Organization of Energy, Carbon, and Nutrient Cycles in an
               Ultraoligotrophic Ecosystem: A Workshop on Crater Lake, Oregon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0221908

Award Number: 0221908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Collier rcollier@coas.oregonstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1692      BE: COUPLED BIOGEOCHEMICAL CYC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1530,1689,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This award will support, under the aegis of the Biocomplexity in the Environment
              initiative, a conference at Oregon State University to examine the vertical
              organization of energy, carbon, and nutrient cycles in Crater Lake, Oregon. The
              unusual properties of this ultra-oligotrophic lake result in the vertical
              stratification of the ecosystem reminiscent of pelagic marine systems. Crater
              Lake provides a natural laboratory to study the coupling of biological
              processes, element cycles, and the physics of the environment.

Specifically,
              the award will provide some organizational support for the workshop and travel
              and subsistence support for experienced and new investigators, as well as
              students, to participate in presentations and discussions that synthesize the
              latest scientific understanding of Crater Lake and nutrient cycling.
              Discussions will also involve how best to proceed in the future to increase our
              knowledge of such ecosystems. 

Crater Lake, the deepest lake in the United
              States (i.e., 590 m), is a closed-basin caldera lake formed after the explosive
              eruption of Mt. Mazama, ~7700 years ago. The lake, which rests at an elevation
              of 1882 meters in the Cascade Mountains of south central Oregon, is surrounded
              by steep caldera walls and has a very small watershed. There are no major inlet
              streams and no surface outlet. External inflows of nutrients to the lake are
              low and dominated by precipitation and dry deposition from the atmosphere.
              Thus, the lake is ultra-oligotrophic and one of the clearest bodies of water on
              the earth. In spite of its great depth, vertical mixing is relatively rapid
              (i.e., 3-5 years) and recycled nitrogen is mixed upwards from the hypolimnion
              representing the largest source of this limiting nutrient.

Crater Lake is
              the centerpiece of one of the premier National Parks in the United States and
              it provides a unique setting to directly engage the public with compelling
              educational experiences demonstrating the function of complex aquatic
              ecosystems and the methods of interdisciplinary field research. It offers a
              unique resource for the study of the interaction of atmospheric forcing and
              land surface hydrology with biogeochemical cycles in aquatic ecosystems.
