Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Varves and Varve-Forming Processes in a High
               Arctic Lake
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0221376

Award Number: 0221376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond S. Bradley rbradley@geo.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1304,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Paleoenvironmental reconstructions from high Arctic settings have been extremely
              valuable sources of information for a range of purposes, but especially as
              indices of climatic change, which is amplified at high latitudes.  High Arctic
              lakes have been sources of information for many paleoenvironmental
              reconstructions because their watersheds and sediments usually are
              undistrurbed, ice cover limits wind-driven disturbance, and they receive highly
              seasonal sediment inputs.  Glacial lake sediments from the high Arctic are
              particularly useful, because annual to semiannual temperature resolution is
              possible and sediment supplies usually are not limited.  This doctoral
              dissertation research project will study of how varves (distinct annual layers
              of sediments) form in Arctic lakes.  The project will examine the varves and
              varve-forming processes of Lake Tuborg on Ellesmere Island in Nunavut, Canada. 
              Lake Tuborg was formed when ice advanced across the mouth of a fiord, creating
              a lake with seawater trapped beneath freshwater.  This has led to strong
              chemical and density stratification of the water column and a lack of oxygen at
              the bottom of the lake.  Burrowing organisms therefore could not disturb the
              sediments that have been carried into the lake by rivers and streams, allowing
              relatively undisturbed layers of sediment to accumulate each year.  The
              sediments have accumulated in this way for more than 3,000 years, so the lake
              contains an unusually long, pristine record of environmental change.  The
              specific tasks of this project are to understand the modern distribution and
              deposition of sediment by monitoring physical processes in the lake and to
              elucidate spatial, temporal, physical and chemical changes in recently
              deposited sediments (those deposited over the last century or so).  Physical
              processes will be recorded to monitor within lake conditions and the movement
              of sediment.  Concurrent measurements of air temperature and precipitation will
              be made, and recent sedimentation will be analyzed with networks of well-dated
              short gravity cores.

This study will provide insight into the climatic
              significance of undisturbed sediments from Lake Tuborg by providing a better
              understanding of the varve-forming process.  These analyses will improve
              understanding of past climate change at high latitudes, thereby providing a
              framework for placing future changes in a long-term context.  As a Doctoral
              Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support
              to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
              career.

