Title       : IGERT: Working Forest in the Tropics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0221599

Award Number: 0221599
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2790532            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Zarin zarin@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis E. Putz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen A. Kainer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan K. Jacobson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Schmink  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Interdisciplinary skills and knowledge are required to address issues related to
              the use and conservation of tropical forests that do not enjoy protected-area
              status ("working forests"). This IGERT builds on strengths at the University of
              Florida to construct a cutting-edge program that will serve as a model for how
              doctoral research and training can effectively and ethically contribute to
              solving critical problems facing tropical working forests.  The research goals
              are to (1) analyze tradeoffs and complementarities among working forest
              options; (2) clarify how biophysical, social, economic and political
              constraints and their interactions influence the effectiveness of different
              kinds of working forests for conservation and development; and (3) measure the
              impacts of capacity-building interventions designed to improve forest
              management and promote conservation. The methods will be integrative across a
              wide range of disciplines and explicitly comparative across four tropical
              forest regions (Lowland Bolivia; Acre, Brazil; Eastern Amazonia, Brazil; and
              the tri-national Maya Forest). The training program includes (1)
              cross-disciplinary requirements, consisting of courses in ecology and social
              science, history/culture of the research regions, and appropriate language
              proficiency; (2) integrative coursework, including Interdisciplinary Research
              Methods, Leadership and Communication Skills, Tropical Conservation and
              Development and Land-Use/Land-Cover Analysis, a Working Forests Clinic, and a
              Working Forests of the Tropics seminar and field course; and (3) complementary
              learning/teaching opportunities, including site visits within the four regions,
              annual conferences, retreats and workshops, an IGERT student group,
              internships, service as mentors, and sharing research results with
              stakeholders.  This IGERT will (1) foster research that is more responsive to
              real world problems due to interdisciplinary training and strong partner
              linkages; (2) provide a better match between knowledge and skills developed by
              graduates and job market demands; and (3) develop a network of effective
              leaders, trained for the challenges of conservation and intensified use of
              tropical working forests.

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the
              challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the
              multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

