Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Dynamic Approach to the Assessment of
               Vulnerability: Farmers' Coping Responses to No-Flow Events in the Lower Yellow
               River, 1991-1999
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0221144

Award Number: 0221144
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Kasperson rkasperson@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic Golding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research project will examine the vulnerability of
              farming households to irrigation water shortages that result from "no-flow"
              events in Lower Yellow River in the Shandong Province of China. Prior to 1949,
              severe flooding was the major threat in this region. Ironically, the increasing
              frequency, duration, and extent of "no-flow" events mean that a lack of water,
              rather than a surfeit, may be the problem of the future. But just how
              vulnerable are farmers to irrigation water shortages resulting from no-flow
              events on the Yellow River? What factors determine vulnerability to these
              shortages? How have farmers been coping with no-flow events to date, and how
              can farmers reduce their vulnerability to no-flow events in the future? The
              research will attempt to answer these questions by developing and testing a
              framework that conceptualizes vulnerability as a dynamic, evolutionary and
              iterative process that operates at different time and space scales. The
              research will focus on the experiences of farming households in two villages in
              Shandong Province during the period 1991-1999. Household surveys will be
              conducted in these villages to gather information about farmers' knowledge and
              awareness of no-flow events and the coping strategies that they have employed.
              Additional interviews will be conducted with key informants at the village and
              regional levels.  Interview data will be supplemented with official data on the
              frequency, duration, and extent of no-flow events, crop yields, and irrigation
              quotas. These data will be used to map the temporal patterns of vulnerability
              at the household level, using a modified version of the coping response
              sequence developed by the Famine Early Warning System (FEWS).  The data will
              also be used to identify the links between coping capacity and the transitional
              economy by examining socio-economic factors that have influenced the pattern of
              entitlement changes, and explore the differing social processes that affect
              vulnerability at various spatial scales. Qualitative analyses will be used to
              generate a meaningful understanding of the effects of agricultural policies and
              water management institutions on farmers' livelihoods, and the linkages between
              institutional responses at different levels. Quantitative analyses will be used
              to determine the statistical association between stress levels and household
              coping responses, between household assets and coping responses, and between
              household coping responses and specific institution strategies, and thus to
              identify the main factors affecting household vulnerability to irrigation water
              shortage.

The research will contribute to the study of vulnerability in
              several practical and conceptual ways. First, by focusing on household coping
              sequences, the research will clarify the factors that determine the nature and
              temporal dynamics of vulnerability for specific people in specific places.
              Second, the study will extend the empirical analysis of vulnerability to a
              transitional economy, which have been largely ignored to date. Third, the study
              focus on the Lower Yellow River will provide better understanding of water
              shortage problems in North China, and help improve the coping capacities of
              water management institution and farming households, and thus aid in the
              development of a sustainable water resource management regime at the regional
              and national levels.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

