Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Urban Designers and the Production of Public
               Space in Belleville, Paris, France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0221053

Award Number: 0221053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11585              (Estimated)
Investigator: Don M. Mitchell dmmitc01@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 5918,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Although community and government leaders often promote programs that can lead
              to significant transformations of major parts of cities with terms that use the
              word "public" as an adjective, there is not one public but rather many
              different groups who have interests in "public space," "public works," and
              other manifestations of "public" activity.  These different groups can have
              fundamentally different views of what is best for "the public," and the ways in
              which they organize space and interact with each other can have profound
              consequences for the groups individually and for the overall cumulative
              product. This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award proposal
              outlined plans for a doctoral student to examine the transformations of public
              space in Belleville, a community in northeastern Paris, France, that now is
              dominated by relatively poor, recently arrived immigrants.  The student will
              use ethnographic approaches to assess how the quarter's public spaces have
              developed as a result of the struggles between urban designers and local
              residents during the major redevelopment of the quarter in the 1990s.  The
              study will focus on the urban development process itself, paying particular
              attention to the determining if and how immigrant struggles for political and
              representation have influenced the design process.  The student will conduct
              archival research and use participant observation of both local residents and
              the design offices engaged in redevelopment efforts.

This project will
              provide valuable new insights into the ways that different groups conceive of
              and deal with public spaces.  In particular, it will shed light on the varying
              ways that urban designers, who often are situated far away from the sites where
              their designs are to be implemented, and residents based directly in affected
              communities participate in debates on the political economy of public space. 
              The study will provide useful information to residents and designers in the
              study area, and its insights may have practical benefits for comparable actors
              in other communities.  As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
              this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
              a strong independent research career.

