Title       : STEMTEC II - Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Teacher Education
               Collaborative FollowOn Grant
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  2002  
File        : a0221265

Award Number: 0221265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Morton M. Sternheim mort@k12s.phast.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan Feldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7688,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Teacher Education
              Collaborative (STEMTEC) is an NSF Collaborative for Excellence in Teacher
              Preparation (CETP) involving the University of Massachusetts-Amherst in
              partnership with Amherst, Hampshire, Mount Holyoke, and Smith Colleges,
              Greenfield, Holyoke, and Springfield Technical Community Colleges, and local
              school districts. STEMTEC accomplishments include the revision of mainstream
              courses for science and math majors who are potential teachers, faculty
              development to enable the adoption of student-active teaching strategies,
              alternative assessment, and collaborative group work,  and early teaching
              experiences for preservice students. New science and mathematics teacher
              preparation transfer programs were developed for community college students and
              a post-baccalaureate summer/fall secondary certification option was created. A
              follow-on project is supporting a comprehensive summative evaluation of
              STEMTEC, emphasizing the outcomes of STEMTEC efforts in K-12 schools. The
              evaluation effort focuses on the extent to which STEMTEC has improved the
              preparation of K-12 math and science teachers, recruited students into math and
              science teaching, and supported new math and science teachers. The project
              provides an induction program for new teachers coordinated with district
              programs and state and national certification requirements. It includes a
              teacher collaborative group, STEM Education Institute programs including
              Science and Engineering Saturday Seminars, and a redesigned UMass Teacher
              Education Program that features an online seminar and a master's program with a
              discipline research experience. The project is contributing data to the CETP
              Core Evaluation effort.
