Title       : IGERT: Integrated Training Program in Biomechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0221682

Award Number: 0221682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  2003   
Expires     : January 31,  2008    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2884279            (Estimated)
Investigator: Noel M. Holbrook holbrook@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard A. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew A. Biewener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Fredberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Whitesides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This IGERT project is a multidisciplinary program of education and research
              focused on biomechanics. Biomechanics is the study of phenomena in biology that
              is broadly concerned with the mechanical characteristics of cells, tissues, and
              organs. It deals with both structural aspects - for example, the strength of
              the cytoskeleton and the Young's modulus of the cell - and dynamic aspects -
              the motion of fluids in biological microchannels and the action of biological
              micromotors. Understanding these phenomena and processes requires combining
              methods, tools, and styles of research from biological and physical sciences,
              and from engineering. The IGERT program is intended to offer Ph.D. students an
              education designed to make them proficient in the methods of both biological
              and physical sciences. The research component of the program will generate
              improved understanding of important and relatively unexplored biological
              processes; it will also use this understanding to design inanimate systems that
              mimic aspects of the biological systems (biomimetic systems). The educational
              component will combine thesis programs that require co-advisors from biological
              and physical science and engineering, research rotations through laboratories
              with different styles of research, and active interaction among students with
              different backgrounds. The program will support 10 students per year, and
              involve 20 faculty at Harvard in the departments of biology, chemistry, and
              physics, the Division of Applied Science and Engineering, and the Medical
              School. Many of these research groups already collaborate in other projects:
              the proposed program will strengthen and extend these collaborations, to the
              benefit of both students and faculty. 

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended
              to meet the challenges of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with
              the multidisciplinary backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal
              skills needed for the career demands of the future. The program is intended to
              catalyze a cultural change in graduate education by establishing innovative new
              models for graduate education and training in a fertile environment for
              collaborative research that transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In
              the fifth year of the program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions
              for programs that collectively span the areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.

