Title       : A Systems Theoretic Approach to Robust Active Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0221562

Award Number: 0221562
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mario Sznaier msznaier@frodo.ee.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Octavia I. Camps  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Active vision - the confluence of control and computer vision - is positioned in
              an optimal situation to address the needs of a growing segment of the
              population. Aware environments would enable elderly people to carry on
              independent lives. Computers that interpret facial expressions to obtain cues
              to user confusion or frustration can lead to simpler interfaces. Finally,
              intelligent activity surveillance systems capable of detecting suspicious
              activities can substantially improve the ability to prevent tragedies. Clearly
              these applications would not be possible without the use of feedback to
              compensate for uncertainty and errors, stemming for instance, from poorly
              calibrated cameras, blurring or only partially determined feature
              correspondences between images. Indeed, computer vision and control are already
              linked through many successful proof-of-concept systems developed at several
              research institutions, including Penn State. However, there is a consensus in
              both the computer vision and control communities that, in spite of the implicit
              power of visual control, there are relatively few instances where these
              techniques have been successfully applied in unstructured environments. This
              can be traced, to a large extent; to theft-agility (i.e. lack of robustness) of
              active vision systems designed using classical methods.
 
The present
              proposal is motivated by preliminary work by the Co-PIs strongly indicating
              that this fragility can be addressed by appealing to a common systems theoretic
              substrate to make the interconnection between the different aspects of the
              problem stronger and more direct. Specifically, the objectives of the proposed
              research are:
 
Development of a paradigm for systematically designing
              provably robust active vision systems. This paradigm will address the computer
              vision and control aspects of the problem within a common systems-theoretic
              framework, exploiting their synergism to optimize performance. Examples of the
              advantages offered by this approach include:
 
(i)	Integration of robust
              identification/model (in)validation based predictions into target localization
              algorithms to improve robustness and reduce search time.
 
(ii)	Robust
              identification of models that combine computer vision and dynamical effects, as
              well as the corresponding uncertainty structure.
 
(iii)	Controller design
              that exploits these models and the associated uncertainty structure to robustly
              optimize performance.
 
Comprehensive experimental validation and performance
              characterization of the resulting systems, using several pan and tilt units and
              dedicated image processing hardware currently available in our lab.
 
The key
              point of the research is the realization that the problems of robustly tracking
              an object in a sequence of frames and robust performance analysis, share an
              underlying common fact: they are equivalent to analyzing the existence of a
              bounded L2 to L2 operator that satisfies certain interpolation conditions.
              While the details are somewhat different in each case, this allows for
              developing a common set of tools, by appealing to the rich language of convex
              analysis to recast these problems into an LMI optimization form.
