Title       : Development of High-Resolution, Multi-Century Records of Trace Element
               Deposition in West-Central Greenland Using ICP-MS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0221515

Award Number: 0221515
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302716             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. McConnell jmcconn@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1079,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              McConnell
0221515
The Principal Investigator will develop three spatially
              distributed, continuous, multi-century glaciochemical records of more than 20
              chemical species, trace elements, and isotopes with unprecedented temporal
              resolution (~50 to 100 samples). These unique records will significantly expand
              possible applications of glaciochemical data to the study of a range of
              environmental and global change issues. This work builds on recent NSF-funded
              development at the Desert Research Institute (DRI) of a new method for
              continuous, high-resolution ice-core analyses called Continuous Flow Analysis
              with Trace Elements (CFA-TE).  CFA-TE is a novel analytical approach in which a
              continuous ice-core melter is coupled directly with an Inductively Coupled
              Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) and traditional Continuous Flow Analysis
              (CFA) system. The apparatus makes possible continuous, high-resolution and
              exactly co-registered glaciochemical measurements of a broad spectrum of
              chemical species, trace elements, and isotopes. Measurements on an
              approximately 137meter core from Summit, Greenland demonstrate the potential of
              this new approach. Using sample handling and analytical protocols developed for
              the successful Summit analyses, CFA-TE will be used to measure more than 20
              chemical species, trace elements, and isotopes on one archived and two new
              approximately140-m ice cores from high accumulation regions of the dry snow
              zone in west-central Greenland. This area is strongly influenced by large-scale
              changes in atmospheric circulation and anthropogenic pollution from North
              America. These new glaciochemical records will extend from around 1750 A.D. to
              the present and will be the highest resolution, multi-century elemental and
              isotopic glaciochemical records ever produced from Greenland ice cores.

The
              application of ice-core chemical data in environmental, biogeochemical,
and
              global change studies has been limited by 1) relatively coarse sample
              resolution in time even for high resolution studies, 2) inexact co-registration
              in depth for different chemical measurements, and 3) the limited number of
              chemical species, elements, and isotopes routinely measured in ice cores. The
              recent development of the CFA-TE method for ice-core analysis eliminates many
              of these issues and presents a new opportunity to develop very high-resolution,
              broad-spectrum glaciochemical records at relatively modest cost. Together with
              similar, recently completed measurements from Summit, these rich data sets will
              open new avenues for using glaciochemical data to investigate environmental and
              global changes issues ranging from anthropogenic, volcanic and
              biomass-burning-related trace element fallout to changes in hemispheric-scale
              circulation.

