Title       : BE/GEN-EN: Analysis of Factors Determining the Ecological Function and
               Resilience of Microbial Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0221768

Award Number: 0221768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1316114            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jillian F. Banfield jill@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary E. Power  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne Marcus Getz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1689,1693,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Environmental chemistry is largely controlled by the interplay
              between microbial activity 
and geochemistry.  The complex nature of most
              communities in natural systems makes it 
difficult to unravel the specific
              mechanisms of this interaction. A compounding factor is that most
              microorganisms have not been isolated, and thus their biochemistry and actual
              roles in geochemical cycling are largely unknown.  This project will study a
              community at the level of its metabolic network in order to develop and test
              ecological models for community resilience and function.  The approximately
              five member community is derived from a subsurface extreme acid mine drainage
              (AMD) site within an ore body. The environmental geochemistry is simple because
              the ore deposit is ~95% pyrite (FeS2), and receives minimal inputs of fixed
              carbon and nitrogen.  Energy is supplied to autotrophs from only two sources:
              aerobic iron and sulfur oxidation. These and other characteristics make the
              system tractable to bioreactor experiments and modeling that can document
              ecosystem structure and function. 

Two groups of hypotheses based on
              established ecological principles will be tested.  First, microorganisms
              responsible for nitrogen fixation and oxidation of elemental sulfur are
              hypothesized to be keystone species because their impact on the community is
              disproportionate to their abundance.  Perturbation studies will be used to test
              this hypothesis.  Second, iron-oxidizing organisms are hypothesized to be
              adapted to higher pH conditions.  Microbes colonize pyrite surfaces, and
              through a series of species succession events, lead to a climax community at an
              optimal low pH (facilitative succession). The identity and metabolic
              characteristics of early to late colonizers in bioreactor communities will be
              determined in a series of eight washout-perturbation treatments in order to
              test this hypothesis. The central product of this study will be a
              genome-enabled elucidation of the metabolic pathways that regulate and
              determine survival of individual species and the community.  Genome data and
              gene expression will be analyzed to identify and monitor activity of genes
              responsible for oxidation of ferrous iron (the primary sulfide oxidant) and
              sulfur (the key acid generating reaction), and CO2 and nitrogen fixation. 
              Metaphysiological trophic models will be developed to describe the system and
              test hypotheses.  This modeling technique is particularly adept at handling
              non-linearities in complex systems.  Outcomes will include the first tests of
              ecological theories of succession and species interactions with genetic-level
              resolution, and students trained in the development of new approaches to
              ecology. 


