Title       : IGERT: Multidisciplinary Graduate Progrqam in Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a0221651

Award Number: 0221651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2007   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2910000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Wirth mwirth@chem.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Sawyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Rabolt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Abraham M. Lenhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary C. Farach-Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Research on protein structure, function and assembly is an inherently
              multidisciplinary enterprise that is also driving rapid change and growth
              across many types of companies.  The goal of this IGERT program is to create a
              new model for graduate education to prepare students for this evolving world.
              In this new model, students will learn how to pool the knowledge of different
              scientific, engineering and business disciplines, and different socially
              diverse groups to achieve creative and productive research collaborations.
              Students will understand their research in a larger perspective to include its
              impact on academic, industrial, and social environments. The program will
              include science and engineering doctoral students and MBA students of
              twenty-four University of Delaware faculty from four Colleges and seven
              Departments. The program is supported by a diverse local biotechnology industry
              from incubating start-ups to large global companies. It links these research
              groups to form a network of university and industrial collaborators having
              complementary expertise. The research projects are collaborative across
              disciplines and are synergistic, spanning topics that include living cells, new
              tools, and synthetic materials. The educational program augments a strong
              academic experience by incorporating the additional features of workforce
              skills, career guidance, and collaboration between business and technical
              students. A new course, "Multidisciplinary Teamwork in Research", is introduced
              that includes scientists, engineers, and MBA students. This course brings
              industrial speakers into the classroom to discuss unmet challenges that need to
              be addressed by research, and brings in social scientists to train students in
              teamwork and diversity. The course includes training in writing and oral
              presentations, and experience in working creatively on problems in teams that
              include science, engineering and business students. The educational program
              also features laboratory experience in other departments, industrial
              internships, attending conferences, presenting posters, an industrial mentoring
              program, participation of minority undergraduate researchers, and lectures and
              seminars on ethics. The IGERT program will be the subject of a doctoral
              dissertation by a social scientist to provide detailed assessment and
              dissemination. 

IGERT is an NSF-wide program intended to meet the challenges
              of educating U.S. Ph.D. scientists and engineers with the multidisciplinary
              backgrounds and the technical, professional, and personal skills needed for the
              career demands of the future. The program is intended to catalyze a cultural
              change in graduate education by establishing innovative new models for graduate
              education and training in a fertile environment for collaborative research that
              transcends traditional disciplinary boundaries. In the fifth year of the
              program, awards are being made to twenty-one institutions for programs that
              collectively span the areas of science and engineering supported

