Title       : US-Africa Cooperative Research: Collaboration in Materials Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0221416

Award Number: 0221416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251809             (Estimated)
Investigator: Winston O. Soboyejo soboyejo@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1066,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0221416
Soboyejo

This award supports a one-year collaborative project among
              Professor Winston Soboyejo, at Princeton University; Professor Aboubaker Beye,
              at the Universite Cheikh Anta Diop de Dakar, Senegal; Professor Yunus Ballim,
              at the University of the Witwatersrand, South Africa; and Professor Christopher
              Chama, at the University of Zambia.  The purpose of the grant is to promote
              research collaborations in materials science and engineering between the United
              States and Africa.  Nine US universities and one national laboratory will be
              participating in this program.  Sixteen scientists (15 from Africa and one from
              South America) will spend nine weeks conducting collaborative research projects
              at the participating US institutions.  They will conduct research in the
              following major areas: 1) failure mechanisms in micro-electro-mechanical
              systems; 2) processing, characterization and deformation of nano-scale thin
              films; 3) holistic approaches to infrastructure materials; and 4) the
              microstructural design of thermal shock resistant refractory ceramics.  The
              collaborations will continue with reciprocal visits by the US scientists to
              their African counterparts.  Support is also being provided to assist with the
              establishment of Africa MRS chapters in North Africa (Egypt), and West Africa
              (Nigeria).  In addition, US graduate students will gain valuable experience
              about the process of international collaborative research.

This project will
              also provide assistance for the coordination and/or organization of the
              following symposia that were proposed at prior NSF-supported workshops: 1)
              micro-electro-mechanical systems and thin films; 2) infrastructure materials;
              3) affordable materials; 4) low cost manufacturing; 5) biomaterials and
              biomedical systems; and 6) entrepreneurship in materials.  The symposia will
              feature talks by US researchers, graduate students and postdoctoral
              researchers, as well as their counterparts from Africa and South America. 
              Symposia presentations will be published in special editions of peer-reviewed
              international journals.  Overviews of the Africa MRS activities will also be
              presented at the US MRS meetings in Boston and San Francisco.

The Office of
              International Science and Engineering, the Directorate for Engineering, and the
              Division of Materials Research are jointly providing support for this
              project.

