Title       : Electron Transfer Mechanisms in Concentrated Organic Redox Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1994       
File        : a9396195

Award Number: 9396195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry S. White white@chem.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Electron-transfer reactions of organic compounds in highly                     
              concentrated (1-10 M) redox solutions are investigated.                        
              Extensive use is made of microelectrode techniques to obtain                   
              quantitative transport and kinetics data in solutions                          
              containing molar-level concentrations of electroactive                         
              species.  Initial studies focus on several recently identified                 
              mass-transport phenomena, including accelerated transport                      
              rates resulting from homogeneous electron-transfer reactions.                  
              In addition to microelectrode techniques, phase-measurement                    
              interference microscopy and quartz-crystal microbalance                        
              methods are used to measure physical parameters of the                         
              electrochemical depletion layer.  Other emphases include                       
              developing a detailed description of the dependence of                         
              heterogeneous electron-transfer rate constants on                              
              concentration and the investigation of the dependence of                       
              coupled chemical reactions (including catalytic reactions) on                  
              local electric fields;  electrochemical reduction of ketones                   
              is studied in detail to determine the effects of high electric                 
              fields on reaction selectivity.                                                
                                                                                             
              Commercial electrosynthetic processes are usually run in                       
              highly concentrated solutions since these give a better energy                 
              efficiency and higher throughput than do dilute solutions, but                 
              almost all laboratory electrochemistry is done in dilute                       
              solutions where variables are more easily isolated and                         
              interpreted.  By creating a fundamental framework for the                      
              properties of concentrated solutions, this work will make                      
              feasible a rational scale-up paradigm for electrochemical                      
              processes.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This is an award under the joint Initiative on Electrochemical                 
              Synthesis sponsored by the National Science Foundation and the                 
              Electric Power Research Institute.
