Title       : Fourier Transform Microwave Spectroscopic Study of Weakly Bound Complexes of
               Unsaturated Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1993     
File        : a9396236

Award Number: 9396236
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Helen O. Leung hleung@mtholyoke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mount Holyoke College
	      
	      South Hadley, MA  01075    413/538-2000

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Research Planning Grant will enable Dr. Helen Leung to                    
              initiate a research program using fourier transform microwave                  
              spectroscopy to investigate weakly bound complexes of                          
              unsaturated molecules. In the early phase of the work a a                      
              pulsed molecular beam fourier transform microwave spectrometer                 
              will be constructed.  The average and equilibrium structures of                
              complexes formed from two unsaturated subunits will be                         
              determined for the ground vibrational states. Subsequent work                  
              will investigate the molecular dynamics of these systems and                   
              and the nature of van der Waals forces. This will be done by                   
              sampling the potential energy surfaces. It is intended that the                
              work will shed light on the raction dynamics of pericyclic                     
              cycloaddition reactions between the subunits.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              Research Planning Grants are awarded to women who have not yet                 
              received federal funding for their research. Dr. Leung will be                 
              constructing the equipment necessary to study the weak                         
              interactions among certain kinds of molecules. These                           
              interactions are very important in biological systems and, in                  
              general,  in a detailed understanding of how chemical reactions                
              proceed.
