Title       : Incremental Placement and Routing for Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MIP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  1994    
File        : a9396073

Award Number: 9396073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul T. Hulina                          
	      MIP  DIV OF MICROELECTRONIC INFOR PROCESS SYS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 4,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130700             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Beetem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mitre Corporation VA
	      
	      McLean, VA  22102    /   -

NSF Program : 4731      SYSTEMS PROTOTYPING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) have the potential to                   
              revolutionize rapid hardware prototyping both in industry and in               
              university research and instruction.  To realize this potential,               
              FPGA placement and routing tools must be orders of magnitude faster            
              than those currently available.  This project is investigating the             
              use of incremental placement and routing to speed up FPGA design.              
              Design is an iterative process characterized by small changes.  By             
              processing design changes as minimally as possible, incremental                
              placement and routing has the potential to be dramatically faster              
              than conventional tools which must reprocess an entire design from             
              scratch.  For placement, a generalized incremental form of the                 
              force-directed algorithm with time-varying cost functions is being             
              investigated.  Routing is being investigated using incremental                 
              penalty-driven iterative improvement and a generalized graph                   
              representation of routing resources.  The algorithms produced will             
              be implemented to demonstrate their efficacy and at the same time              
              provide high-quality FPGA design tools.  As a side benefit, the                
              algorithms will also be applicable to conventional IC and PC board             
              placement and routing tasks.
