Title       : Modular Building Blocks for Non-Close Packed Organic Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1994   
File        : a9396298

Award Number: 9396298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48191              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Moore moore@scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the design and synthesis of                      
              nanosized units termed modules that can be pieced together by                  
              directed organization using specific, non-covalent bond                        
              associations.  The modules contain functionality for directed                  
              organization and the rigid geometry needed to form covalently                  
              pre-assembled sections of the desired cavities and/or channels.                
              Specific 1D, 2D and 3D target motifs can be realized by                        
              placement of appropriate functional groups on the modules.  The                
              approach could have a major impact on the synthesis of new                     
              functional organic materials.                                                  
                                                                                             
              With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is supporting                   
              the research of Dr. Jeffrey S. Moore, a young investigator from                
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan, Ann                 
              Arbor.  Professor Moore will focus his efforts on the rationale                
              design and preparation of packed organic crystals possessing                   
              large internal cavities and/or channels.  The resulting                        
              crystals will serve as a new family of "hosts" in the                          
              developing area of host-guest chemistry.  The method, in the                   
              long run, could lead to the preparation of new organic                         
              materials and even tailor-made organic zeolites.
