Title       : Thermodynamics of Protein Unfolding/Refolding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1993   
File        : a9396108

Award Number: 9396108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Kowalsky                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 19,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32400              (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Bolen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Med Branch Gal
	      301 University Boulevard
	      Galveston, TX  775550136    409/761-1011

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goals of this proposal follow two parallel developments in                 
              the application of thermodynamics to problems of protein                       
              unfolding.  One addresses fundamental issues associated with                   
              thermodynamics of solvent-induced and thermal unfolding of                     
              proteins and the other involves the use of thermodynamic                       
              techniques in studies of the unfolding of oxidized and reduced                 
              thioredoxin and mutant thioredoxin species.  Thioredoxin is a                  
              protein in which a change in protein stability is an integral                  
              aspect of it function.  Thermodynamic studies of the unfolding of              
              thioredoxin and site-specific mutant forms of this protein can be              
              used to establish the ground rules and constraints to which                    
              mechanistic studies of thioredoxin folding must conform.                       
                                                                                             
              Historically, there have been two major approaches to the problem              
              of protein folding.  One, largely thermodynamic in emphasis, is                
              concerned with the stability of protein species and attempts to                
              understand the forces which lead to stabilization of the native                
              (folded) state.  The other approach, which uses kinetic studies                
              to a large extent, focuses on mechanisms of folding with the goal              
              of understanding the molecular events which ultimately lead to                 
              the folding native protein.  Both of these approaches have                     
              contributed to the present day understanding of protein folding.
