Title       : Materials Synthesis and Processing: A Novel Technique of Net-Form Materials
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1994       
File        : a9396221

Award Number: 9396221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa E. Orme melissao@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terence G. Langdon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              E. Phillip Muntz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A novel method of net-form materials synthesis has been                   
              conceived and initial verification experiments have been                       
              successfully completed.  The method uses streams of highly uniform             
              droplets of molten metal which are deposited onto a substrate in               
              a controlled environment such as a vacuum or higher pressures of               
              selected gases.  The droplet deposition rate is controlled such                
              that rapid solidification occurs leading to a net-formed material              
              with small grain size and high structural integrity.  By using                 
              novel droplet stream generation techniques the droplets are                    
              directed onto the substrate with very small angular and speed                  
              dispersions thereby making possible the synthesis of small detailed            
              parts.  Since the droplets are the same size (typically 30-150                 
              microns in diameter) and travel at the same speed, the absence of              
              pre-solidification droplets in the final product leads to a more               
              homogeneous, and thus higher quality part than is normally achieved            
              with other related techniques.  Since the solidification rate                  
              determines the structural integrity of the net-formed part, the                
              droplet deposition rate, speeds, and sizes are parameters which                
              will be varied in the study.  The homogeneity and grain structure              
              of the net-formed parts will be examined both optically and with               
              the use of an electron microscope, and their mechanical                        
              characteristics will be studied by subjecting formed parts to tests            
              in both compression and tension.                                               
                   The reduction of the proposal process to practice may allow               
              the rapid fabrication of parts directly from computer-based                    
              descriptions.  The resulting parts may also be produced with novel,            
              high strength structure.
