Title       : Research Initiation Award: The Intertube Falling-Film Mode,Its Transition,
               Hysteresis, and Effect on Heat Transfer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1992     
File        : a9396194

Award Number: 9396194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony M. Jacobi jacobi@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              When a falling liquid film flows from one horizontal tube to                   
              another below it, its mode (droplets, jets, or a sheet) has a                  
              significant impact on the hydrodynamics and heat transfer.                     
              There is no complete model or empirical basis for predicting                   
              the falling-film mode, its transitions, or effects.  The                       
              proposed research is directed at understanding which physical                  
              parameters govern the mode and its transitions, quantifying                    
              the coupling between mode and heat transfer, and providing a                   
              complete basis for predicting mode behavior.                                   
                                                                                             
              In this experimental program, a liquid film falls between two                  
              heated or cooled specimen tubes in a thermally controlled                      
              environment.  Measurements of film location, thickness, and                    
              velocity, along with measurements of the surrounding vapor                     
              temperature, pressure, velocity, and heat transfer,                            
              characterize the falling film and its influence.  Experiments                  
              are conducted with different working media, tube diameters and                 
              spacings, and in quiescent and forced flows, with varying heat                 
              fluxes, liquid mass flow rates, and thermodynamic conditions.                  
              Candidate parameters are examined for their influence on                       
              transitions and hysteresis.  Coupling between the mode and                     
              heat transfer are studied, to develop a basis for evaluating                   
              the mode and its effects.
