Title       : NSF Young Investigator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1999 
File        : a9396244

Award Number: 9396244
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: C. Suzanne Iacono                       
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce R. Schatz schatz@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                Science information systems is the construction and study of                
              complete computer systems to support scientific research.   This               
              project is building a model "electronic community system", a                   
              digital library containing all the knowledge of a community of                 
              molecular biologists and a software environment to manipulate this             
              library across the NSFNET, with the first release currently running            
              in 20 biology laboratories.                                                    
                                                                                             
                 Several studies are being pursued in collaboration to                       
              investigate technology and sociology issues in constructing                    
              electronic communities.  An "information space" is the                         
              representation used to support uniform transparent retrieval from              
              many distributed data sources; it consists of uniform objects which            
              package items from the sources and interconnect them to form a                 
              relationship graph.  There are data model issues in providing                  
              uniformity across multiple data types and network caching issues in            
              providing transparency of interaction across wide-area networks.               
              There are also information retrieval issues in supporting                      
              semantic-based retrieval from an automatically generated                       
              representation which includes a domain-specific thesaurus.                     
              Finally, there are sociological issues in how the communication                
              patterns of the community change with significant electronic                   
              support.
