Title       : Photooxidation of Metal Carbynes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1994   
File        : a9396213

Award Number: 9396213
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa McElwee-White lmwhite@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Lisa McElwee-White of the Chemistry Department of Stanford                     
              University is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and                    
              Organometallic Program for continued investigation of the                      
              reactions of photochemically-generated organometallic radical                  
              cations.  Metal carbyne complexes of molybdenum and tungsten,                  
              which also contain cyclopentadiene, carbonyl and phosphine                     
              ligands, are the starting materials.  Depending on reaction                    
              condition, the radicals produced undergo ligand substitution or                
              carbyne ligand rearrangement reactions.  The rearrangement                     
              reactions produce organic products stereospecifically.  In this                
              study, the mechanism of the rearrangement reaction will be                     
              studied using spectroscopic and isotopic labelling                             
              experiments,and a variety of carbyne ligands will be tested.                   
              The goal of the research is to develop new methods of organic                  
              synthesis, especially for desirable stereospecific products.                   
              %%%                                                                            
              In this fundamental research project, light will be used to                    
              induce the production of organic molecules of specific                         
              symmetries.  The reactant molecule, which contains a                           
              carbon-carbon triple bond, is originally bound to a metal                      
              complex.  Upon irradiation, it rearranges in a specific way and                
              is released to form the product.  The project will develop new                 
              methods of synthesis for various organic products.
