Title       : Workshop: Advanced Study Institute on Computational Methods for Engineering
               Analysis and Design, Madras, August 2-11, 1993, Award in Indian and U.S.
               Currencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  1993  
File        : a9396319

Award Number: 9396319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45427              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. N. Reddy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Description:  This proposal requests support                                   
              for the travel of six U.S. scientists to the                                   
              Advanced Study Institute on Computational                                      
              Methods for Engineering Analysis and Design, at                                
              the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT),                                      
              Madras, August 2-11, 1993.  The organizers are                                 
              C.S. Krishnamoorthy, of IIT and J.N. Reddy, of                                 
              Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State                                       
              University.  India's Department of Science and                                 
              Technology is a key sponsor and will support                                   
              all invited speakers from within India. The                                    
              purpose is to have a detailed exchange of                                      
              information among prominent scientists on the                                  
              most recent advances in computational methods                                  
              for the analysis and design of engineering                                     
              systems in aerospace, civil, mechanical, and                                   
              manufacturing.  Advances such as the                                           
              development of powerful numerical tools, the                                   
              application of artificial intelligence to                                      
              design, and the use of special modeling                                        
              techniques have contributed to the emergence of                                
              engineering design as an area of specializa-                                   
              tion.  In research, too, increasing attention                                  
              is devoted to developing design theory and                                     
              models for design processes. The workshop aims                                 
              at synthesizing and presenting state-of-the art                                
              computational methods required for analysis and                                
              design of engineering systems.                                                 
                                                                                             
              Scope: The workshop should lead to a meaningful                                
              exchange of knowledge and expertise in the                                     
              areas of analytical modeling, advanced comput-                                 
              ational methods and software for use in                                        
              practical designs in several disciplines of                                    
              engineering.  High level academics and                                         
              practicing engineers in India and the U.S. will                                
              review developments in the field, identify                                     
              future research and development activities and                                 
              formulate collaborative research projects of                                   
              mutual interest to the U.S. and India.  The                                    
              proceedings of the workshop will be a state-of-                                
              the-art publication that can be expected to be                                 
              of immense value to researchers and                                            
              practitioners in academia and industry, and to                                 
              students engaged in analysis and design of                                     
              engineering systems.
