Title       : Pelagic to Benthic Coupling of Recruitment in the American Lobster (Homarus
               americanus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1992  
File        : a9396081

Award Number: 9396081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Wahle   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Rates of larval settlement may be a major determinant of                       
              subsequent year-class size for many benthic invertebrates. However             
              it is often difficult to elucidate the relative importance of                  
              pre- and post-settlement processes to spatial and temporal                     
              variability in recruitment.  The American lobster, Homarus                     
              americanus, recruits from a pelagic postlarva to shelter-                      
              providing benthic substrata, but little is understood about the                
              regulating factors or the consequences of this process. This                   
              project will examine the linkage from late pelagic to early benthic            
              phase along the central coast of Maine, where shallow subtidal                 
              cobble provides prime recruitment habitat.  Previous studies                   
              from 1989-1991 suggest that lobster recruitment at some sites may              
              be limited by larval supply, whereas others may be limited by the              
              availability of suitable habitat.  This study will utilize an                  
              experimental approach at two different sites that consistently                 
              represents the extremes in recruitment density despite apparent                
              similarities of the habitats.  At these sites habitat manipulations            
              and postlarval seeding experiments will test the influence of                  
              postlarval supply, habitat quality, and density-dependent processes            
              on benthic recruitment.  Hydrographic data will be collected to                
              examine possible differences in stratification as well as absolute             
              temperature structure that may influence postlarval diving                     
              behavior.
