Title       : Forgetting in Short Term Memory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1994     
File        : a9396076

Award Number: 9396076
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 30,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Dosher bdosher@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate the accuracy and speed with which               
              people can retrieve material from memory; its aim is to account                
              for dissociations between different kinds of performances which                
              depend primarily on short-term memory.  The aspects of short-                  
              term memory performance on which the research will focus include               
              the accuracy with which people can retrieve memorized materials                
              when they are asked to recognize them (studied via forgetting                  
              functions), the speed with which they can retrieve such materials              
              (studied via reaction time or scan time), and the accuracy with                
              which they can produce memorized materials when asked to recall                
              them (studied via ordered recall or span).  These measures are                 
              sensitive to differences in materials and between individuals.                 
              Though analysis of individual differences in performances in                   
              problem solving, reading, etc., shows that short-term memory is                
              one good predictor of these performances, the various measures                 
              can show odd dissociations.  For  example, retrieval times and                 
              production in recall show related dependence on materials, but                 
              individuals whose performance is above average on one measure may              
              not be above average on the other.  This research will test a                  
              precise quantitative model of short-term memory performance.  The              
              core of the model is short-term forgetting, fairly directly                    
              measured by forgetting functions.  Experiments will show whether,              
              as the model suggests, retrieval time is tied primarily to speed               
              of forgetting, while production or recall also is strongly                     
              affected by initial efficiency in learning.  Experiments will                  
              outline the relations between the three aspects of short-term                  
              memory within individuals for different materials, including                   
              characters and words, both controlled and uncontrolled for                     
              phonemic complexity, and geometric and graphical items.  The                   
              project aims to produce an accurate model to account for the                   
              common materials effects, explain the dissociation in measures                 
              for the individual, and to suggest how the various short-term                  
              memory measures should be interpreted with respect to their role               
              in different kinds of mental tasks.  Because of the dependence of              
              so many tasks on short-term memory, the results of this research               
              will bear on issues such as reading, problem solving, and                      
              decision making, as well as on education in these tasks.
