Title       : REU: Systematics of Chlamydomonas and the Chlamydomonadales (Chlorophyceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  1992    
File        : a9396019

Award Number: 9396019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Buchheim mark-buchheim@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The modern molecular approach of nucleic acid sequence                    
              comparison will be combined with the latest computer-aided                     
              cladistic analyses to answer fundamental questions about the                   
              evolutionary relationships and taxonomy of a widely known and                  
              frequently used algal unicell, Chlamydomonas and its relatives.                
              Drs. Mark Buchheim and Russell Chapman at Louisiana State                      
              University have gathered preliminary evidence that indicates that              
              many of the 500 or so described species of Chlamydomonas are not               
              valid and that textbook examples of the evolution of motile                    
              colonies of algae from unicellular Chlamydomonas must be re-                   
              examined.  The extensive use of this organism and some of its                  
              relatives in cell biology and molecular biology research, as well              
              as its prominence in virtually all textbook coverages of green                 
              algae, make the study of this eukaryote unicell especially                     
              important.                                                                     
                   Nuclear encoded ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences will be                    
              obtained through direct sequence analysis using reverse                        
              transcriptase enzymes or through polymerase chain reaction                     
              amplification of ribosomal DNA.  Sequences are aligned by                      
              computer and used as characters for taxonomic evaluation of the                
              most likely pattern of phylogenetic splitting leading to the                   
              several subgroups of Chlamydomonas currently recognized.  The                  
              phylogeny so obtained will test whether colonial or multicellular              
              forms of green algae have evolved only once or several times, and              
              from what likely ancestral lineages.
