Title       : Active Site Structure and Function of Copper Enzymes in Denitrification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1994    
File        : a9396202

Award Number: 9396202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132900             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Dooley dmdooley@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The principal goal of the proposed research is a fundamental                   
              understanding of the structural and catalytic roles played by the              
              metal ions and protein moieties in nitrite and nitrous oxide                   
              reductases.  Extensive spectroscopic and chemical studies on                   
              these reductases are proposed.  These classes of multicopper                   
              redox enzymes provide new opportunities to investigate                         
              structure/function relationships in copper-containing enzymes                  
              that are involved in denitrification.  Dr. Dooley will also                    
              address questions concerning the possible regulation of theses                 
              enzymes by intermediates in the denitrification pathway.  In                   
              addition a partially copper-depleted form of N2O reductase,                    
              isolated from a mutant strain of Pseudomonas stutzeri, will be                 
              thoroughly characterized.  The spectroscopic properties of Cu(II)              
              will be exploited as a built-in probe of the active site by                    
              variable temperature X-ray absorption spectroscopy circular                    
              dichroism, magnetic circular dichroism resonance Raman, and EPR                
              spectroscopy.  Dr. Dooley plans to develop a N2O-specific                      
              electrode assay for activity which would facilitate kinetics and               
              mechanism studies of N2O reductase.  Effects of exogenous ligands              
              (inhibitors, denitrification intermediates, substrate analogs)                 
              and pH on the spectral properties and kinetics of the copper                   
              reductases will also be investigated.  Integrating results from                
              spectroscopic experiments and mechanistic studies will permit new              
              structure/reactivity/function correlations among multicopper                   
              oxidases and reductases to be formulated.  Understanding the                   
              relationships between the structures and mechanisms of nitrite                 
              and N2O reductases is expected to play an essential role in                    
              developing rational strategies to control and exploit biological               
              denitrification.
