Title       : An Introductory Computer Science Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9052116

Award Number: 9052116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49543              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Stinson stinson@cps.cmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gongzhu Hu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. N. Jayaram Murthy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Michigan U
	      Office of Research
	      Mount Pleasant, MI  48859    989/774-6777

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes a dedicated laboratory for the                        
              introductory Computer Science course sequence for majors, namely               
              CPS 180 and CPS 181.  The laboratory hardware consists of 30                   
              Mcintosh computers that are networked to a file server/instructor              
              workstation.  Laser printers provide hardcopy output and the                   
              software includes a Pascal compiler.  In these courses, students               
              are expected to understand the general concepts of problem solving             
              using computers.  They are also expected to master programming                 
              skills with the use of a structured language for the implementation            
              of algorithms.  The laboratory facilities are utilized in the                  
              classroom to give demonstrations and planned in-class assignments              
              to clarify a concept, to demonstrate an idea and/or to teach a                 
              skill.  This project is significant because it adds the most                   
              important component that has been missing in classrooms for                    
              teaching computer courses, namely the computer.  During the in-                
              class experiments, problem solving efforts are closely monitored               
              by the faculty teaching the course.  Debugging skills are taught               
              under supervised conditions.  Outside of class hours, students                 
              registered in these courses have priority access to the laboratory             
              facilities to complete the programming assignments.  This                      
              laboratory provides excellent facilities through which the                     
              instructors enhance their teaching effectiveness. The award is                 
              being matched by an equal amount from the principal investigator's             
              institution.
