Title       : Photoelectronic Detectors Lasers and Fiber Optics: A Tech- nologically Current
               Approach to the Study of Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1992   
File        : a9052184

Award Number: 9052184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1990      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17195              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott R. Baird baird@kuphsx.phsx.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Benedictine College
	      
	      Atchison, KS  66002    913/367-6110

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Benedictine College is introducing a series of new laboratories in             
              optics which allow students to study the nature of light with                  
              equipment similar to what they will find in industry and research.             
              While investigating such standard optical phenomena as diffraction,            
              blackbody radiation, and image formation they are learning both the            
              physics behind several types of detectors (photomultiplier tubes,              
              photodiode arrays, CCDs), lasers, and fiber optics, and they are               
              becoming familiar with tools that they are likely to encounter in              
              graduate school or in industry.  Experiments using these                       
              instruments are being introduced into the Optics Laboratory course,            
              which is required of all physics and astronomy majors.  The Optics             
              lecture course, taken simultaneously, is being changed to include              
              extensive discussion of these objects and their underlying physics.            
              Some of the equipment is also being used in upper-division                     
              astronomy laboratory exercises.  All this equipment is being used              
              by physics, astronomy, and biology students in undergraduate                   
              research projects.  Such research efforts are graduation                       
              requirements for majors in these three areas, and these detectors              
              are in almost continual demand.  The college is matching the award             
              with an equal amount of funds.//
