Title       : Instrumentation Enhancement for Science, Technology, and Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1990     
File        : a9052085

Award Number: 9052085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1990      
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zafra M. Lerman zafral@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bela Majoros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia College
	      600 S Michigan
	      Chicago, IL  606051901    312/663-1600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Columbia College Chicago has a significant tradition of training               
              future communications professionals, including a substantial                   
              proportion of women and minority students.  The Science and                    
              Mathematics Department incorporates this tradition into the                    
              chemistry curriculum by offering courses which examine the impact              
              of chemistry on areas of social concern like the environment,                  
              drugs and drug testing, and consumer product quality                           
                                                                                             
              Results of student research projects in these and other areas are              
              integrated with the students' communications specialties through               
              the presentation of reports such as videotapes, films, artwork                 
              and other creative presentations.  Student projects have appeared              
              on local cable television, and have been presented nationally and              
              internationally at numerous science museums, science centers,                  
              conferences, symposia and special lectures.                                    
                                                                                             
              Laboratory experience, which is a strong emphasis throughout the               
              curriculum, features numerous applications of analytical                       
              technique, including gas chromatography.  The acquisition of the               
              high pressure liquid chromatograph through this project expanded               
              the analytical methods component of the institution's laboratory               
              program as a logical extension of their chromatography                         
              capability.  The Atomic Absorption Spectrometer permitted                      
              analysis of metals in a variety of settings.  The instrumentation              
              allowed students to investigate and report on a wide variety of                
              realistic problems in the application of chemistry to the                      
              concerns and needs of society.                                                 
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to the project in an amount equal to               
              the NSF funds.
