Title       : Instructional Laboratory for Civil and Surveying EngineeringData Acquisition,
               Analysis and Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1991      
File        : a9052068

Award Number: 9052068
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1991     
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50499              (Estimated)
Investigator: David F. Mezera   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan P. Vonderohe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1365      PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The convergence of infrastructural and environmental crises with               
              a technological explosion is giving rise to vast expenditures of               
              public and private funds on land/spatial infrastructure                        
              information systems.  This in turn is creating a burgeoning need               
              for professionals trained in the design, implementation, and                   
              management of these systems.  These social and technological                   
              dynamics exert enormous pressure on education institutions to                  
              respond to change and more importantly, to help shape positive                 
              change.  In civil and environmental engineering, effective course              
              offerings, and curricula, methods of instruction depend upon                   
              state-of-the-art instructional laboratories which keep pace, as                
              best as practical with technological innovation.  This project                 
              aims to upgrade equipment in surveying engineering and land                    
              information studies laboratories.  Specifically, the project                   
              seeks to acquire electronic angle and distance measurement                     
              systems (total stations) for state-of-the-art three dimensional                
              field data collection, and computer equipment/software for modern              
              laboratory data processing, analysis, design and graphics                      
              presentations.  This equipment will enable changes to be                       
              incorporated into our instructional programs to meet the                       
              challenges of these rapidly changing times.  The project not only              
              responds to the current situation, it attempts to anticipate                   
              future requirements for civil and surveying engineers and the                  
              associated land information management problems.  It will have a               
              direct impact upon twelve courses and as many as 1100 students                 
              over the next five years.
