Title       : Multi-Media Teaching in Geology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1990    
File        : a9052167

Award Number: 9052167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marvin E. Kauffman                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1990 
Expires     : August 31,  1992     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70962              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Prothero prothero@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This proposal requests equipment that will enable                         
              the Department of Geological Sciences at University of                         
              California, Santa Barbara to provide advanced laboratory and                   
              lecture media capability of its students.  Over the years, the                 
              UCSB geology faculty have shown strong interest in developing and              
              using computers and advanced visual presentation media to                      
              teach undergraduate courses.  Presently we are, with both                      
              University and Apple Corp. funding, creating a videodisc                       
              (consisting of slides, animations, and video clips) for use in                 
              our Oceanography course, an extensive interactive tutorial for                 
              Optical Mineralogy and Crystallography, and an interactive                     
              tutorial on the evolution of the North American continent from                 
              Phanerazoic to the present. The interactive tutorials are                      
              demonstration projects being implemented with SuperCard on color               
              Macintosh computers. The potential use for this kind of material               
              is enormous.  We want to create an environment where students can              
              browse through a side range of geological information in support               
              of their laboratory and coursework, access tutorials of                        
              geological topics, and communicate with their professors through               
              electronic mail over a network.  We hope that this will also have              
              the affectof softening subject matter boundaries, integrating                  
              diverse branches of the geological sciences.  A high speed                     
              network connected to computers in the laboratories, combined with              
              presentation equipment, will allow the students and lecturers to               
              have access to a much wider range of instructional material than               
              they would otherwise.  All or the material would also be                       
              available to students outside of the laboratory.  We are                       
              requesting equipment for use in student labs, department network               
              support for availability of the material department and                        
              campus.wide,equipment in support of lecturing (using the                       
              computer's display and animation capability), and computers for                
              faculty use in lecture, laboratory, and tutorial materials                     
              preparation.
