Title       : Colony Structure and Queen-Worker Conflict in Social Insects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9496230

Award Number: 9496230
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33096              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Herbers herbers@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie S. Banschbach  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   For some insect societies a colony can comprise several                   
              discrete nesting units.  This phenomenon of colony fractionation,              
              or polydomy, produces nest subunits that can differ primarily in               
              whether or not they contain a queen.  Since workers and their                  
              mother queen are in conflict over how reproductive energy should               
              be allocated polydomous colonies represent natural systems for                 
              studying conflict and cooperation within the squabbling family.                
              Furthermore, polydomous colonies represent a tractable ecological              
              system for studying levels of selection.  Colonies of the ant                  
              species Myrmica punctiventris are seasonally polydomous:  in                   
              spring a colony emerges aboveground as a unit, but then                        
              fractionates.  Nest subunits are functionally autonomous during                
              the summer months, but re-coalesce in fall for overwintering.                  
              Previous work has shown that workers can exploit this system to                
              bias reproductive broods towards their own interests and away                  
              from the interests of their mother queen.  The proposed research               
              will characterize colony structure and reproductive allocation                 
              for three populations of this species; contextual analysis will                
              allow us to distinguish selection on the local nesting unit                    
              versus on the entire colony.  A field experiment will be carried               
              out to assess the impact of ecological parameters for seasonal                 
              polydomy, reproductive allocation, and levels of selection in                  
              this species.  The research will provide considerable insight to               
              the evolutionary mechanics of social behavior.  Furthermore this               
              project, while primarily basic research, may have implications                 
              for control of pest ant species, which are notoriously                         
              polydomous.
