Title       : Maintenance of Preindustrial Atmospheric pCO2 Levels: Recalibration of a Carbon
               Isotopic Paleobarometer and pCO2 mapping of the late Quaternary Global Ocean.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1994 
File        : a9496312

Award Number: 9496312
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42050              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Jasper   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Hayes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              The carbon-isotopic compositions of long-chain alkenones will be               
              compared to those of coexisting foraminiferal carbonates in                    
              representative in representative ocean waters for which the                    
              concentration of dissolved carbon dioxide is also known.  The                  
              objective will be to examine relationships between carbon-isotopic             
              fractionations and CO2 levels, thus calibrating a "CO2                         
              paleobarometer."  In cold, high latitude waters, both suspended and            
              sinking materials will be examined in materials collected during               
              the JGOFS North Atlantic Bloom Experiment.  Extensive data on the              
              concentration and isotopic composition of dissolved CO2 are already            
              available for that site.   Alkenones and carbonates from Southern              
              Ocean transects are also available, as are data on carbonate                   
              chemistry and isotopic composition.  At lower latitudes with warmer            
              surface waters, materials from the Eastern Equatorial Pacific JGOFS            
              site will be examined.  Alkenones will be obtained from suspended              
              particulate organic carbon.  Concentrations and isotopic                       
              compositions of dissolved CO2 are available from JGOFS reports and             
              the isotopic composition of forams will be determined in the course            
              of this work.  Isotopic signals actually reaching the sediment                 
              water interface will be examined through analyses of materials from            
              core tops in the Norwegian Sea (high-latitude, low-temperature                 
              site) and at the Eastern Equatorial Pacific JGOFS site.
