Title       : U.S.-Mexico Research: Systematic and Evolutionary Studies of Mexican
               Podostemaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1994  
File        : a9496072

Award Number: 9496072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16700              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Thomas Philbrick Philbirck@wcsu.ctstateu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western CT State Col
	      181 White Street
	      Danbury, CT  068106845    203/797-4000

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will fund a two year study in Mexico                                
              to elucidate the patterns and processes of                                     
              evolution of New World Podostemaceae, the                                      
              largest family of aquatic flowering plants                                     
              (river weeds).  Both a field collection program                                
              and experimental studies of the patterns and                                   
              processes of evolutionary diversification will                                 
              be conducted.  The collection will provide the                                 
              foundation for subsequent systematic and                                       
              evolutionary studies and will be the first step                                
              in the production of a taxonomic framework to                                  
              estimate the diversity, sensitivity to human                                   
              impact, and potential utility, as biological                                   
              indicators of water pollution, of the                                          
              Podostemaceae.  The insight gained from these                                  
              studies will be valuable in planning broader                                   
              scale studies of reproductive systems                                          
              throughout the family.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The project is a collaborative research effort                                 
              between Dr. C. Thomas Philbrick, of the Rancho                                 
              Santa Ana Botanical Garden, California and Mr.                                 
              Alejandro Novelo, of the National Autonomous                                   
              University of Mexico (UNAM), Mexico City.  The                                 
              project provides a great opportunity not only                                  
              to study reproduction and evolution in a                                       
              biologically diverse and sometimes peculiar                                    
              group but will also improve our understanding                                  
              of the biodiversity and evolution of aquatic                                   
              flowering plants overall.
