Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analysis on Groups and Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1993   
File        : a9496025

Award Number: 9496025
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ann K. Boyle                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Sarnak sarnak@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This grant supports the research of Professor P. Sarnak as                
              principal investigator and Dr. Zeev Rudnick as a post-doctoral                 
              associate.  Professor Sarnak will work on the spectral theory of               
              automorphic forms and its applications to number theory and                    
              combinatorics.  He hopes to make progress towards the general                  
              Ramanujan conjecture.  Dr. Rudnick is working in automorphic                   
              forms.  He intends to apply techniques derived from the study of               
              automorphic forms to counting integer points on affine varieties.              
              He is also investigating the behavior of Euler products.                       
                   This is research in the field of number theory broadly                    
              conceived.  Number theory starts with the whole numbers and                    
              questions such as the divisibility of one whole number by                      
              another.  It is among the oldest fields of mathematics and it was              
              originally pursued for purely aesthetic reasons.  However, within              
              the last half century, it has become an essential tool in                      
              developing new algorithms for computer science and new error                   
              correcting codes for electronics.
