Title       : Lamellar-Micellar Transitions in Surfactant-Phospholipid- Protein Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9496272

Award Number: 9496272
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne Walter waltera@stolaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Saint Olaf College
	      1520 St. Olaf Avenue
	      Northfield, MN  55057    507/646-2222

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Amphiphilic molecules dispersed in aqueous solution spontaneously              
              assemble into structures thought to be defined by the size, shape              
              and chemistry of the entire system.  In the dilute region of the               
              phase diagram, phospholipids and surfactants undergo a vesicle-                
              micelle transition with increasing fraction of surfactant.  Two                
              types of micelle were observed recently, a cylindrical mixed                   
              micelle and small mixed micelles at higher surfactant levels.  The             
              phase behavior of phospholipids with surfactants at high water                 
              content will be examined to elucidate the process of structural                
              transition in these mixed systems from a thermodynamic and kinetic             
              perspective.  The structures will be identified and the positions              
              of the phase boundaries determined as a function of amphiphile                 
              chemistry and thermodynamic parameters (temperature, pressure).                
              cylindrical mixed micelles and their formation from small mixed                
              micelles or vesicles will be characterized by separation                       
              techniques, fluorescence probes sensitive to the differences                   
              between these structures, nuclear magnetic resonance, and the                  
              kinetics of the transition.  Molecular packing models will be                  
              tested and the energetics of assembly will be calculated in order              
              to improve the quantitative models to be applied when using                    
              amphiphiles to create, for example, biological model membranes,                
              drug delivery systems, and protein crystals.                                   
              %%%                                                                            
              The focus of this study is a class of molecules called amphiphiles.            
              The amphiphiles have two parts, an oily, nonpolar or hydrophobic               
              end, and a polar, hydrophilic end.  A special class of amphiphiles             
              is the phospholipids which along with amphiphilic proteins make up             
              the membranes that surround the biological unit of the cell.  When             
              amphiphiles are added to water, they self-assemble into clusters of            
              molecules with the polar hydrophilic groups facing the water and               
              the nonpolar hydrophobic groups clustered together in the center.              
              The shape and size of these structures depends on the shape and                
              relative concentrations of the molecules that compose them.                    
              This study will focus on the biological amphiphiles dispersed in               
              water with a series of detergents that are used in biological                  
              studies.  The goals are to describe the structural transitions that            
              occur as the relative detergent concentration changes using                    
              electron microscopy and several spectroscopic techniques.                      
              Understanding these systems may have far-reaching consequences.                
              Subtle changes in phospholipid structure are likely to regulate                
              cell function.  Although the temperature and pressure affect the               
              characteristic properties of an amphiphiles - water system details             
              are not well known.  The general principles learned will have a                
              broader application for all amphiphilic mixtures from detergent                
              design to the rheology properties of mixture of oils and                       
              emulsifiers.
