Title       : Presidential Young Investigators Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1994 
File        : a9496309

Award Number: 9496309
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George Lea                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42090              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Keyes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This Presidential Young Investigator (PYI) Award will be devoted               
              to computational engineering, in particular, the following three               
              areas will be examined: algorithmic enhancements, applications to              
              computational fluid dynamics and other convective-diffusive                    
              systems, and implementation on parallel supercomputers.                        
                                                                                             
              For field problems with in two or more dimensions, domain decom-               
              position is a natural way to partition operations across proces-               
              sors and to partition data across memories, since both the data                
              structures and the algorithms employed in a proven serial code                 
              can be carried over to the parallel case with special code to                  
              treat the artificially introduced partitioning boundaries.  The                
              principal bottleneck to parallelizing iterative schemes is the                 
              preconditioning.  The goal of preconditioning in domaindecom-                  
              position is to create independent or nearly independent threads                
              of execution and optimal memory management of problems too large               
              to fit in active core.                                                         
                                                                                             
              Some of the issues to be examined under algorithmic                            
              include:                                                                       
                                                                                             
                1. adaptive gridding and transition between levels of                        
              refinements occurring at subdomain boundaries.                                 
                                                                                             
                2. adaptive updates of preconditioning and active control                    
                   of local convergence rates.                                               
                                                                                             
                3. transitional regions between subdomain boundaries for                     
                   three dimensional problems.                                               
                                                                                             
              The implementation issues to be addressed are:                                 
                                                                                             
                1. complex domain geometry.                                                  
                                                                                             
                2. characterizing the performance of supercomputers (Cray, etc)              
                   on domain-decomposed applications.                                        
                                                                                             
                3. comparison between domain-decomposed out-of-core solution                 
                   techniques with traditional techniques.                                   
                                                                                             
              Some of the test problems for which domain decomposition will be               
              applied are: aerodynamics modeling. oil reservoir modeling, semi-              
              conductor device physics modeling, and detailed kinetics                       
              combustion modeling.
