Title       : Electron Transport in Disordered Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1994       
File        : a9496134

Award Number: 9496134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Phillips dimer@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal grant jointly funded by the Divisions of                     
              Materials Research and Chemistry.  The theoretical project focuses             
              on the role of disorder on the transport and spin properties of                
              granular metals and conducting polymers.  The work on granular                 
              metals represents a new thrust to this ongoing project.  Impurity              
              band and scaling arguments are proposed to explain the                         
              experimentally observed conductivity in granular metals.  It is                
              shown how the impurity band model for granular metals can be                   
              applied to conducting polymer polyaniline.  In addition, an                    
              interacting electron model is used to explain the magnetic                     
              properties of polyaniline.  Studies will be conducted on                       
              polyacetylene and the role of structural disorder on the insulator-            
              metal transition.  Finally, a study of the crossover from two- to              
              one-dimensional dynamics in the polymer poly-pyrolle perchlorate               
              will be undertaken.                                                            
              %%%                                                                            
              In real materials disorder manifests itself through impurities or              
              the misplacement of atoms or molecules in an otherwise perfect                 
              crystal or chemical structure.  This disorder can have profound                
              effects on the properties of materials.  The understanding of                  
              various types of disorder and its influence on materials represents            
              a major challenge to materials scientists.  The proposed research              
              will study a novel approach to the effects of disorder on two types            
              of systems:  conducting polymers and granular metals.  Both of                 
              these materials have important applications and pose formidable                
              theoretical difficulties.
