Title       : The Politics of International Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1993   
File        : a9496057

Award Number: 9496057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10751              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Bates   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ctr Adv Stdy in Behav Sci
	      202 Junipero Serra Boulevard
	      Stanford, CA  943058006    415/321-2052

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Scholars agree that two central questions in political economy are:            
              How do economic markets become politically regulated?  And, once               
              regulated, what determines the allocation of resources within them?  To        
              date, little research has been directed at these questions.                    
                                                                                             
              This project will address these questions by examining the case of the         
              international coffee market.  The market is regulated by international         
              agreement.  One objective of this research is to examine what led to           
              the elaboration of political rules to govern trade in this commodity.          
              Another objective is to characterize the way in which these rules              
              influence the quantities traded and the price levels maintained in             
              international markets.                                                         
                                                                                             
              The study of the political regulation of markets lies at the forefront         
              of theoretical concerns in contemporary social science.  The research          
              is also important for policy reasons.  Coffee represents one of the            
              most valuable exports from the unstable countries of Central and               
              Southern America.  Understanding the way in which trade in this                
              commoditiy is governed is thus of great interest, for it may help              
              policy makers to restructure the rules of the agreement so as to bring         
              greater prosperity to these strategically important nations.
