Title       : Mechanism of Ferric Entrobactin Uptake Through FepA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1994      
File        : a9496173

Award Number: 9496173
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valerie W. Hu                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39875              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip E. Klebba @aardvark.ucs.uoknor.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research will examine the mechanism of ferric enterobactin                 
              passage through its Escherichia coli outer membrane receptor,FepA.             
              Binding, in which the siderophore or colicin associates with                   
              specific residues of FepA that are located on the external surface             
              of the bacterial cell; Uptake, in which the receptor, by                       
              interaction with TonB, undergoes conformational change or other                
              mechanisms, facilitates the movement of ferric enterobactin through            
              the OM bilayer. A variety of biochemical, molecular genetic, and               
              immunological approaches to these problems will be utilized,                   
              including random and site-specific mutagenesis, genetic selection              
              for FepA proteins that function independently of TonB, and                     
              immunochemical purification of cell envelope proteins that may                 
              physically associate with FepA during ferric enterobactin uptake.              
              These investigations will enhance understanding of the mechanism by            
              which two distinct secreted proteins, colicins B and D, and a                  
              siderophore, ferric enterobactin, interact with a single receptor,             
              FepA.  They will augment knowledge of bacterial outer membrane                 
              protein structure, and provide specific information about the                  
              physiology of TonB-dependent outer membrane proteins.                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The research will determine how a bacterial membrane receptor                  
              protein recognizes and transports small molecules into the cell.               
              The membrane protein of interest, Escherichia coli FepA, is                    
              essential for the acquisition of iron.  Theoretically, the                     
              structure of this receptor is akin to a barrel with a lid, that                
              usually remains closed to protect the cell from noxious molecules              
              in its environment, but can open to permit entry of iron-containing            
              nutrients.  To test this model experiments that subdivide the                  
              transport process into two stages have been designed:                          
              Binding, in which the receptor protein recognizes iron-containing              
              molecules and holds them on the cell surface.  Uptake, in which the            
              iron is transferred across the cell membrane, presumably by moving             
              through the 'lid' region of the receptor, and into the barrel                  
              domain.  A variety of biochemical, molecular genetic, and                      
              immunological approaches to these problems will be utilized.  The              
              experiments will enhance understanding of the mechanism by which               
              small molecules are recognized and captured by bacterial cells.                
              They will be also improve knowledge of the structure of membrane               
              proteins, and the transfer of energy across membranes.
