Title       : Workshop: Environmental Information Management and Analysis:Ecosystem to
               Biosphere Scales, Albuquerque, New Mexico, Fall 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1994      
File        : a9496170

Award Number: 9496170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah A. Joseph                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17792              (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Michener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joseph W. Jones Ecol Res
	      Route 2, Box 2324
	      Newton, GA  317709640    912/734-4706

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project, which is part of a joint package from Drs. Brunt,                
              Michener, and Stafford, will support a symposium for the exchange              
              of information and technology among computer scientists, Geographic            
              Information system/Data Management specialists, and environmental              
              scientist (atmospheric, marine, and terrestrial) engaged in                    
              scientific database development, management of complex long-term               
              and broad area data sets, and addressing questions at ecosystem                
              through biosphere scales.  The symposium will be organized along               
              four related themes:  (1)  ecosystem, regional and global scale                
              environmental research; (2)  scientific databases for broad scale              
              research; (3) data/information management technical aspects; and               
              (4) management and analysis of broad scale spatial databases.  A               
              number to technical and scientific experts involved in each of the             
              four thematic areas have been contacted and tentatively agreed to              
              participate in the symposium and assist the symposium organizers               
              in identifying internationally recognized experts in the respective            
              fields.  The knowledge exchange and cross-fertilization of ideas               
              among scientists from a wide spectrum of disciplines fostered in               
              such a form, are essential for the development of the scientific               
              databases, data management, and analytical tools which will be                 
              necessary to address the problems facing environmental scientists              
              at a variety of scales.  A high quality volume of the proceedings              
              will be produced in a timely fashion and preliminary manuscripts               
              will be shared electronically.
