Title       : Diffusion Coefficients of Dissolved Carbonate Species and CaCO 3 Dissolution in
               Deep-Sea Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1994   
File        : a9496066

Award Number: 9496066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clare E. Reimers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Research is underway to study the dissolution of calcium carbonate             
              particles on the ocean floor.   The laboratory diffusion-cell study            
              is designed to determine the effective diffusion coefficients of               
              the dissolved carbonate species sediments.  This effort will help              
              to determine whether the dissolution rates are limited by diffusive            
              exchange between seawater and pore waters or by reaction kinetics.             
              The field experiment is designed to determine rates of recycling of            
              benthic organic carbon and calcium carbonate carbon above and below            
              the calcite saturation horizon in the western equatorial Atlantic              
              Ocean.  A primary goal of the research is to determine to what                 
              extent the dissolution is enhanced by the oxidation of organic                 
              matter within surface sediments.  In situ high resolution pore                 
              water profiles of pH and pCO2 will be made using newly perfected               
              microelectrode techniques.  The field work is planned for the                  
              Ceara Rise area in conjunction with benthic chamber flux                       
              measurements by R. Jaknke and with in situ whole core squeezer                 
              methods by Martin and Sayles.  Preliminary testing and                         
              intercomparison of methods is being done in the southeastern U.S.              
              continental margin.
