Title       : Mechanisms of Maternal Transfer of Photoperiodic Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9496304

Award Number: 9496304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa H. Horton thorton@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Changes in hormone levels and metabolism in pregnant females in a              
              number of species, including humans, can influence the                         
              development of the fetus.  These changes in fetal development can              
              result from adaptive responses to normal fluctuations in the                   
              environment as well as from the teratogenic effects of chemicals               
              injected by the mother.  Indeed the toxic effects of nicotine,                 
              cocaine and alcohol result from their interference with the                    
              normal biochemical pathways that regulate fetal development,                   
              pathways similar to those used in an organism's normal adaptive                
              response.  Dr. Horton will examine the mechanisms by which the                 
              maternal system transmits information about changes in day                     
              length, a naturally occurring environmental cue, to the fetus                  
              during gestation.  It is known that prenatal photoperiodic                     
              information influences postnatal rate of growth, body weight and               
              reproductive development.  She proposes that melatonin, a hormone              
              produced and secreted by the pineal gland, is a likely candidate               
              for this transfer of information since it crosses the placenta                 
              from the maternal to the fetal circulation and is involved in                  
              regulation of circadian rhythmicity.  Using an innovative                      
              technical procedure to administer melatonin in a physiologically               
              meaningful manner, Dr. Horton will identify those factors in the               
              maternal system which communicate day length information to the                
              fetus.  The results of these fundamental studies will lead to a                
              better understanding of the mechanism by which the maternal                    
              system can alter the unfolding intrinsic genetic program                       
              regulating the development of the fetus.
