Title       : Diurnal and Developmental Regulation of Neurotransmitter Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9496168

Award Number: 9496168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Raymon Glantz                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Herman K. Lehman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A fundamental characteristic of the nervous system is the                      
              modification of function in response to a number of stimuli.                   
              Neurotransmitters are molecules responsible for communication in               
              the nervous system; therefore, regulation of neurotransmitter                  
              synthesis is an important aspect of neural modification.  Examples             
              of short- and long-term regulation of neurotransmitter synthesis               
              are numerous, but in many cases the underlying mechanisms are not              
              understood.  Tyramine-beta-hydroxylase is the decisive enzyme                  
              required for the synthesis of octopamine, a transmitter of insects.            
              In insects that undergo diurnal as well as developmental changes of            
              their nervous system, octopamine and Tyramine-beta-hydroxylase are             
              not static but vary in both short- and long-term cycles.  The aim              
              of this study is to investigate the mechanism of these changes in              
              a simple, model nervous system.  Molecular probes of                           
              Tyramine-beta-hydroxylase will be developed by purifying and                   
              sequencing the enzyme for the development of antibodies to the                 
              enzyme.  The molecular basis of its regulation will be determined              
              by biochemical kinetic analysis, enzyme activity and changes that              
              occur during the diurnal cycle and during development.  The results            
              of these studies will contribute to our understanding of the                   
              mechanism that regulate neurotransmitter synthesis.
