Title       : RUI: Phylogeny and Diversification of Hydrangeaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1994    
File        : a9496127

Award Number: 9496127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Hufford hufford@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    Investigations that coordinate phylogenetic analyses with                
              explorations of the evolutionary processes are essential for                   
              understanding organismal diversity.  The proposed research,                    
              centered on the hydrangea family of plants, aims to resolve                    
              phylogenetic relationships among major groups of flowering plants.             
              This will be accomplished by focusing on key taxa in conjunction               
              with groups that are poorly known and considered "anomalous" in the            
              subclass Rosidae, many of which are Asian in origin and poorly                 
              known in collections.  Hydrangeaceae are positioned near the                   
              divergence of the subclass Asteridae, and this investigation will              
              increase our understanding of evolutionary diversification                     
              preceding the origin of subclass Asteridae with its great floral               
              conservation.                                                                  
                    The proposed investigation has three facets: 1. phylogenetic             
              analysis using anatomical and morphological features of plants of              
              the hydrangea and dogwood groups positioned taxonomically among                
              Rosidae and near the origin of Asteridae; 2. phylogenetic analysis             
              within the Hydrangeaceae family to distinguish natural groups of               
              species and genera and to explore patterns of flower and fruit                 
              evolution in the family; and 3. ontogenetic or developmental                   
              studies to determine roles of various cellular processes in the                
              evolution of different floral and fruit forms.  An explicit                    
              phylogenetic framework will help guide the choice of critical taxa             
              in making comparisons for the study of different developmental                 
              processes that create flower and fruit diversity.
