Title       : RUI: Collaborative Research: Spatial and Temporal Interpo-lation in Visual
               Object Perception
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9496112

Award Number: 9496112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162695             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip J. Kellman kellman@cognet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              People are able to perceive objects and boundaries successfully,               
              despite the fact that the visual input on which that perception is             
              based is fragmentary across both space and time.  For instance,                
              despite the fact that objects are occluded a great deal by other               
              objects and that patterns projected on the retina change                       
              continually whenever objects or observers move, people can                     
              ordinarily detect complete boundaries and shapes.  There are other             
              cases in which people perceive boundaries in the absence of local              
              visual information, known as illusory contours and transparency                
              phenomena.  This project will address the various cases of boundary            
              interpolation; it will test and refine a proposed unifying theory              
              and extend that theory from static, two-dimensional displays to the            
              three-dimensional case and to cases in which boundaries are                    
              obtained from information conveyed by motion.  The project will                
              also investigate convergent methods to assess boundary perception,             
              including both perceptual report and objective performance                     
              measures.  This research, in addition to its implications for                  
              understanding human perception of objects, will aid in the                     
              construction of object and boundary detection methods in computer              
              vision systems.
