Title       : An Alternative Approach to Earthquake-Hazard Evaluation for Concrete Building
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9496280

Award Number: 9496280
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mete A. Sozen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9314197  Sozen  Research is proposed to develop an alternative earthquake-hazard
               evaluation technology for regions with infrequent earthquake  occurrence.  The
              proposed work includes (a) development of  procedures specifically designed to
              identify buildings that will  threaten life, (b) calibration of the new as well
              as current  state-of-the-art procedures with data from buildings subjected to 
              a strong earthquake and (c) analysis of the strengths and  weaknesses of
              current and proposed technologies in formulation of  risk-reduction strategies
              for regions of low to moderate  seismicity.    The research is designed to
              focus on field experience.  The  information from 31 partially damaged
              buildings, with lateral-  force resisting systems ranging from effectively none
              to barely  acceptable, will be used.  The important attributes of the 
              buildings for the project are that they all survived a strong  ground motion
              (Amax = 0.5G) without leading to life-threatening  damage and they all would
              have been evaluated to be hazardous by  state-of-the art evaluation procedures.
                 The project will include six tasks: Task !-Selection and  determination of
              parameters to be used to define the structures  and the ground motion.  These
              will include standard quantitative  and qualitative indices such as framing
              descriptors, calculated  translation periods, and base shear strength
              coefficients as well  as those reflecting the combined effect of structural and
               nonstructural elements.  Task II-Studies to select a set of five  to nine
              structures for analysis.  The selection will be made so  that the set includes
              examples covering suitable ranges of the  parameters established in phase I. 
              Task III-Detailed studies of  the selected set of structures.  Each selected
              structure will be  evaluated in each direction using standard analysis and 
              evaluation methods use in Turkiye, the U.S. and Japan.  Analyses  will range
              from two-dimensional linear to three-dimensional  nonlinear, depending on the
              quality of the information , type of  framing and perception of return.  Task
              IV-Identification of  incompatibilities between evaluation results and
              observations.  In this critical phase, incompatibilities between results of 
              evaluation and observation will be studied to identify which  differences can
              be reconciled by credible modifications of the  input or modeling and which
              cannot be so reconciled.  Task V-  Synthesis.  This phase will involve work
              either to modify the  standard techniques to suite (by far the preferable
              option) or to  develop totally new approaches.  Task VI-Recalibration.  The 
              sanctioned procedures will be calibrated using (a) the entire set  of 31
              buildings, (b) the six buildings in Erzincan that collapsed  in the March 1992
              event, and (c) typical nonmetallic buildings in  central and eastern U.S.   
              Two reports will be prepared for dissemination.  The first will  document tasks
              1 to IV.  The second will present results of tasks  V and VI.  ***
