Title       : Research Initiation: Sensitivity Analysis Approach in the Absence of an Optimal
               Basis and its Application to the Framework of Interior Point Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1994     
File        : a9496178

Award Number: 9496178
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pius J. Egbelu                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6074               (Estimated)
Investigator: Renato D. C. Monteiro monteiro@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project addresses the design, development, and                       
              implementation of a new approach to sensitivity analysis in the                
              context of linear programming (LP) that does not require the                   
              knowledge of an optimal basis.  The main application of this                   
              sensitivity analysis approach is in the context of interior point              
              methods.  Range analysis is the main emphasis of this research                 
              project.  Parametric analysis is also discussed and serves to                  
              motivate the approach to range analysis.  The approach is based                
              on a new view of the parametric linear programming problem                     
              developed by Adler and Monteiro.  A new interpretation for ranges              
              of the cost and right hand side coefficients is given and it is                
              shown that the computation of the ranges for the LP problem                    
              reduces to the estimation of optimal values of certain LP                      
              subproblems.  Two major tasks are involved in this research.                   
              The first is to understand the affect of degeneracy.  The second               
              is to develop efficient ways of estimating the optimal values for              
              the subproblems.                                                               
                   This project promises to enhance (and possibly change) our                
              understanding of LP sensitivity analysis.
