Title       : Applying Strategic Bargaining Models to Union Contract Negotiations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1994        
File        : a9496198

Award Number: 9496198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21092              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Cramton peter@cramton.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The aim of this project is to develop and empirically test                     
              strategic bargaining models applied to union contract negotiations.            
              A prominent feature of the contract data is the holdout:                       
              negotiations often continue without a strike after the contract has            
              expired.  Production continues with workers paid according to the              
              expired contract.  A model was developed that accounts for the                 
              union's threat choice.  A key prediction of the model is that                  
              variation in strike incidence is caused by shifts in the                       
              composition of disputes.  Strike activity varies with economic and             
              policy variables that change the attractiveness of the strike                  
              threat relative to the holdout threat.  Preliminary empirical                  
              results generally support this prediction.  Also there is some                 
              evidence of a structural shift in negotiations after 1981.                     
                                                                                             
              This project will build on these preliminary results.  First, the              
              data for empirical tests will be added to and refined.  Second,                
              estimation strategies that incorporate the main features of the                
              theory will be developed and implemented.  Third, the issue of                 
              permanent strike replacements will be studied.  In particular, the             
              role that permanent replacements played in the structural shift in             
              negotiations after 1981 will be addressed.   A theoretical and                 
              empirical analysis of strike replacements will add to the current              
              policy debate on whether firms should be able to permanently                   
              replace striking workers.
