Title       : Research Initiation Award: Multiple Model Estimation With Variable Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1994 
File        : a9496319

Award Number: 9496319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87772              (Estimated)
Investigator: X. Rong Li xli@uno.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Orleans
	      Lake Front
	      New Orleans, LA  70148    504/286-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9409358  Li  This proposal deals with an important class of adaptive schemes 
              for state/parameter estimation, known as multiple model (MM)  estimation. 
              These schemes are characterized by using multiple  models and are particularly
              good for problems involving both  structural as well as parametrical changes. 
              Applications of MM  estimation can be found in many areas, such as failure 
              detection/isolation, maneuvering target tracking, air traffic  control, and
              adaptive filtering.  An intelligent framework of the  following three variable
              structure schemes will be developed in  particular:  active model set,
              model-set switching, and adaptive  grid.  Theoretical work on model set
              selection will also be  carried out, which will provide a solid basis and a
              useful  guideline for design of practical MM estimators.  Moreover, a 
              theoretical framework for the MM estimation will be established  based on graph
              theory.  This will lead to systematic treatment of  model set evolution
              (adaptation) as well as better understanding  of the existing schemes.  The
              developed schemes will be applied  to practical problems and their performance
              and computation will  be compared with those of the existing schemes.  ***
