Title       : The Use of Linked Multiple Representations to Understand and Solve Problems in
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1994  
File        : a9496200

Award Number: 9496200
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Kozma rkozma@unix.sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joel W. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia Baggett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9353614  Kozma    To most students, chemistry consists of memorized, isolated
              facts  and quantitative calculations,; they typically do not have an 
              integrated or deep understanding of how these relate to the  chemical phenomena
              they represent.  In our first study, we will  look at how chemistry faculty
              members understand chemical  equllibrium, particularly as it is expressed in
              various qualitative  and quantitative representations, and compare this to the
              way of  college students represent their understanding. In our second study  we
              will look at how the understanding of students can be improved  by using
              multiple linked representations.  We have developed a  prototype interactive
              multitmedia environment called MultiMedia and  Mental Models in Chemistry
              ($M:Chem). It allows users to operate on  chemical systems and observe the
              results in multiple, dynamic,  synchronized windows which include a video of
              the reacton as it  occurs on the lab bench., verbal descriptions,
              molecular-level  animations, and dynamic graphs.  We will use this to see how 
              student understanding might be improved by promoting linkages among  multiple
              representations of chemical phenomena.  We will also  investigate how
              professors and students use it in lecture and  laboratory classrooms.
              Potentially, our findings will contribute to  a theory of multimendia concept
              formation and use, and to changes  in colloege chemistry curricula, pedagogy,
              and assessment.  ***
