Title       : Biochemical, Biophysical and Physiological Characterization of an Ice-Active
               Substance Released by Sea Ice Diatoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9496259

Award Number: 9496259
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79649              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Raymond raymond@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9316736  Raymond  Recently it has been shown that diatoms from sea ice platelets
              in  McMurdo Sound, Antarctica, release a proteinaceous, ice-active  substance
              that, at natural concentrations, causes dense pitting  on the basal surfaces of
              growing ice platelets.  At present, only  fish, insects and bacteria are known
              to produce an ice-active  substance.  Thus, the ice-active substances
              associated with sea-  ice algae are of interest because it is the first to be
              associated  with algae, and it may provide new insights on how biomolecules 
              interact with ice.  The objectives of this project are to  biochemically,
              biophysically and physiologically characterize the  ice-active substance.  On a
              biochemical and biophysical level,  the objectives are to purify the ice-active
              substance, to  determine its chemical composition and structure, and to 
              characterize its effect on the growth of ice crystals.  On a  physiological
              level, the objective is to determine the  relationship between algal production
              of ice-active substance and  the environment.  More specifically, what is the
              temporal and  spatial distribution of the ice-active substance in McMurdo 
              Sound, how is its production influenced by temperature and light,  and among
              which species and habitats is it found?  The long-term  goal of project is to
              understand what role ice-active substances  play in the sea-ice algal
              community.  ***
