Title       : Economics of Financial Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9496204

Award Number: 9496204
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64210              (Estimated)
Investigator: William R. Zame zame@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    9308589  Zame    There is substantial empirical evidence to suggest that
              individual  consumption is poorly correlated with aggregate consumption.  Such 
              data is difficult to reconcile with the picture suggested by the  standard
              Arrow-Debreu complete markets model.  One explanation  might be that markets
              are in fact incomplete - and incompleteness  of markets seems to be an
              observational fact.  Unfortunately, this  explanation begs several questions:
              Why should markets be  incomplete?  If markets are incomplete, what markets are
              missing,  and which are present?  Should incompleteness of markets be  expected
              to matter?  Four topics are studied which address these  questions:    1. Does
              Market Incompleteness Matter?  Can mutual insurance -  through simple borrowing
              and lending - substitute for the full  range of contingent contracts?    2.
              Innovation of Futures Contracts.  If exchanges behave  strategically in the
              innovation of financial securities, what  securities should we expect to see? 
              In what circumstances will  exchanges have the proper incentives to offer a
              complete set of  financial securities?    3. Economic Implications of
              Collateral.  What are the economic  implications of the fact that collateral is
              required for many  loans?  In particular, how do collateral requirements affect
              the  set of assets that are offered, the price and price volatility of  assets
              and commodities, and the efficiency of equilibrium  allocations?    4. A
              Non-standard Approach to Models of Continuous Trading.  What  are the
              properties of markets in which assets are traded  frequently, but financial
              markets remain dynamically incomplete?
