Title       : An Investigation of the Performance Characteristics of the Lottery Procedure for
               Controlling Risk Preferences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1993       
File        : a9496002

Award Number: 9496002
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce E. Berg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin A. McCabe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Dickhaut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many theoretical models in modern finance, organizational                      
              economics, information economics, and game theory rely heavily on              
              how individuals react to risk.  The purpose of this proposal is                
              to analyze risk preferences by the use of experimental methods in              
              a laboratory setting.  Specifically, experiments will be designed              
              and run with human subjects to determine the factors that govern               
              the experimentalist's ability to induce particular risk attitudes              
              for an experimental commodity, and then to compare this ability                
              to induce preferences to various techniques for the direct                     
              measurement of preferences over monetary gambles.  A better                    
              understanding the role of risk preferences is important not only               
              from a theoretical, but also from a practical standpoint.                      
              Recently, a plethora of institutional changes, ranging from                    
              computerized trading and new financial instruments to new                      
              regulatory rulings on trade inequities, have emerged.  The                     
              evaluation of these institutions has immense, practical import,                
              given the magnitude of resource transfers that occur in these                  
              institutions.
