Title       : Asymptotic Methods for Deformation Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  1998     
File        : a9496250

Award Number: 9496250
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Johnson robejohn@uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9322714  Johnson       The objective of this research effort is to develop
              analytical  solutions, by means of asymptotic methods, for deformation 
              processing.  Such models will provide a rich environment in which  to explore
              processing alternatives.  The work will be done in  collaboration with
              industry.  Two areas of deformation processing  will be modeled, hot mill
              rolling, particularly reversing miss, and  thin section extrusion.  Results
              from finite element analyses will  be used to validate the analytical
              solutions.  The work on hot  sheet rolling mills is primarily aimed at
              evaluating through-  thickness and thermal effects.  The study is divided into
              two  areas, thermal effects resulting from roll surface thermal boundary 
              layers and temperature dependent constitutive behavior, and a thick  slab,
              three-dimensional rolling model based on generalized plane  strain.  The work
              on extrusion will be a non-standard application  of asymptotic methods aimed at
              developing a die design tool for  thin section extrusion.       The application
              of results obtained from this research will  include both hot reversing mills
              and hot continuous mills.  The  lack of good models for deformation processing
              has been a limiting  factor in the optimization and control of these processes.
