Title       : An Invariant Manifold Approach to Modal Analysis of Nonlinear Structural Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9496271

Award Number: 9496271
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Devendra P. Garg                        
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Shaw shaw@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christophe Pierre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The basic objective of this research is the development of a modal             
              analysis methodology for nonlinear structures, which utilizes a                
              newly introduced formulation of nonlinear normal modes of                      
              vibration. The importance of the subject stems from the fact that              
              a modal analysis of a nonlinear structure that relies on the modes             
              of the associated linearized system may require an unpractical                 
              number of such terms in order to yield satisfactory modal                      
              convergence. This is because, even through for the linearized                  
              structure the linear models yield uncoupled modal dynamics and                 
              hence optimal modal convergence, in the  nonlinear case these                  
              linear modes become  coupled by the nonlinear terms, resulting in              
              deterioration of the modal convergence. The proposed nonlinear                 
              modal analysis is based upon a definition and formulation                      
              of nonlinear normal modes of motion in terms of invariant                      
              manifolds. This approach is general and is not restricted to linear            
              systems, nor to conservative systems, nor to finite-dimensional                
              systems. In addition, the  formulation is constructive for weakly              
              nonlinear systems and provides the physical nature of the nonlinear            
              modes, the associated modal  dynamics, and the way in which the                
              nonlinear modal coordinates are related to the physical                        
              coordinates. The proposed methodology will allow for many important            
              research problems to be addressed, including the outstanding                   
              questions of how to choose optimal mode shapes for modal analysis              
              of nonlinear dynamical systems. In order to attach these problems,             
              and integrated strategy is chosen which involves analytical,                   
              computational, and experimental components.***
