Title       : Modeling and Characterization of Materials for Dynamic Metal Working Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9496284

Award Number: 9496284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Oscar Dillon                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Romesh C. Batra rbatra@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Manufacturing operations like rolling, forging, and extrusion are              
              characterized by interrupted, non-isothermal, large deformations               
              at high strain rates (104sec-1) and high homologous temperatures               
              (0.5 to 0.9).  There is very little test data available to validate            
              and/or refine constitutive relations proposed to describe the                  
              material behavior under these loading conditions.  The purpose of              
              this research is to perform experiments on Fe-2% Si and Ti6A1-4V               
              in a split Hopkinson torsion bar at different strain-rates and                 
              various values of the homologous temperature.  These test data and             
              others available in the literature will be used to delimit the                 
              functional forms of constitutive relations, and also to find values            
              of material parameters.  The predictive capability of these                    
              constitutive equations will be ascertained by comparing                        
              analytical/computed results with experimental findings under                   
              loading conditions different from those used to establish them,                
              including dynamic loading of specimens pre-strained quasistatically            
              in a direction different from that of dynamic loading.  The                    
              developed constitutive relations will be used to analyze extrusion             
              and hot forging processes, and the effect of loading rate and                  
              initial specimen temperature upon the initiation and growth of                 
              shear bands in forging, torsion, and combined loading.  The study              
              will combine a thorough theoretical/numerical effort with careful              
              and accurate experimental investigation.  The close collaboration              
              and integration between the experimental and theoretical work                  
              should help formulate reliable constitutive relations that can be              
              used to analyze other high strain-rate processes such as machining             
              and penetration of metallic targets by fast moving penetrators.
