Title       : The Biology of Glycerol-Producing Arctic Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1994 
File        : a9496315

Award Number: 9496315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35548              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Raymond raymond@nevada.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Many polar fishes produce macromolecular antifreezes that act in               
              non-colligative way to prevent freezing.  Some arctic fishes in the            
              Smelt and Greenling families use a novel method to avoid freezing.             
              These fishes increase the freezing point depression of their body              
              fluids by producing high concentrations of glycerol in winter.                 
              This study will focus on the high glycerol concentrations in arctic            
              fishes and the physiological and biochemical implications they have            
              on water balance, kidney and gill function, and metabolism of                  
              energy stores.  Conservation of glycerol by the kidney and gills               
              will be investigated by measuring glomerular filtration rate, urine            
              flow, drinking rate and permeability of the gills to glycerol.                 
              Because glycerol is present only in winter, seasonal variations in             
              these parameters will be determined.  The source and fate of                   
              glycerol will be determined with assays of glycogen, lipid and key             
              enzymes using cold- and warm-acclimated fish.  Additional studies              
              will be conducted to determine the maximum concentrations of                   
              glycerol that occur in cold-acclimated fishes, the environmental               
              conditions that regulate its production, and the occurrence of                 
              glycerol in other species.  A puzzling characteristic of the smelts            
              is that they have both colligative and non-colligative antifreezes.            
              Further studies will be undertaken to explain why two different                
              antifreezes are needed in these species.
