Title       : Influence of Pack Ice on the Distribution and Demography of Pygoscelis Penguins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1995 
File        : a9496035

Award Number: 9496035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335734             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Z. Trivelpiece waynezt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Trivelpiece  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The annual advance and retreat of pack ice may be the major                    
              determinant of spatial and temporal changes in the structure,                  
              function, and distribution of Antarctic penguin populations.                   
              Satellite records, from 1973 onwards, indicate that winter pack                
              ice reaches its maximum extent on 6-8 year cycles.  These                      
              interannual cycles in pack ice extent may have significant                     
              impacts on all levels of the marine food web, thereby affecting                
              the penguins' reproductive success, survival, and recruitment                  
              patterns which are factors regulating penguin populations.                     
                                                                                             
              This project continues a comparative study of the population                   
              biology of Adelie, Gentoo, and Chinstrap Penguins (Pygoscelis                  
              adeliae, P. papua, and P. antarctica, respectively) at Admiralty               
              Bay, King George Island, South Shetland Islands, Antarctica.  The              
              Pygoscelis species are the major predators of Krill (Euphausia                 
              superba) in the Antarctic Peninsula region and are the primary                 
              species used as monitors of fishery activities in this area.  To               
              thoroughly understand the structure and function of the Antarctic              
              marine ecosystem, it is imperative to determine the impact of                  
              environmental variation on the structure and regulation of key                 
              trophic level predators such as the Pygoscelis penguins.  This                 
              research will contribute such information.
