Title       : The Obsidian Craft at Xochicalco, Morelos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1994     
File        : a9496188

Award Number: 9496188
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth G. Hirth Kgh2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Kenneth Hirth will               
              continue his archaeological research at the site of Xochicalco                 
              which is located in Morelos, central Mexico.  Work to date                     
              indicates that this large prehispanic urban center existed during              
              both the Classic (250-700 AD) and Epiclassic (700-950 AD)                      
              periods.  Data also shows that it was a center for the production              
              of obsidian (volcanic glass) tools.  Because of the sharp cutting              
              edge it holds, obsidian was widely prized throughout prehistoric               
              Middle America.  Dr. Hirth will first conduct test excavations                 
              and then larger scale work to collect samples of obsidian as well              
              as other cultural materials.  The goal is to determine how this                
              industry was organized and how it changed over time.  Artifact                 
              remains will be collected using a two-stage macro-micro strategy               
              which samples different dimensions of the artifact universe.                   
              Macro-debitage (remains), obtained in normal screening                         
              operations, will be combined with an analysis of micro-debitage                
              recovered from fine mesh water screening.  The scale and                       
              specialization of production will be examined through an analysis              
              of the lithic technology and types of tools produced.                          
                                                                                             
              Large states arose and declined in Central Mexico prior to the                 
              arrival of the Spanish and many archaeologists are trying to                   
              understand the processes involved.  In recent years it has become              
              clear that control over trade and the access to scarce resources               
              played a major role.  During the Classic period the polity                     
              centered around Teotihuacan dominated Central Mexico.  After ca                
              700 AD, this state declined and power shifted to a number of                   
              smaller regional centers such as Xochicalo.  Therefore, it is                  
              quite interesting to examine what changes in the production and                
              control of obsidian occurred over this transitional period.  Dr.               
              Hirth will study not only how Xochicalo related to the larger                  
              world of Middle America but also how obsidian production was                   
              organized within the site itself.  Did production tend to be                   
              egalitarian or was it tightly controlled in state run workshops.               
              Excavation and analysis of recovered remains will help to address              
              these questions.                                                               
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              data of interest to a large group of archaeologists.  It will                  
              also increase our understanding of how complex societies emerge                
              and are maintained.
