Title       : Constructive Assessment: Study Equity, Validation and Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1997      
File        : a9496045

Award Number: 9496045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Earle                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $572768             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rose Wray Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lewis and Clark College
	      0615 S W Palatine Hill Rd
	      Portland, OR  972197879    503/244-6161

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of the three-year Constructive Assessment Project is                  
              to enhance student equity, as well as validation and                           
              communication aspects of alternative assessment methods in                     
              mathematics.  First year project activities will focus on the                  
              objective "to enable more in-depth relevant understanding of                   
              student achievement on the part of students themselves".  This                 
              objective will be addressed by investigating the needs,                        
              interpretations and values of approximately 200 students who                   
              are participating in alternative assessment activities within                  
              the constructivist Visual Mathematics programs.  The research                  
              will proceed at three levels.  Ten Teacher-Researchers at five                 
              sites will generate research questions, and will investigate                   
              these with the support of workshops, monthly meetings and                      
              classroom visits by the PI.  The PI and a Research Associate                   
              will also research the issue across the five sites through                     
              observation, interview and textual analysis.  And a group of                   
              Faculty Associates will explore the issues at the concept                      
              level through library research and data analysis.  During the                  
              second and third years activities will address on the                          
              objective "to advance the general state-of-the-art of                          
              assessment practices" by using the outcomes of the first-year                  
              investigation to develop classroom guidelines which                            
              incorporate a learner-oriented, constructivist approach to                     
              assessment.  The project will provide an integrative model for                 
              the constructive involvement of teachers, students and                         
              technology in a broad range of assessment methods, and will                    
              provide a base of grounded theory for future research.
