Title       : Spontaneous Formation of Identical Collections of Nanostructures During
               Semiconductor Heteroepitaxy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1994 
File        : a9496296

Award Number: 9496296
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273227             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff S. Drucker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9402184  Drucker    Research will be carried out to develop a fundamental 
              understanding of  the processes associated with direct epitaxial  deposition to
              spontaneously form a collection of identical,  defect free nanostructures
              during Ge/Si(100) heteroepitaxy.  A  unique combination of both in situ (low
              energy electron  microscopy, scanning tunneling microscopy and ultrahigh vacuum
               scanning transmission electron microscopy) and ex situ  (transmission electron
              microscopy) microscopy will be used to  asses the size, uniformity, areal
              density and spatial  distribution of these nanostructures.  Tuning the size of
              uniform  collections of dots will be investigated by varying the  concentration
              of mobile adatoms (supersaturation) on the growth  surface through changes in
              deposition parameters. The size of  these nanostructures will be tuned through
              the Bohr radius in Ge,  about 10 nm, to investigate the effects of quantum
              confinement.  Use of direct epitaxial deposition allows formation of the target
               structures on a semiconductor surface, in situ and, most  importantly, in a
              single step.  %%%  The primary goal of this program is to develop a 
              fundamental-understanding of the epitaxial growth, processing,  and properties
              of Ge/Si quantum dots so that they can be  exploited in the realization of a
              variety of advanced electronic  and photonic devices.  An important feature of
              the program is the  training of graduate and undergraduate students in a 
              fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials  and processing
              research.  This research will contribute to  improving the general performance
              of advanced devices and  integrated circuits used in computing, information
              processing,  and telecommunications.  ***
