Title       : Biotechnology Process Engineering Research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2002    
File        : a9843342

Award Number: 9843342
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Sohi Rastegar                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10082791           (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Lauffenburger lauffen@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel I. Wang  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9843342  WANG    This award renews funding for the Engineering Research Center
              (ERC) for Biotechnology Process Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology.  The award funds the second five years of effort under a new
              cooperative agreement, with a total duration of eleven years.  The vision of
              the Biotechnology Process Engineering Center (BPEC) is to promote and enhance
              U.S. biotechnology research.  Over the past year, BPEC has shifted its primary
              research direction from therapeutic protein biotechnology, an area in which
              BPEC has made significant advances and for which it has built up a strong
              industrial partnership, to therapeutic gene biotechnology, a nascent area of
              research.  This new area will focus on the delivery of genes, as opposed to
              gene discovery or production, which many believe is the crucial bottleneck in
              gene therapy.  Currently, the expression of therapeutic genes delivered to
              cells within a living system is either too short in duration, not repeatable,
              not selective or not properly regulated.  By combining engineering with
              molecular cell biology and by building on its track record of developing strong
              teams, producing excellent cross-disciplinary students, and creating
              long-lasting industrial partnerships, BPEC is well positioned to make major
              progress in addressing these challenges in the gene biotechnology field.    The
              goal of the therapeutic protein work is to provide the underlying science and
              engineering knowledge and technology required to produce and deliver
              therapeutic proteins of high quality in quantities large enough and within
              formulations stable enough to be economically viable.  The new gene
              biotechnology research area will focus on two complimentary methods of delivery
              of genes to cells.  The first approach is the use of retroviruses to transfect
              genes into stem cells ex vivo, followed by re-implantation of these cells into
              a patient.  The second approach is the use of synthetic molecular conjugates to
              transfect genes into already differentiated c ells in vivo.    A new Division
              of Bioengineering and Environmental Health is currently being created at MIT,
              in part because of the influence of BPEC, which greatly facilitated the break
              down of the traditional cultural barriers between biology and engineering. 
              This Division will be a source of both undergraduate and graduate students for
              BPEC, and will offer a Biomedical Engineering Minor, a 5-year BS/MS
              Bioengineering Degree, a Ph.D. in Bioengineering, and a Ph.D. in Toxicology. 
              BPEC has a strong industrial partnership in the area of protein therapeutics. 
              This group is very enthusiastic about both the research and the students
              produced over the past thirteen years.  Within the last 12 months, BPEC has
              also put together a second industrial group that focuses on gene biotechnology.
               This group as very active in helping BPEC develop its gene biotechnology
              research strategy over the past year, and is very interested in continuing to
              partner with BPEC in this area.
