Title       : Tuna Tracking with Chemistry: A Test of the Two-Stock Hypothesis for Atlantic
               Bluefin Tuna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a0003769

Award Number: 0003769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50382              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne L. Cohen acohen@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graham D. Layne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The investigators hope to show that the otolith chemistry of bluefin tuna,
              specifically Sr/Ca and Ba/Ca measured at microscale resolution and with high
              analytical precision, will be a definitive signal in the recognition of
              trans-Atlantic migrations, stock mixing, and spawning habitats. The stock
              structure of Atlantic bluefin tuna (Thunnus thynnus) is currently one of the
              most controversial issues in fisheries management.  The controversy centers on
              the management of Atlantic bluefin according to a two-stock model that assumes
              independent spawning grounds in the Mediterranean Sea and Gulf of Mexico.  To
              date, there is no biological evidence to support this assumption. The
              investigators propose that the elemental chemistry of bluefin tuna otoliths can
              be analyzed to test the two-stock hypothesis and yield information about the
              spawning habits and habitats of individual fish.  Microconstituent analysis of
              otoliths can be used to link individual fish to a particular hydrographic
              environment assuming that tracers are either incorporated into the otolith in
              proportion to their concentration in the surrounding seawater or by a
              temperature-dependent fractionation.  Fish that aggregate for any length of
              time will share a multi-elemental fingerprint independent of genetic identity,
              which can be used to delineate stocks and determine population structure.  

