Title       : Structure Function Correlation of G-Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0003872

Award Number: 0003872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arieh Warshel warshel@invitro.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              WARSHEL
MCB-0003872

GTP-binding proteins play an important role in the
              regulation of cellular functions in virtually all living organisms, and control
              signal transduction processes.  Obtaining detailed molecular pictures of the
              actions of these proteins is an important challenge to modern molecular
              biology. The studies of G-proteins underwent a "structural revolution" where
              new structures of G-proteins and their complexes with the corresponding
              accessory proteins and/or transition state analogues are rapidly emerging. 
              This offers a unique opportunity for elucidating the detailed molecular
              mechanisms of the action of these proteins.

In the past years, computer
              simulation approaches that correlate the structures of enzymes with their
              functions have been developed.  These methods were found to be very useful in
              the studies of the reaction catalyzed by Ras.  In particular, the simulations
              suggested that the GTP, rather than Gln61, is the actual base in the enzymatic
              mechanism of Ras.  This is now widely accepted as the likely mechanism for the
              action of G-proteins and related systems.  The previous studies also led to the
              finding of a Linear Free Energy Relationship (LFER) between the rate constant
              of the GTPase reaction and the pKa of the g-phosphate.  This LFER has given
              experimental support to the GTP as a base proposal.  The previous studies
              demonstrated that the GAP operates by combining two effects.  First, it acts by
              a direct electrostatic stabilization of the transition state using primarily
              Arg789.  Second, it acts indirectly by "pushing" Ras to a catalytic
              configuration.  
  
These simulation studies lead to the current project that
              exploits the enormous progress in structural studies of G-proteins.  In this
              project, the efforts will be in the following directions.
(i)  The potential
              surfaces for phosphate hydrolysis will be validated and refined.  The
              calculated and observed LFER, isotope effects and activation entropies will be
              compared.  The stability of water-assisted transition states, including the
              corresponding entropic contribution will also be examined.  This effort will
              help in resolving mechanistic problems and in refining EVB surfaces for studies
              of G-proteins.
(ii)  The activation of Ras by GAP will be studied, with a
              focus on the effect of mutations such as Gln61 and Gly12.  These studies will
              examine whether these residues act directly or by stabilizing the catalytic
              configuration of Ras.
(iii) A comparative study of the action of different
              G-proteins will be conducted, focusing on transducin, EF-Tu, and Ras. The
              relative rates of the GTPase reaction in these proteins will be reproduced.
              These studies will determine whether or not they use a common mechanism.
(iv)
              Although the structural information offered by complexes of G-proteins and TS
              analogues is potentially very useful, its interpretation is not straightforward
              because the relationship between the charge distribution of these molecules and
              that of the actual TS is rather unclear.  Thus ab initio and EVB calculations
              will be used to extract the information offered by the available crystal
              structures of G-proteins with TS analogues.

