Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Evolution and Biogeography of Late Cretaceous
               Vertebrates from the James Ross Basin, Antarctic Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0003844

Award Number: 0003844
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judd A. Case jcase@stmarys-ca.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Mary's College
	      Saint Mary's College
	      Moraga, CA  94575    415/376-4411

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003844
Case

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative research
              project between the Saint Mary's College of California, the South Dakota School
              of Mines and technology, and the Argentine Antarctic Institute (Instituto
              Antartico Argentino or IAA) to investigate the Late Mesozoic vertebrate
              paleontology of the James Ross Basin in the Antarctic Peninsula region. The
              Campanian through the Maastrichtian ages (80 to 65 million years ago) is an
              important time interval concerning vertebrate biogeography (i.e. dispersals and
              separations due to moving landmasses) and evolution between Antarctica and
              other Southern Hemisphere continents (including India, i.e. Gondwana).
              Moreover, the dispersal of terrestrial vertebrates (i.e. dinosaurs and
              marsupial mammals) from North America to Antarctica and beyond (e.g. Australia)
              via Patagonia and the Antarctic Peninsula, as well as the dispersal of modern
              birds from Antarctica northward are important unresolved questions in
              paleontology. These dispersal events include vertebrates not only in the
              terrestrial realms, but also in marine settings. Both widely distributed and
              localized marine reptile species have been identified in Antarctica, creating
              questions concerning their dispersal in conjunction with the terrestrial
              animals.

The Antarctic Peninsula and Patagonia represent the western-most
              portion of the Weddellian Paleobiogeographic Province, a region that extends
              from Patagonia through the Antarctic Peninsula and western Antarctica to
              Australia and New Zealand. Within this province lie the dispersal routes for
              interchanges of vertebrates between South America and: 1) Madagascar and India,
              and 2) Australia. As the result of previous work by the principal
              investigators, it is postulated that an isthmus between more northern South
              America and the Antarctic craton has served to bring typical North American
              dinosaurs, such as hadrosaurs (duck-billed dinosaurs) and presumably marsupials
              traveling overland, while marine reptiles swam along coastal waters, to
              Antarctica in the latest Cretaceous. Finally, this region has served as the
              cradle for the evolution, if not the origin, for groups of modern birds, and
              evolution of a suite of typical southern hemisphere plants.

In order to
              confirm and expand upon these hypotheses, investigations into the latest
              Cretaceous deposits of the James Ross Basin, Antarctica Peninsula must be
              continued. The Cape Lamb and Sandwich Bluff geological units, of the Lopez de
              Bertodano Formation in the James Ross Basin along the eastern Antarctic
              Peninsula, exhibit a mixture of marine and terrestrial deposits. The following
              vertebrates have been recovered from these sedimentary deposits during previous
              field seasons:  plesiosaur and mosasaur marine reptiles; plant eating
              dinosaurs; a meat eating dinosaur; and a variety of modern bird groups,
              including shorebirds, wading birds and lagoonal birds.

This project will
              undertake new fieldwork to recover new specimens in order to test biogeographic
              and evolutionary hypotheses concerning Late Cretaceous vertebrates in Gondwana.
              Fieldwork is planned in January 2002 and 2003 to explore the eastern slopes of
              Cape Lamb, Sandwich Bluff and False Island Point on Vega Island, and the Santa
              Marta Cove area of James Ross Island.

This research will result in important
              new insights about the evolution and geographic dispersal of several vertebrate
              species. The results are important to understanding the development and
              evolution of life on Earth.

This is a collaborative research project with
              Argentinean scientists from the IAA and it continues a productive collaboration
              that began in 1995. In addition, collaboration with vertebrate paleontologists
              from the Museo de La Plata, both in the field and at our respective
              institutions in Argentina and in the United States, will continue.


