Title       : 2001 National Science Foundation Design, Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation
               Research Conference; Tampa, Florida; January 7-10, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0003004

Award Number: 0003004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tapas K. Das das@eng.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              O. Geoffrey Okogbaa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation Design,
              Manufacturing and Industrial Innovation Research Conference.  The conference
              will involve researchers in all program areas within the Division of Design,
              Manufacture and Industrial Innovation (DMII), the manufacturing researchers in
              the Divisions of Engineering Education and Centers (EEC), Electrical and
              Communication Systems (ECS), Civil and Mechanical Structures (CMS), located
              within the Directorate for Engineering, Information and Intelligent Systems
              (IIS), located within the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
              Engineering, Materials Research (DMR), located within the Directorate for
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences, International Programs (INT),  Social,
              Behavioral, and Economic Research, specifically the Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program (IOC), located in the Directorate for Social,
              Behavioral and Economic Sciences who are in manufacturing related research will
              present ongoing activities in their current research and attend sessions which
              will extend beyond their immediate area of research.  Ongoing research in
              manufacturing related research activities are presented by the grantees from
              the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACyT), from locations within
              Mexico, and grantees from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
              (NSERC) and the National Research Council (NRC), from locations within Canada. 
              The conference ensures that the individual researchers are informed about the
              ongoing activities of their colleagues.  An elimination of duplication of their
              efforts may be achieved and a degree of cooperation may result from this
              activity.  An overall improvement of efficiency of the research activity could
              be expected.  In addition, the conference program organization allows for ample
              time to discuss manufacturing research in detail with the collective research
              community at the meeting, with feedback to and input from the National Science
              Foundation.  Finally, personal contacts between the grantees and program
              directors in the Divisions should contribute to clarify many current issues in
              their work.

The aims of the conference are: (1) to broaden the outlook of
              all participants; (2) promote transfer of ideas and technology from one area of
              research to another; (3) to allow those working in a related area of research
              to get to know their peers so as to avoid duplication of research and to
              encourage cooperation, and (4) to allow personal contacts from the collective
              research community, the NSF, CONACyT, NSERC, and NRC program staff to discuss
              manufacturing research in detail (this should contribute to clarifying many
              current problems in ongoing projects).  Attendees to the conference gain an
              early access to the information disseminated.

