Title       : SGER: Capillary Affinity Sensors Based on Surface Plasmon Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0003829

Award Number: 0003829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sinclair S. Yee yee@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                   The high sensitivity and label-free nature of surface plasmon resonance
              (SPR) sensors make SPR an excellent technology for affinity sensing.  SPR
              sensors are typically built using a prism with one gold coated surface onto
              which a flow cell is attached.  This prism-based SPR sensor design is fairly
              complex and has several drawbacks, including awkward fluid handling, optical
              inflexibility, and the need for index matching.
     To overcome these
              limitations, a simple, one-piece sensor design based on capillary tubes will be
              developed.  A TM-polarized, collimated beam from a diode laser passes through a
              converging lens with its focus near the capillary surface.  The beam hits the
              gold-coated internal surface of the capillary at angles greater than the
              critical angle, and is reflected by this diverging mirror surface.  The
              reflected light exits the capillary and strikes a diode array detector.  Since
              each location on the diode array will correspond to a different angle of
              incidence, a reflectivity vs. angle measurement results.  The capillary design
              has simple construction, no index matching, an ideal flow geometry, a protected
              sensor surface, and optical versatility.  To further develop this promising
              sensor concept, research in capillary optics and fabrication techniques will be
              conducted.  
     In the capillary SPR sensor, information is encoded in the
              reflectivity vs. angle spectrum of the metal coated capillary interior surface.
               SPR reflection spectra display a dramatic dip centered at a certain angle, and
              the sharpness of this dip determines in large part the resolution of the
              measurement.  For this reason, research will focus on elements of sensor design
              which contribute to this sharpness, including choice of beam divergence,
              diffraction, plasmon effects, and choice of capillary dimensions and refractive
              index.  With improved understanding of the capillary response, the use of
              simplified light sources and interference effects may be used to enhance the
              capillary sensor.
     To achieve high quality data from a capillary SPR
              sensor, high quality gold layers must be deposited inside capillaries.  The
              thermal wire deposition method used to date is inadequate:  capillary length is
              limited, capillary ID is constrained, and deposition is nonuniform.   As an
              alternative, a method of wet chemical gold deposition will be investigated. 
              This procedure will be used to internally coat capillaries with gold, using an
              experimental technique in which the necessary reagents are pumped back and
              forth through capillaries using air pressure.  Since the capillaries have a
              small internal volume, only a small amount of reagent will be necessary,
              reducing costs and simplifying waste disposal.

