Title       : Dynamics and Kinematics of North America -Juan de Fuca- Pacific Plate
               Interaction: Constraints from GPS Geodesy and Geophysical Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2001     
File        : a0003483

Award Number: 0003483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42969              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Meghan Miller meghan@cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy I. Melbourne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1044,1576,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0003483
Miller 

Characterizing North American continental dynamics
              critically depends on constraining Pacific Northwest tectonics. The Pacific
              Northwest provides key constraints that differentiate dynamic models of active
              deformation in western North America at a plate boundary scale. The San Andreas
              system, entrainment of the Sierra Nevada block, and the role of modern Basin
              and Range extension in plate interaction and within-plate tectonics, cannot be
              accurately understood in ignorance of this region. Moreover, Cascadia is a
              global class natural laboratory for testing and comparing subduction zone
              interseismic strain accumulation models, models that are widely applied to
              other subduction zones where such testing is precluded by natural complexity.
              Unique paleoseismic constraints on a single, large-magnitude and relatively
              simple, margin-wide rupture of the 1700 A.D. subduction zone event make
              Cascadia an excellent case study of viscoelastic vs. elastic deformation models
              300 years into the interseismic cycle. Rarely is such a simple system, of such
              vintage, so well known. 

The proposed continuation of geodetic and
              geophysical modeling studies will place first order constraints on crustal
              deformation in the Pacific Northwest, where they have direct implications for
              subduction zone mechanics and for continental dynamics, as well as for plate
              driving forces. These studies also directly support seismic risk evaluation in
              the urban corridor from Puget Sound to Portland, Oregon. The investigators will
              undertake completion of the PANGA velocity field and completion of dislocation
              modeling, as well as continued operation of the continuous PANGA GPS network.
              Meeting these goals requires ongoing observations by the PANGA array, setting
              these results results in the context of other western U.S. deformation arrays,
              continuing the regional kinematic and dynamic modeling studies, and refining
              recent models for subduction zone dynamics. This approach will resolve the
              superimposed interseismic (elastic and viscoelastic) subduction strain field
              from the regional secular stain field well enough to address the kinematic and
              dynamic models. 




