Title       : Collaborative Research: Northwest Canada Seismic Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0003745

Award Number: 0003745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160021             (Estimated)
Investigator: Justin Revenaugh jsr@es.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Gaherty-EAR0003404
Revenaugh-0003746
Garnero-0003745

The Canadian Northwest
              Experiment (CANOE hereafter) will employ  a Y-shaped, 48-station broadband
              seismic array to address two of the great unsolved problems in the evolution of
              the solid Earth:  the assembly and stabilization of the continents, and the
              importance of the Earth's core-mantle boundary (CMB) as the birthplace of
              mantle plumes and the graveyard of subducted slabs.  Constructed via a sequence
              of collisional events associated with subduction, continents grow outwards from
              nuclei that stabilize quickly, experiencing little deformation over the
              subsequent billions of years.  This stability is presumably due to dynamic
              processes associated with craton construction, but is poorly understood. The
              best locale in the world for mapping continent construction is the northwestern
              corner of the Canadian shield, which is characterized by a progression from the
              2.5-4 billion-year-old Slave province (home to the oldest known rocks on Earth)
              to the recently uplifted Northern Cordillera of the great Rocky Mountain
              system.   The investigators will deploy broadband seismometers across this
              transition, with a western arm following the Alaskan highway from Whitehorse,
              BC to Edmonton, AB, and an eastern arm reaching from Fort Nelson, BC to
              Yellowknife, NWT.  Using records of local, regional, and distant earthquakes,
              the investigators will construct detailed images of the mantle and crust
              associated with this cordillera-to-craton transition.

By recording
              earthquakes from the far reaches of the Pacific basin, the CANOE deployment
              will also provide unsurpassed sampling of the seismic structure of the
              lowermost mantle. The 90's witnessed a parade of new and unusual discoveries
              about the Earth's lower mantle and CMB, including evidence for compositional
              heterogeneity, partial melting, and anisotropic mantle fabric that have strong
              implications for mantle dynamic processes. CANOE, situated within 120o of the
              vast majority of the world's deep seismicity, provides a remarkable opportunity
              to examine the lower mantle in greater detail.  This includes unsurpassed
              coverage of the CMB beneath Hawaii, providing an excellent opportunity to test
              models of the genesis of this hotspot archetype.

Following the experiment,
              all data will be made available to the community through the IRIS Data
              Management Center (www.iris.washington.edu).  Seismic instrumentation will be
              provided by the IRIS PASSCAL program.  A portion of the experiment is funded by
              the Canadian Lithoprobe program via a grant to the University of British
              Columbia.

-- 


