Title       : Collaborative Research: Field Investigation of Se Oxyanion reduction and Se
               Sources in Wetlands: Application of Se Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2001      
File        : a0003691

Award Number: 0003691
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44838              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Bullen tdbullen@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003691
Bullen

This project will apply selenium (Se) stable isotope ratios
              as a new tool
for understanding the transport and chemical transformations of
              Se in
wetlands.  Se contamination poses a threat to wildlife in many
              wetland
areas of the western United States, in fly-ash disposal areas, and in
              other
settings worldwide.  The complex chemistry of Se determines the
              element's
mobility and bioavailability, and efforts to understand its
              long-term
cycling and transport in wetlands depend on accurate understanding
              of
chemical transformations there.
Previous work by this group suggests that
              Se isotope ratio measurements can
be used as indicators of reduction
              reactions, which transform Se oxyanions
into forms that are less mobile and
              less bioavailable.  The present study
will address critical questions arising
              from that work by performing the
first detailed Se isotope field study, at a
              Se-contaminated wetland at
Benton Lake National Wildlife Refuge, Montana.  The
              primary objectives are
to determine Se reduction rates using this new
              technique and constrain the
relative importance of reduction by bacteria
              versus assimilation by plants
and algae.  The work will involve detailed
              measurements of Se
concentrations, Se isotope ratios, and related geochemical
              variables in
surface water, sediment pore waters, sediment components, and
              microcosm
experiments.  Sampling will be timed according to seasonal
              variations in
water management and biogeochemistry.  If possible, Se from the
              various
sources will be traced through the system via their isotopic
              "signatures".
The study is designed as a Ph.D. project for a graduate student,
              who will
be trained in environmental geochemistry, hydrogeology,
              isotope
geochemistry and geomicrobiology


