Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Charged Species in Supercritical Fluids - How
               Clustering Affects Ionic Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0003690

Award Number: 0003690
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Holroyd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andy Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Wishart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brookhaven Science Associa
	      P.O. Box 5000
	      Upton, NY  11973    631/344-2494

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003690
Holroyd

This award supports a two-year collaborative research
              project between Dr. Richard Holroyd of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in
              New York and Professor Masaru Nishikawa of the Kanagawa Institute of Technology
              in Japan.  The researchers will undertake a study of charged species in
              supercritical fluids - how clustering affects ionic reactions.  Achieving an
              understanding of how ions are solvated by supercritical solvents such as carbon
              dioxide and ethane is important in fundamental chemical research.  The
              clustering of supercritical fluid solvent molecules around a neutral solute
              molecule has been intensively investigated using spectroscopic methods since
              the 1980's and now almost established.  However, the clustering around an ionic
              molecule has attracted attention in the last ten years.  The researchers will
              extend their measurements and theoretical interpretation to charge transfer
              reactions.  They will produce anionic solvent molecules by electron attachment
              after picosecond pulse radiolysis and try to follow the electron transfer to
              solute molecules with both time-dependent fluorescent and conductivity
              measurements.  Such measurements clarify the applicability of the compressible
              continuum model to ionic reactions in supercritical fluids.  

The project
              brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary
              expertise and research capabilities. Results of this research could form the
              basis for the analysis of ionic organic reactions in supercritical fluids,
              which are now extensively investigated as a technology for the next century. 
              This research advances international human resources through the participation
              of a postdoc.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will
              broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of their research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

