Title       : Impact of Larval Transport and Benthic Habitat Quality Upon Recruitment
               Dynamics: Poor Nursery Habitat Decouples Larval Supply From Reproductive Output
               of Caribbean Spiny Lobster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a0003253

Award Number: 0003253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84787              (Estimated)
Investigator: David B. Eggleston eggleston@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study is based on prior research of recruitment in the Caribbean spiny
              lobster, couched in the theoretical framework of metapopulation and source?sink
              dynamics, at four widely spaced sites (over 100's of kms) in Exuma
              Sound,Bahamas. Those findings, which were based on field sampling, field
              experiments and a 2?D hydrodynamic model of physical transport, produced a
              conceptual model describing the collective influence of physical transport,
              habitat quality and adult abundance upon spiny lobster recruitment.
              Specifically, spatial patterns in recruitment and adult abundance across the
              four sites were consistent over three years, adult abundance and recruitment
              were decoupled spatially, and the spatial patterns in recruitment were
              explained largely (? 67 % of mesoscale variation) by larval and postlarval
              transport via gyral currents and geostrophic flow. These suggested that habitat
              quality and physical transport decoupled recruitment and adult abundance
              spatially, thereby producing a source?sink network. These findings have major
              implications for understanding of recruitment processes and placement of marine
              reserves to enhance recruitment. In particular, the results are novel in their
              demonstration of direct and strong control of larval supply by fundamental
              hydrodynamic processes, and in their applicability to the design of marine
              reserves. For instance, placement of a marine reserve in a sink habitat would
              lead to a false sense of security and would not prevent local extinction of a
              heavily exploited population. This investigation tests a key hypothesis derived
              from the earlier findings: poor habitat quality in some sites reduces recruit
              survival disproportionately and thereby decouples larval supply and subsequent
              adult abundance. It includes both mensurative and manipulative experiments,
              specifically to measure the absolute availability of settlement and nursery
              habitat, to quantify abundance and survival rates of post?settlement and young
              juvenile spiny lobster, and to quantify population parameters at the four
              sites. The study therefore constitutes a unique empirical test of the
              collective influence of physical transport, habitat quality and adult abundance
              upon the recruitment dynamics of marine species.
