Title       : Geochemical Reactions in the Unsaturated Zone of the Pyritic Mine Wastes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2001  
File        : a0003364

Award Number: 0003364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195216             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Donald Rimstidt jdr02@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Geochemical Reactions in the Unsaturated Zone of Pyritic Mine
              Wastes
By J. Donald Rimstidt

	There are over 60 billion tons of mine wastes
              from non-fuel mineral production in the US today and more are being produced at
              a rate of about 2 billion tons annually. Although most of these wastes are
              relatively benign, consisting of common rocks and soils, a significant fraction
              contains iron sulfide minerals, especially pyrite, that can oxidize to produce
              an acidic sulfate solution, often containing high concentrations of toxic
              metals. Discharge of this acid mine drainage (AMD) into nearby streams and
              lakes is responsible for the ecological impairment of thousands of miles of
              streams. Furthermore, AMD reduces water quality often making it unfit for human
              consumption or for use as industrial process water. Thus, AMD is a
              multi-billion dollar societal problem that can benefit significantly from an
              organized scientific and engineering research program. We propose to study
              chemical reactions that occur at the air/mineral and air/brine/mineral
              interfaces in the unsaturated parts of pyritic waste piles. Specifically, we
              will measure the rates of oxidation of pyrite in moist air as a function of the
              partial pressure of oxygen, relative humidity, and temperature. This oxidation
              produces sulfuric acid and ferrous sulfate and is the primary mode of acid
              production. Furthermore, we will investigate the evolution of the ferrous
              sulfate as it evolves via oxidation, dehydration, and neutralization through a
              series of ferrous/ferric hydroxysulfate minerals. These minerals are a
              secondary source of acid production and are hosts of many of the trace metals
              that cause environmental degradation. They are of particular concern because
              they are quite soluble so they dissolve rapidly during rain events to release
              large amounts of acidity and trace metals to nearby receiving waters. Our goal
              is to provide details about the thermodynamic stability and rates of
              transformation of these sulfate minerals so we can predict the evolution of
              this reservoir of latent acidity and trace metals. We believe that this
              information will provide valuable guidance to the engineers and geochemists
              that are designing new waste disposal facilities or who are preparing
              remediation plans for abandoned mine wastes. 


