Title       : Dissertation: Mississippian Household Organizational Dynamics in the Era of
               Moundville's Consolidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0003295

Award Number: 0003295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9637               (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincas P. Steponaitis vin@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Vincas Steponaitis, Mr Gregory Wilson will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. In 1939 and 1940 large scale archaeological
              excavations were conducted at the site of Moundville, located in the Black
              Warrior Valley of Alabama and Mr Wilson and colleagues will analyze this data
              to answer a number of specific questions about how his chiefdom was organized.
              Although no prehistoric North American culture reached a state level of
              organization, in many cases chiefdoms arose which integrated multiple thousands
              of individuals into functioning social and political units. As the name
              implies, the site of Moundville includes a series of large visually impressive
              mounds which testify to the ability to enlist and organize a large amount of
              labor over a sustained period of time. Archaeologists wish to understand how
              such complex societies developed and were maintained. Considerable research has
              been conducted on the mounds themselves and data indicate that they served both
              as burial mounds and as platforms on which structures were erected. Exotic
              items not locally available reflect a well developed system of long distance
              trade and these symbols likely reinforced  a hierarchical system of social
              organization. Relatively little however is understood about how the majority of
              Moundville inhabitants lived, the degree of differentiation among them or how
              they were integrated into the larger social system. Mr. Wilson's research will
              address these issues. The large scale excavations conducted in the 1939 and
              1940 uncovered remains of many non-mound structures and associated artifacts
              such as ceramics, stone tools and animal bones. Mr. Wilson and his
              collaborators will plot their spatial distribution using a geographic
              information system, identify individual domestic units and reconstruct
              activities conducted. For example he wishes to determine whether food storage
              facilities are associated with each since this will provide insight into
              centralized vs. familial control of an essential resource. He will also examine
              the degree of differentiation among units to see if status differences are
              present at this level.

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide insight into Native American prehistory and the processes which
              underlie the development of complex societies. It will provide data of interest
              to both archaeologists and the general public and assist in training a
              promising scientist.

