Title       : The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a0003301

Award Number: 0003301
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lura J. Chase                           
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84040              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. P. White tricoal@triangle-coalition.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Triangle Coalition Tech
	      1201 New York Avenue, NW
	      Washington, DC  20005    202/289-2911

NSF Program : 7366      RURAL SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Program Objectives

The Albert Einstein Distinguished Educator Fellowship
              Program is designed to provide outstanding elementary and secondary mathematics
              and science teachers the opportunity to bring to Congress and appropriate
              branches of the federal government the insights, extensive knowledge, and
              practical experience of classroom teachers.  As Fellows, teachers can help to
              increase the understanding, communication, and cooperation between Congress and
              Federal agencies, and the mathematics and science education
              community.

Process

Ms. Kerry Venegas, a teacher in the Gallup-McKinley
              County School District was initially identified by the The Albert Einstein
              Distinguished Educator Fellowship Program and was subsequently interviewed at
              the National Science Foundation based on her interest and related experience to
              the work of the Division of Educational System Reform. The ESR Acting Division
              Director and two Program Directors interviewed the applicant. They unanimously
              agreed that it would be mutually beneficial to allow a Fellowship candidate to
              work with the Rural Systemic Initiative program.  The incumbent will have an
              opportunity to work with program directors to guide the overall RSI program and
              assist in the assessment of ongoing projects and provide recommendations to
              strengthen the projects.



