Title       : Testing a Pseudotachylyte Geothermometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  2000  
File        : a0003482

Award Number: 0003482
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63396              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kieran O'Hara geokoh@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003482
O'Hara
A simple new geothermometer for frictionally melted rocks (so
              called pseudotachylytes) that allows estimate of ambient country rock
              temperature during melting is being tested on a fossil intracontinental
              pseudotachylyte-bearing fault zone the (Homestake shear zone, Colorado) and
              ultradeep pseudotachylytes from western Norway.  Temperature (and hence depth)
              estimates on frictional melting along fault zones give a three dimensional
              picture of the rupture geometry.  Frictional melting appears to be one of the
              few indicators of ancient seismic activity in the crust and the depth of
              frictional melting is thought to correspond to the seismic regime.  The
              recognition that some pseudotachylytes are overprinted by ductile fabrics,
              together with the discovery of ultra-deep pseudotachylytes, suggests that
              frictional melting is not confined solely to the brittle upper crust. 
              Information on the depth distribution of frictional melting places important
              constraints on the rheological behavior of the crust and its potential to
              behave seismically.

Frictional melting during faulting can be regarded as an
              adiabatic heat pump in which the fault does work at the ambient country rock
              temperature.  Some of this work is converted to heat producing a melt at a
              higher temperature.  The efficiency of the conversion process depends solely on
              temperature difference between the heat reservoirs.  If an estimate of
              efficiency can be made and the temperature of one of the heat reservoirs is
              assumed, the temperature of the other reservoir can be calculated.  It is shown
              here that the ratio of frictional melt volume to mechanical wear volume in
              natural pseudotachylytes is a proxy for the ratio of thermal to mechanical
              energy during faulting, and that this ratio is independent of fault area,
              displacement, stress and mineralogy. Thermodynamic arguments indicate it
              depends solely on temperature.

Preliminary data from four different
              pseudotachylyte localities, which are not overprinted by ductile fabrics, yield
              reasonable ambient temperature estimates of 132-484oC, corresponding to the
              upper and middle crust.  The geothermometer yields a country rock temperature
              of 627- 827oC for eclogite-facies pseudotachylytes from western Norway,
              consistent with an independent estimate of 670oC.  The geothermometer appears
              to be applicable throughout the entire crust.

