Title       : Design and Synthesis of Phagocytosis-Resistant Polymeric Surfactants for the
               Development of Perfluorocarbon Emulsions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0003006

Award Number: 0003006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-An Peng capeng@rcf.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thieo E. Hogen-Esch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003006
Peng
The synthesis is proposed of fluorine-containing polymeric (PPF)
              surfactants for the emulsification of perfluorocarbon chemicals (PFCs) that are
              useful as intravenous transfusion agents.  Such emulsions are of interest as
              bioacceptable oxygen and carbon dioxide carriers that are less immunologic than
              is presently the case with the currently used Pluronic F-68 (polyoxyethylene
              polyoxypropylene block polymer) and egg yolk phospholipids (EYP).  The PIs
              present evidence indicating that phagocytosis of PFC emulsion microparticles in
              the present of PPF surfactants is reduced compared to that by emulsions
              mediated by low molecular weight perfluorocarbon surfactants.  The synthesis is
              proposed of two types of biocompatible hydrophilic polymers that have
              perfluorocarbon (RF) groups at the chain end or as pendent groups.  The PIs
              outline procedures allowing the synthesis of such PPF surfactants with RF
              groups having between 4 and 12 carbons and hydrocarbon segment that allows
              varying degreds of hydrophobic/ lipophilic character.  The hydrophlic polymers
              include polyethylene glycol (PEG), hydroxyethylcellulose (HEC),
              polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), and similar polymers.  The polymers are synthesized
              either by chemical derivatization of the polymer end- or pendent group or by
              copolymerization of the water-soluble vinyl monomer(s) with RF-acrylates,
              -acrylamides or similar monomers.  The polymers may also contain negatively
              charged groups that are anticipated to affect phagocytosis and/or PFC
              recognition by the immune system.  The effect(s) of these PPF surfactants on
              the phagocytosis process will be investigated by a number of techniques that
              include optical and electron microscopy as well as fluorine-19 NMR.  The PIs
              will also examine the rate of cytokine (e.g., IL-1b and TNF-a) secretion
              associated with the PFC emulsion droplets phagocytosed by J774A.1 macrophage
              cells.  The efficiency of oxygen diffusion through the cell-PPF surfactant will
              be studied by oxygen microsensors.


