Title       : Constraining Late Paleozoic Climate, CO2 Levels, and Ice Sheet Volumes:
               Integration of Oxygen Isotopes with Climate and Ice Sheet Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a0003596

Award Number: 0003596
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ethan L. Grossman   (Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Hyde  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent developments provide an opportunity to couple for the first time two
              methods for estimating Paleozoic continental ice volume: oxygen isotope
              (18O/16O) paleothermometry and ice sheet-climate models (ISCMs).  This proposal
              requests funds to use oxygen isotopic data for marine fossils and ISCMs to
              estimate temperature variations, ice volumes, and CO2 levels during a key
              interval in Earth's past.  The study will span late Devonian to mid-Permian
              time, Earth's last greenhouse-icehouse-greenhouse cycle.  

As a first step,
              the model will be tested on more recent end-member climates, those of the late
              Pleistocene (fully glaciated) and the Early Eocene or Mid-Cretaceous (ice
              free).   This will examine the model's ability to reproduce temperature
              distributions and permit comparison to existing isotopic data.  The model will
              then be applied to the Paleozoic in two modes.  First, CO2 levels will be
              inputted from the geochemical model of Berner (1997, Science 76:544-546),
              permitting estimates of global temperature variation and ice volume.  Using
              modeled temperatures and oxygen isotopic (d18O) data from brachiopod shells,
              seawater d18O can be calculated and ice volume redetermined.   Different CO2
              levels will be entered iteratively in an effort to converge on a solution in
              which the temperature distribution, CO2 level, and ice volume are mutually
              consistent with the isotopic data.  Much of the data necessary for the study
              are available from previous studies, especially from those of the first PI and
              his coworkers.  Additional data will be collected for select intervals (e.g.,
              Lower Carboniferous and Early Permian) using samples in hand, provided by
              Russian and Australian collaborators, and collected in Russia.  This will
              permit development of a reliable d18O record for the Late Paleozoic.

	This
              study is the first exploratory step in the development of a new methodology for
              determining ice volume and CO2 levels, in which the physical dynamics of ice
              sheets and climate are combined with the precise data available through oxygen
              isotope analysis.   The ultimate goal is to estimate atmospheric CO2 levels for
              Earth's last 540 million years.  This premiere study will be performed using a
              computer-efficient ISCM, as the areas of parameter space to be examined
              prohibit the use of more expensive models.  Subsequent studies will employ more
              sophisticated and expensive models to focus on key problems and areas of
              model/data disagreement.


