Title       : Dissertation: The Role of Cerros de Trincheras in Prehistoric Agricultural
               Strategies of Northern Mexico and the Southern Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2000  
File        : a0003715

Award Number: 0003715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wirt H. Wills wwills@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Drs. Wirt Wills and Robert Hard, Mr. Gerry Raymond will
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. For many years archaeologists have
              recognized the presence of "cerros de trincheras" (terraced hillsides) in the
              late prehistoric Southwest. Research indicates that they served multiple
              functions and that people both lived on them and used the terraces as
              agricultural fields. Recently however similar features have been discovered in
              the state of Chihuahua Mexico which are significantly earlier than their
              northern counterparts and which date to the Archaic period, over 3,000 years
              ago. The discovery of fragments of maize and other domestic plants in the
              terrace soil demonstrates that the inhabitants were practicing agriculture at a
              time and place where hunting and gathering had been believed to be the sole
              source of subsistence. Mr. Raymond will conduct archaeological research at a
              newly recognized group of cerros de trincheras in Chihuahua to determine how
              they functioned. Because little is known about this group, he will conduct test
              excavations to recover cultural material as well as charcoal, faunal and
              botanical remains. These will permit age determination by radiocarbon dating
              and also provide information on the range of subsistence resources. Mr. Raymond
              also wishes to understand why relatively large amounts of labor were expended
              to build such terraces and why residents did not rely on less labor intensive
              flat ground farming. Based on analyses from later U.S. counterparts, he
              postulates that individual terraces create separate microenvironments with
              unique moisture characteristics based on slight differences in runoff
              catchment. Some terraces, he believes were better watered than others and in
              variable semi-arid rainfall conditions, productivity among terraces would vary
              from year to year based on unpredictable rainfall level. Thus terracing would
              serve a risk minimizing function. Using a geographic information system to
              display and correlate data, he will map terraces, measure their slope,
              catchment area and geological context and determine whether observed variation
              meets his prediction. He will also set the individual terraced hillsides into a
              larger geographic context to learn how they functioned in a broader
              ecological/subsistence context. The research is situated within a theoretical
              framework of optimum foraging theory.

This work is important for several
              reasons. The existence of Archaic cerros de trincheras was completely
              unexpected and significantly changes archaeologists understanding of the
              development of agriculture and the shift from hunting and gathering to farming
              over a wide region in the U.S. Southwest and Mexico. Mr. Raymond's work will
              add a new set of cases to a very small and inadequate sample. The research will
              provide new insight into how these features functioned and provide data of
              interest to many scientists. It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

