Title       : A Geomorphic Framework for Interpreting Continental Interior Mountain Belt
               Exhumation: The Laramide Example
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a0003604

Award Number: 0003604
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Anderson rsand@rupture.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth B. Safran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

A Geomorphic Framework for Interpreting Continental Interior
              Mountain Belt Exhumation: The Laramide Example

Robert Anderson and Elizabeth
              Safran  EAR-0003604

Between about 80 and 50 Myr ago, the Laramide orogeny
              uplifted a series of high, thrust fault-bounded mountain ranges that form some
              of the most dramatic mountain landscapes of the continental interior.  These
              ranges and the intervening sedimentary basins stretch across much of Wyoming,
              Colorado, Montana, Utah, and South Dakota.  Interpretations of the tectonic and
              climatic history of the entire western U. S. hinge on assumptions about
              Laramide landscape evolution, and yet this evolution remains ill-understood. 
              The debate centers on the significance, timing, and cause of two geomorphic
              episodes, evidence for which is recorded in a suite of distinctive Laramide
              landforms.  Widespread, high-elevation surfaces of low local relief capped by
              narrow bedrock spines record a period of declining local relief in most of the
              Laramide ranges.  A subsequent period of regional erosion produced canyons in
              the ranges and broad, deep depressions in the basin fills, punctuated by
              numerous river terraces.  Previous researchers have tried to correlate the
              development of these landforms with regional episodes of tectonic or climatic
              forcing.  However, the Laramide landforms apparently do not reflect external
              forcing in a simple way, because limited dating suggests that they vary in age.
               This finding has hindered the construction of a regionally coherent geologic
              history, and to date no process-based model has been put forth to explain
              it.
This study will address geomorphic mechanisms by which erosional activity
              might have been triggered at different times throughout this interior mountain
              landscape.  PIs hypothesize that even a simple forcing event would produce
              complex erosional patterns, given a set of interlocking ranges and basins
              linked by an integrated drainage network.  They will quantitatively address
              this hypothesis, focusing on the exhumational episode that shaped the Laramide
              landscape during the late Cenozoic.  Their approach will involve: 1) improving
              constraints on the timing of Laramide basin exhumation by using cosmogenic
              radionuclides to date landforms and deposits of fluvial origin within the
              basins; 2) improving constraints on pre-exhumation range morphology by
              characterizing the geomorphology of the Granite Mountains, which they view as a
              modern analogue to the ancient condition of other Laramide ranges; and 3)
              developing numerical models of both regional and mountain range-scale landscape
              evolution to provide a mechanistic framework for data interpretation.  

