Title       : GLOBEC: Physical Influences on California Current Salmon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0003254

Award Number: 0003254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $569923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis W. Botsford lwbotsford@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Hastings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The GLOBEC NEP Program will continue annual long term observations (2D) in two
              parts of the California Current System (CCS), along with mesoscale (3D) and
              process studies in two field years.  Through those studies the program aims to
              achieve a quantitative understanding of how physical and biological processes
              drive zooplankton and salmon populations, on time scales ranging from
              multi-decadal to weekly, and spatial scales from the basin to mesoscale. 
              Modeling is required to integrate over the many disciplines involved, scales of
              variability, and levels of ecological organization, both as a part of the
              scientific process, and as a prospective tool to predict the effects of future
              climate change on these populations.  As part of the GLOBEC Program the PIs
              will: (1)  add a swimming capability to their bioenergetic model of individual
              CCS salmon and embed that in GLOBEC and CoOP physical models to explain salmon
              distribution, growth and survival in early ocean life, (2)  describe
              implications for CCS salmon population dynamics of well known, but poorly
              understood effects of the ocean environment on salmon size structure, and (3) 
              assess retrospectively relationships between CCS salmon spawner and recruit
              data and physical data from the CCS from multidecadal scales to the mesoscale. 
               In addition the PIs will use numerical. experiments to test explanations of
              observed distributions, to see whether they meet bioenergetic and swimming
              speed constraints, and to evaluate their consequences regarding distributions
              of food and predators.  Individual level analyses and existing data indicate
              environmental influences on growth affect not just survival, but also maturity
              schedules, an effect whose consequences for population and metapopulation
              dynamics and for retrospective are not known.  GLOBEC NEP conclusions regarding
              the response of this ecosystem and salmon populations to climate change will
              require consistency with past data.  The PIs will refine their retrospective
              results by relating decadal and annual scales to seasonal, mesoscale
              mechanisms, using recruitment and spawner data (which are less confounded than
              catch) and accounting for freshwater conditions. As GLOBEC NEP reaches
              completion 4 or 5 years from now, the modeling and retrospective studies will
              be integrated to provide a prospective summary.
