Title       : Forward and Inverse Modeling of Rupture Dynamics in Three Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0003275

Award Number: 0003275
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim B. Olsen kbolsen@crustal.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1576,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract for proposal EAR0003275 (PH #23x)

Title: Forward and Inverse
              Modeling of Rupture Dynamics in Three Dimensions

PI: Kim Olsen, Institute
              for Crustal Studies, University of California at Santa Barbara

The proposed
              research is an integrated approach to significantly advance our knowledge in
              the field of earthquake rupture dynamics. The work consists of three parts. The
              first part is the development of a method for flexible and efficient modeling
              of dynamic rupture propagation on curved or multi-segmented fault geometries
              with radiation in a laterally and vertically heterogeneous three-dimensional
              medium and accurate boundary conditions. This method will allow fully
              large-scale dynamic modeling of the statistics of recurrent ruptures on systems
              of arbitrarily-shaped faults. Here, we will combine the most flexible and
              efficient features of several numerical methods. The second part is a
              continuation of ongoing efforts on defining the critical parameters and
              conditions describing when dynamic rupture start, propagate, and stop. This
              involves an analysis of the variation of dynamic rupture velocity in a
              heterogeneous stress field and in particular, deriving expressions for and
              numerically estimating the parameters generating rupture propagation in
              agreement with observations. The third part will examine the feasibility of
              inverting for the friction, stress, or fracture energy, parameters containing
              key information about the rupture history, for large earthquakes. We will
              describe the limitations and accuracy of the inversion, and attempt to apply
              the method to selected large, well-recorded earthquakes. The three parts of the
              proposed research all lead towards the ultimate goal of the project, namely to
              better our understanding of why do earthquakes start, propagate and arrest. 
              Such understanding may lead to successful prediction of earthquakes in the
              future, thereby mitigating the loss of life and property.


