Title       : Dissertation: The Role of Long-Distance, Interregional Exchange in Archaic State
               Formation, Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0003229

Award Number: 0003229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles S. Stanish stanish@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Charles Stanish, MS Aimee Plourde will obtain
              radiocarbon dates to determine the ages of material recovered during the course
              of fieldwork in the Huancane-Putina Valley in Peru. Over the course of six
              weeks, MS Plourde excavated at the site of Cachichupa which, based on its
              strategic location, massive terracing and large scale corporate architecture
              was the dominant location during the Formative period from ca. 1100 BC - AD
              400. Based on comparison of Cachichupa's ceramics with those of adjacent
              regions it is possible with some confidence, to situate the site within this
              broad 1500 year time span, but the necessary more accurate placement requires
              radiocarbon dates.

The goal of the work by MS Plourde and her advisor is to
              understand the factors which led to the rise to complex state level societies
              in the Andean region. While many are familiar with the Inca Empire, this in
              fact was the last in a series of such entities, the first of which developed in
              the highland Lake Titicaca Basin. While it is unlikely that any single cause
              can be isolated, many archaeologists believe that trade and control over the
              movement of essential resources led to the concentration of power and the
              development of hierarchically organized societies. Plourde and Stanish noted
              the early expansion of one particular site, Pukara, within the Titicaca Basin
              and its location adjacent to an important route which leads East towards the
              lowland Amazon. They postulated that the site controlled trade in important
              lowland goods and to test this idea they surveyed along the hypothesized route
              in an attempt to locate Pukara related sites. Cachichupa, they believe
              constitutes one such occurrence. However without precise knowledge of its age,
              it is not possible to fit it securely into a broader developmental
              sequence.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
              insight into the rise of state level society in the New World and shed light on
              the factors which underlie this process. It will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

