Title       : Mechanism of Gene Regulation by High Intensity Light in Cyanobacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0003151

Award Number: 0003151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lorraine G. van Waasbergen Lorivw@uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Because of their photosynthetic lifestyle, plants have naturally developed
              elaborate mechanisms for controlling their responses to the quality and
              quantity of incident light.  During periods of exposure to high intensity light
              (HL) the photosynthetic apparatus becomes over-excited and this excess energy
              can cause serious damage to the cell.  Studies suggest that photosynthetic
              organisms may sense that they are receiving HL, and trigger the expression of
              factors that help the organism to acclimate to HL stress, by monitoring the
              redox state of the photosystem or through the activities of one or more
              blue/UV-A light (BL) photoreceptors.  The long-term goal of this research is to
              identify and characterize the sensors and other regulatory elements that
              control gene expression in response to HL in cyanobacteria.  Previous work has
              identified one such regulatory element.  This factor, a histidine sensor kinase
              designated NblS, controls the expression of a number of important genes during
              HL stress.  NblS is hypothesized to sense the redox stress on the photosystem
              during HL exposure and appears to also be involved in BL photoperception.  An
              objective of this research is to explore the mechanism of HL sensing by NblS. 
              The presence of a PAS domain within the sequence of NblS strongly suggests that
              it binds a redox-active cofactor.  This possibility will be explored.  The
              presence and nature of a cofactor bound to this domain will be determined by
              spectral analysis of the PAS region of NblS overexpressed in E. coli. 
              Subsequent alignment-based, site-directed mutagenesis would be used to identify
              the residues important in binding of the cofactor.  This information would
              serve as an important step towards understanding the sensory mechanism of NblS.
               Another objective of this research is to identify other regulatory factors
              involved in controlling gene expression in response to HL stress in
              cyanobacteria.  This will be done by generation and analysis of additional
              mutants altered in expression of the HL- and BL-activated hliA gene.  Mutants
              will be generated by transposon mutagenesis in the cyanobacterium Synechocystis
              PCC 6803.  Combined use of the tagging mutagenesis method and knowledge of the
              entire genome sequence that is available for this strain will allow rapid
              identification of a number of factors involved in the HL-sensing process.  It
              has long been recognized that numerous processes in all forms of life are
              moderated by light, and more recently it has become evident that a variety of
              systems can be controlled by intracellular redox or redox potential.  The
              studies described here will provide greater understanding of how these signals
              are perceived and how they are used to control gene expression.
