Title       : Dynamics and Variability of Northern Hemisphere Storm Tracks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a0003136

Award Number: 0003136
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund K. Chang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under this award, Dr. Chang will investigate the dynamics of mid-latitude storm
              tracks and their relationship with the basic state atmospheric flow.  His goal
              is to understand what drives the seasonal and interannual time variations in
              the position and intensity of storm tracks.  The study builds on his previous
              work and is motivated by the observed suppression of the of the Pacific storm
              track in mid-winter.  The research consists of four thrusts. The first three
              focus on how specific mechanisms affect eddy growth in a given basic state; 
              the fourth concentrates on isolating and understanding the effect of storm
              track eddy fluxes on the basic state.  Specifically, the PI wishes to
              investigate (1) the effect of the basic state shear on the baroclinic sources
              of storm tracks particularly the effect on upper-level perturbations coming off
              the Asian continent;  (2) the modes of variability due to wave propagation
              variations;  (3) the effect of condensational heating on storm tracks;  and (4)
              the relationship between the amplitude and the location of storm tracks and
              low-frequency variability of the atmosphere. For this study, the PI will employ
              a combination of tools including observational data analyses, numerical
              simulations with General Circulation Models (GCMs), and idealized models.  The
              fourth thrust will involve the coupling of a storm track model and a stationary
              wave model.

This research is important because the location and intensity of
              storm tracks have direct bearing on regional weather.  Further, a better
              understanding of storm track behavior is needed to anticipate potential changes
              that might result from climate variations.  

