Title       : Technical Mathematics for Tomorrow: Recommendations and Exemplary Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a0003065

Award Number: 0003065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269956             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Hovis   (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Peterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Kimball  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Math Assoc Two Yr Col
	      Southwest Tennessee CC
	      Memphis, TN  38134    901/333-4643

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The preparation of a workforce of scientifically and technologically competent
              technicians rests on a foundation of mathematical concepts and skills.
              Technical mathematics is an essential part of science, information, computer,
              and engineering technology programs offered by associate degree granting
              colleges; yet, there is a widening disparity between the mathematics used in
              industry and what is taught.

This project is analyzing the role and nature
              of technical mathematics in advanced technology programs, recognizing
              successful models, and developing a vision and recommendations for the future.
              Issues of transferability to four-year institutions are also being
              considered.

Through two regional workshops, mathematics and technical
              program faculty, together with representatives from business and industry, are
              addressing content and curriculum issues related to technical mathematics.
              These issues include the integration of mathematics content with science and
              technology content, relevance to business and industry needs, pedagogy, and the
              use of technology. Reports from these workshops are enabling the development of
              criteria for selecting up to 10 exemplary technical mathematics programs which
              are being highlighted at a national conference.

The focus of the national
              conference is substantive dialogue on technical mathematics issues and the
              development of a vision and recommendations for achieving that vision. In
              addition to representatives from the 10 exemplary programs chosen, participants
              include mathematics and technical program faculty, industry representatives,
              professional society representatives, and other national leaders.

Project
              leadership is centered in the Technical Mathematics Committee of the American
              Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC). A national Advisory
              Group, consisting of leaders from all stakeholders in the continued examination
              and improvement of mathematics for technical mathematics, is serving to guide
              project development and implementation.

