Title       : A New Approach to Hydrologic Data Assimilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0003361

Award Number: 0003361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis B. McLaughlin dennism@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003361 
McLaughlin 

Hydrology is experiencing rapid changes as a result of
              improved scientific understanding and measurement technology.  Advances in
              global modeling and remote sensing are likely to provide large amounts of new
              information in the coming decades.  There will be an increased need for
              efficient methods to process and interpret all of this information.  Many of
              the most promising data processing options combine observations with model
              predictions, a process commonly known as data assimilation.  The data
              assimilation methods which have been most successful in practical applications
              are based on either variational or recursive estimation concepts.  Each of
              these approaches has distinctive advantages and limitations but neither
              provides a satisfactory solution for very large applications (e.g.,
              applications that work with large amounts of remote sensing data over
              continental-scale regions).

In this project, we propose to develop a
              computationally efficient and robust approach to hydrologic data assimilation
              which combines the best aspects of variational and recursive estimation.  This
              work will be methodical in nature but its overall goal is to advance scientific
              understanding of large-scale hydrologic processes.  The data assimilation
              methods we develop in this project will be tested on a case study, which will
              provide insight about scientific questions of hydrologic interest.  The testing
              and application phase of our project will rely on our previous experiences with
              data assimilation techniques and on methods which have been successfully
              applied in meteorology and oceanography.

The case study will be concerned
              with the estimation of near-surface soil moisture.  Such estimates are
              especially useful for weather prediction and analyses of climate change.  The
              case study will rely on an existing hydrologic/measurement model and will be
              based on data obtained from SGP97 and SGP99 field experiments in central
              Oklahoma.  The tests carried out in this study will help to demonstrate the
              benefits of data assimilation in large-scale case studies of particular
              interest to hydrologists.

