Title       : Collaborative Research: Experimental Investigation of X-Band Polarimetric-Radar
               Rainfall Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0003046

Award Number: 0003046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66944              (Estimated)
Investigator: Witold F. Krajewski witold-krajewski@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003046
Krajewski

Flash-flood and urban hydrologic forecast systems required
              accurate quantitative measurements of precipitation at temporal scales of
              minutes and spatial scales on the order of one square kilometer.  We propose to
              explore the potential of X-band polarization diversity radar to provide such
              high-resolution rainfall products.  Polarimetric radar measurements add
              information about rainfall system and have better sensitivity to rainfall rate
              variability.  However, a major drawback of using high frequency radar is that
              both beam power attenuation and backscattering phase shift can be significant
              at high rainfall intensities and thus negatively affect the accuracy of
              rainfall products.  The goal of the proposed research is to develop a
              methodology, which would combine the advantages of X-band radar systems with
              those of polarization diversity techniques.  We aim at demonstrating that such
              a methodology can lead to reliable quantitative rainfall estimates at
              spatio-temporal scales suitable for small-scale hydrologic predictions.  Our
              investigation will be facilitated through two field experiments to obtain
              high-resolution polarimetric radar data at well-instrumented sites. The first
              experiment will take place in Southeast Iowa at the hydrometeorological
              monitoring facilities of the Iowa Institute of Hydraulic Research.  These
              facilities include a two-dimensional video disdrometer, optical rain gauges, a
              mobile vertically pointing Doppler radar, and a very dense network of tipping
              bucket rain gauges.  We will collect the polarimetric radar measurements using
              the National Observatory of Athens. (NOA) mobile dual-polarization X-band radar
              (X-POL).  We will use the data in the development of a rainfall estimation
              scheme.  We will assess the error structure of the scheme's estimates a various
              spatial and temporal scales of aggregation using high-resolution rain gauge
              cluster data.  The second experiment will take place at Goodwin Creek basin in
              Mississippi.  A high-density rain gauge and streamflow network there will be
              complemented with several disdrometers, and the NOA X-POL radar will join
              another X-band mobile radar (Doppler on Wheels) operated by researchers from
              Princeton University.  Successful completion of this research may provide a new
              remote sensing tool that, if proven reliable, would be an attractive and
              economically affordable solution to the problem of monitoring remote basins and
              urban areas that are poorly covered by the NEXRAD radar network.

