Title       : Transforming Property, Persons, and State: Collectivization in Romania 1949-1962
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0003891

Award Number: 0003891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Verdery verdery@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail A. Kligman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,5917,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              High on the agenda of post-Soviet transformation since 1989 is "privatization,"
              the creation or recreation of private ownership from the collective property
              forms created during the socialist period. Western understanding of this
              phenomenon suffers from ignorance not only of how property in socialism worked
              but also of the processes by which that property was constituted in the first
              place, with their devastating effects on social relationships. As a result,
              privatization programs risk imposing a utopian goal on an insufficiently
              appreciated reality in much the same way that Bolshevism did earlier in the
              century.
This project examines the earlier of these two property
              transformations for one property object -- land -- and one post-socialist
              country in Eastern Europe -- Romania. By means of a collaborative venture
              involving fifteen anthropologists, sociologists, and historians from the U.S.,
              Great Britain, and Romania, including both senior scholars and graduate
              students, the project will research the process through which collective
              property in land was created in Romania between 1949 and 1962 (when
              collectivization there was declared complete). Research methods include both
              oral-history interviews and research in archives; the project is possible
              because some of those who experienced collectivization are still alive and
              because newly opened archives will provide information not previously
              available.
The project's goal is to analyze what collectivization reveals
              about the operations of the socialist state-in-formation and the
              creation/transformation of persons. Collectivization was instrumental in
              establishing the nature of the new Party-state and of the subjects it would
              govern; the policy was thus a defining moment both for the peasantry who
              suffered its consequences and for the apparatus that initiated it. Guiding
              questions include: What can one learn about how new techniques of rule were
              created and applied? To the extent that different forms of property entail
              different understandings of the person and of what it means to be a respectable
              human being, how did collectivization affect personhood? Are there discernible
              differences in the course of collectivization according to the ethno-national
              composition of different villages and regions? Did central directives
              repeatedly override policies adopted locally in response to local problems? Did
              local resistance to collectivization substantially modify how collective
              property was being made, thus affecting the subsequent operations of Romanian
              communist power and how the parts of the state apparatus related to one
              another? Was resistance more marked in some parts of the country than in others
              -- thus, did certain locales disproportionately affect the national
              outcome?
Answers to these kinds of questions will help to show how a policy
              instigated in obedience to the Stalinist model took specific shape in Romania
              and helped to form there a particular configuration of inter-bureaucratic and
              state-subject relations. The result of this work will be an analytic history of
              property-making relevant to present-day remakings of property -- a topic of
              increasing interest and practical concern in the contemporary world.


