Title       : Volcanism at the Antarctic Rift Margin: An Isotopic and Trace-Element Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2002 
File        : a0003702

Award Number: 0003702
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt S. Panter kpanter@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003702
Panter

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports an investigation of Cenozoic
              volcanic rocks from the western flank of the West Antarctic Rift System.
              Cenozoic (35 million years ago to presently active) volcanism in West
              Antarctica has been attributed to: 1) mantle melting by 'passive' rifting that
              has thinned the crust and mantle lithosphere, 2) mantle melting by 'active'
              rifting associated with a hot, upwelling mantle plume, and 3) a combined
              'active-passive' scenario that involves the melting of an ancient mantle plume
              source by passive rifting. Making sense of the underlying causes of rifting and
              volcanism in Antarctica has important implications to our understanding of
              continental breakup. In this regard the proposed work will engage models of
              rifting and separation of New Zealand from West Antarctica.

This project
              will undertake new geochemical research in an attempt to unravel processes of
              mantle melting and continental breakup using a suite of basaltic volcanic rocks
              from the foothills of the Royal Society Range, South Victoria Land. Because the
              basalts represent near-primary melts of the mantle, they will be used as
              geochemical tracers of the Earth's interior. Basaltic volcanism in the Royal
              Society Range offers a unique opportunity to study 14 million years of mantle
              evolution along a major tectonic boundary separating the West Antarctic rift
              system from the East Antarctic continental shield.  The principal objective of
              this project is to provide the first detailed isotopic and trace-element
              investigation of basalts in this area. The new results will be integrated into
              regional studies to build better models for West Antarctic volcanism and
              rifting. 

A preliminary survey of the geochemical data suggests that there
              has been a change in the degree and depth of melting beneath this portion of
              the rift. Previous work on basalts in other areas of the rift has shown that
              variations in the degree and depth of melting correlate with changes in
              isotopic composition.  Because isotopes measured in primary basalts provide a
              'fingerprint' of long-lived chemical reservoirs within the Earth's mantle, the
              variations must indicate that melting of different reservoirs is producing the
              basalt. A better understanding of the type and origin of distinct mantle
              reservoirs is critical to models of rifting and volcanism. For instance,
              previous studies have shown that the isotopic signature of many West Antarctic
              basalts, as well as some basalts from New Zealand, have a common mantle
              component; one whose composition is characteristic of a mantle plume source.
              This has led development of a model for plume-assisted breakup.  A complete
              high-quality geochemical data set for Royal Society Range basalts will allow
              this project to test theories of mantle plume activity and plume involvement in
              the breakup of New Zealand from Antarctica. This work is collaborative with
              investigators at the New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology and at Royal
              Holloway, University of London.


