Title       : Assessment of the Importance of Matrix Flow in a Conduit-Dominated Karst
               Aquifer: Investigation of the Unconfined Floridan Aquifer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0003360

Award Number: 0003360
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Martin jmartin@geology.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth J. Screaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003360
Martin

In the majority of well-studied karst aquifers, the matrix
              rocks have low permeability and flow is dominated by conduits.  Few studies
              have focused on karst aquifers with permeable and porous matrix rocks, although
              exchange of water between conduits and matrix may occur in these aquifers with
              important implications for contaminant storage and transportation.  The
              unconfined Floridan Aquifer provides an excellent example of both extensive
              conduit development and high matrix permeability.  A pilot study that focused
              on an ~5 km section of the Santa Fe River in north-central Florida where it
              flows underground through a series of conduits found qualitative evidence for
              exchange of water between the conduit system and matrix.  The study also
              suggested that the extent and direction of exchange varies with the stage of
              the Santa Fe River.  The new study proposed here will use several independent
              techniques to quantify the exchange and its relationship to river stage.  Water
              level will be continuously measured at 3 critical locations along the flow
              path, including a contributing conduit that was recently mapped by cave diving
              exploration.  Development of water level-discharge relationships at these
              locations will provide a continuous water budget for the conduit system,
              thereby quantifying loss or gain of water.  A check on the budget will be
              provided by measuring changes in Cl`  and SO2-4 concentrations caused by mixing
              of conduit water along the flow path, including a previously unsampled
              end-member from the contributing conduit.  Chloride and SO2-4 provide the most
              robust measure of mixing because they are conservative and their concentrations
              differ greatly between the matrix and conduit water.  Time-average velocities
              through the conduits will be measured using a thermal tracer technique
              developed during the pilot study and will guide water sampling.  In conjunction
              with the fluid budget  calculations, detailed time series potentiometric
              surface maps will be constructed, utilizing numerous karst windows, sinkholes,
              and a densely spaced piezometer field to be installed as part of the project. 
              These maps will yield the head gradient between the conduits and matrix, and
              will allow us to estimate the matrix permeability on a field scale.  The
              integrated results will expand current models of flow in karst aquifers by
              quantifying possible volumes of matrix and conduit flow, thereby refining water
              management practices in regions with permeable karst.  The project will have
              extensive educational benefits through support of two graduate students,
              involvement of numerous student volunteers, as well as providing the focus for
              a newly developed course in hydrologic processes.

