Title       : Shaping the Pacific Northwest with Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0003005

Award Number: 0003005
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69865              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy W. Chambers   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sch Dist No1, Multnomah Co
	      
	      Portland, OR  97201    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1078,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0003005
Chambers

Project Objectives: Portland Public Schools (PPS), district
              No. 1, will partner with college/university faculty and other researchers in
              the geosciences in piloting an intensive and collaborative professional
              development model targeted to K-12 teachers.  The following objectives will be
              pursued over the 18-month project period: 1) To provide in-depth opportunities
              for K-12 teachers to increase their knowledge, understanding, and skills
              concerning key topics in the geosciences, Geographic Information Systems (GIS)
              software, and how to provide developmentally appropriate, inquiry-based, and
              interdisciplinary instruction.  2) To motivate participating teachers to
              integrate geoscience content and the use of GIS software into their local
              classrooms and buildings.  3) To strengthen collaborative linkages among K-12
              educators, higher education faculty, and other researchers and professionals in
              the geosciences.  A 15-day geosciences institute for 20 teachers (primarily
              middle and high school, although elementary teachers will also be encouraged to
              apply), will be held in summer 2001, covering key topics in the geosciences
              (climatology, geomorphology, oceanography, volcanology, hydrology and
              glaciology, plate tectonics, petrology and soil science, natural hazards, and
              graduation, erosion, and sedimentation) and introducing the ArcView GIS
              software developed by the Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) K-12
              Schools and Libraries Program.  Institute workshops will be led by faculty and
              researchers from local colleges/universities and agencies/organizations such as
              the National Weather Service, American Meteorological Society, and Oregon
              Office of Ocean Policy.  Five days of the institute will focus on teacher team
              research using ArcView GIS to examine a particular question or issue in the
              geosciences.  Participating teachers will receive an ArcView GIS site license,
              and will develop and implement lesson plans and classroom projects that are
              based on their institute research.  Participants will also provide in-service
              presentations for other teachers in their local schools.   The lessons and
              projects institute participants develop will be reviewed by the principal
              investigator, district science specialists, the PPS Science Core Team of
              teachers, and collaborating researchers in terms of developmental
              appropriateness, geosciences content, alignment with inquiry-based approaches,
              grade-level achievement benchmarks in science, interdisciplinary connections,
              and effective use of the GIS technology.  Follow-up workshops scheduled at the
              beginning of the fall 2001 school year will allow teachers to refine their
              plans, share them with colleagues and professional researchers, and continue to
              improve their skills in using the software as part of high-quality geoscience
              education.  A geosciences lecture series featuring leading researchers will be
              established.  An advisory committee will provide oversight in meeting the
              project's stated objectives and timeline; foster collaboration among K-12
              educators, college/university faculty, and other researchers in the geosciences
              representing government agencies and professional organizations; and plan for
              ongoing networking among project participants and the collaborative
              partnership.  Results will be shared via presentations at local, regional, and
              national meetings and conferences; articles and materials posted
              electronically; and progress reports to the funding agency, and other
              appropriate audiences.

