Title       : Collaborative Research: Iron and Molybdenum Isotope Fractionation During Mineral
               Weathering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a0003565

Award Number: 0003565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Brantley brantley@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This proposal seeks funding for research into the fractionation of iron and
              molybdenum isotopes during one of the most fundamental biogeochemical
              processes:  Mineral weathering.  We intend to investigate the effects of
              organic ligands and bacterial on the isotopic composition of Fe and Mo leached
              from oxides and silicates in a series of controlled laboratory experiments that
              mimic weathering processes in nature.
	
	Recent analytical advances have
              revealed, for the first time, significant natural variations in the isotopic
              compositions of both these elements.  In the case of  Fe in particular,
              complementary laboratory studies have provided information on fractionation
              mechanisms, including fractionation during microbially-mediated reduction of FE
              (111).  These studies suggest that the FE isotope system could provide a
              powerful tool for studying biological activity in ancient sediments, and/or
              research into the Fe biogeochemical cycle.  The Mo isotope system offers
              similar possibilities.  Because of the unique biological importance of both
              these metals, and their extreme sensitivity to environmental conditions, the
              insights gained from Fe and Mo isotope studies are likely to be of broad
              utility in the geosciences.

	The fractionation of neither metal has been
              studied during weathering, despite the obvious importance of weathering in the
              environmental geochemistry of these metals.  Preliminary data indicate that
              this could be a particularly important process for Fe isotope fractionation
              when biological mediation is involved.  In addition, while some processes
              capable of fractionating metal isotopes have been identified, the chemical
              mechanisms of such fractionation remain poorly understood.
	
	This research
              will be conducted collaboratively between Susan Brantley's group at
              Pennsylvania State University, and Ariel Anbar's group at the University of
              Rochester.  Brantley has a demonstrated track record studying the effects of
              organic ligands and bacteria on mineral weathering; Anbar has a demonstrated
              track record with high-precision isotopic measurements of the type required for
              this research.


