Title       : A Target for High-Resolution Quaternary and Older Environmental Change Records:
               Site Survey for Drilling Mackay Sea Valley, Western Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2000  
File        : a0003607

Award Number: 0003607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44179              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross D. Powell ross@geol.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003607										
Powell

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and
              Geophysics Program of the Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a
              geophysical site survey of the MacKay Sea Valley that is needed to evaluate the
              potential of this area to yield important sedimentary records of
              paleoenvironmental records of ice sheet fluctuations during Quaternary time
              (approximately the last 1.6 million years of Earth's history). Quaternary
              geological successions have been a recent focus for providing high-resolution
              records of past environmental changes on which to base future predictions, and
              to assist in deciphering natural variability from human-induced changes. This
              study is aimed at extending the data base of high-resolution marine geological
              records of environmental change that have been established recently in
              Antarctica, and to address Quaternary and perhaps older environmental
              changes.

The current phase of the work, to achieve the goals outlined above,
              is specifically aimed at collecting information in a detailed site survey to be
              used for precisely locating the best drill sites, and also to provide data to
              use in an engineering evaluation of drilling and coring systems to meet
              sampling requirements. The location proposed for this study is Mackay Sea
              Valley (MSV), which is believed to have been formed by erosion associated with
              early Cenozoic expansion of Mackay Glacier, a major outlet glacier of the East
              Antarctic Ice Sheet. MSV extends through Granite Harbor and out to the western
              Ross Sea. Since being eroded, the valley has experienced sediment accumulation,
              at least in the Quaternary and possibly through earlier times during late
              Cenozoic.

Coring sites in the MSV are excellent targets because: (1) their
              great water depth and near shore location, as well as the polar climate,
              appears to have led to the trough being a site of preservation for the highest
              resolution record of Quaternary marine environmental change known in the Ross
              Sea sector; (2) the sedimentation regime is one of the most intensely studied
              coastal settings in Antarctica; (3) there is a preliminary geophysical site
              survey, and (4) based on previous piston core work, the sediments appear to
              have the potential for good chronological control. Ultimately, the main goals
              of the coring study are to: (1) apply multi-proxy techniques to extract a high
              resolution (decadal(?) to century scale) of the Quaternary in the McMurdo Sound
              area; (2) establish marine-terrestrial correlations with geological and ice
              core records both locally and from elsewhere in Antarctica (e.g., Dry Valleys
              and Antarctic Peninsula Quaternary geological records; Taylor and Siple Dome
              ice core records); (3) test Antarctic variability with records from the
              Northern Hemisphere for cross-hemispheric comparisons; (4) determine the age of
              MSV unconformity that may well reflect glacial cutting within the MSV by Mackay
              Glacier during past Quaternary expansion(s) and provide constraints on Neogene
              erosion rates; and (5) characterize older Quaternary and/or Neogene(?) sediment
              below the unconformity that potentially could also provide information on
              Pliocene history of the area. However, before a proposal to achieve these
              overarching goals can be properly developed, high quality site survey
              information is required. This work will provide the site data needed for a full
              assessment of the potential for acquiring high-resolution records of
              environmental change in the MSV.


