Title       : What are Friends For? The Adaptive Value of Social Bonds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0003245

Award Number: 0003245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan B. Silk silk@anthro.sscnet.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this study is to investigate the role that social bonds play in
              the lives of female primates. For primate females, close social bonds may
              represent an effective response to competitive pressures. When ecological
              conditions favor joint defense of resources, selection is expected to favor the
              development of strong social bonds with potential allies. Empirical tests of
              these linkages have produced equivocal results and little is now known about
              the long-term effects of social bonds on females' lives.  This study will
              produce comprehensive information about the nature of social relationships,
              coalitionary support, feeding competition, and aggression among adult female
              baboons in five well-habituated groups in Amboseli National Park, Kenya.
              Archival data on female relationships and reproductive histories will be used
              to evaluate whether variation in the quality of female social relationships is
              consistently linked to variation in longevity or reproductive success.
              Together, these analyses will provide new evidence about the structure and
              function of social bonds among nonhuman primate females. 

The hominid fossil
              record suggests that hominids have always lived in groups, and the extent of
              sexual dimorphism suggests that the earliest hominids lived in groups that
              contained multiple females. Ecological pressures may have shaped the nature of
              social relationships among hominid females, particularly their capacity for
              collective action and their propensity to form close social bonds. The data
              obtained in this study will help us to construct more richly textured models of
              the lives and social relationships of early hominids and to develop a better
              understanding of the selective forces that shaped the human capacity for
              cooperation, establishing alliances, and friendship.

