Title       : Support for International Activities of SCOR Relevant to the Interests of NSF's
               OCE and the US Oceanographic Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0003700

Award Number: 0003700
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $950000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Urban scor@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth Gross  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Sci Comm on Oceanic Res
	      Department of Earth and Planetar
	      Baltimore, MD  21218    410/516-4070

NSF Program : 5419      INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1308,1315,1389,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003700
Gross  
Continuing support is provided for the international
              oceanographic  activities of the Scientific Committee on Oceanic Research
              (SCOR)  that are relevant to U.S. interests in marine sciences and the 
              Division of Ocean Sciences.  There are currently thirty-seven  countries
              represented in SCOR.  The Ocean Studies Board of the  National Academy of
              Sciences serves as the U.S. national committee.    Individual ocean scientists
              participate in SCOR activities through  subsidiary bodies such as working
              groups and scientific steering  committees.  Funding will support two major
              SCOR activities: 1)  U.S. sponsorship of focused SCOR Working Groups. 
              Presently, there  are twelve such Working Groups covering diverse ocean-science
               related topics.  Working Groups are comprised of experts from  different
              countries who meet on a regular basis to discuss and  assess the scientific
              status of their topic area and produce a  report that advises and provides
              recommendations for further  research efforts.  2)  Science Steering Committee
              activities of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) - a study of the
              ocean's role 'in the global carbon cycle and its response to global change;
              Global Ocean Ecosystem Dynamics (GLOBEC) - an effort to understand the
              relationships between physical variability in the ocean and the structure and
              functioning of marine ecosystems and how they may be impacted by global change;
              and Global Ecology and Oceanography of Harmful Algal Blooms (GEOHAB) - a
              program to improve our understanding of the processes involved in the
              development of algal blooms which have enormous consequences for marine
              resources, the economies which depend upon them and, in some cases, human
              health.  SCOR will also be involved in developing plans for a new program
              (Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Study, SOLAS) to look at the interactions
              between the upper ocean and the lower part of the atmosphere where many
              important exchanges take place, in particular of carbon dioxide and other
              "greenhouse gases".  These major programs have origins  in U.S. and have turned
              to SCOR to provide a forum for  international planning and coordination. 
              SCOR's impact has and  will continue to be evident in the standardization of
              measurement  protocols, sharing of data, coordination of ship time, and the 
              enlargement of field studies which would be impossible without  international
              coordination.  Activities will also include coordination of an international
              workshop to bring together leading oceanographers to consider future needs and
              directions in ocean biogeochemistry.


