Title       : ZooGen, a DNA Sequence Database for Calanoid Copepods and Euphausiids: an OBIS
               Tool for Uniform Standards of Species Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0003884

Award Number: 0003884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann C. Bucklin acb@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1308,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
An international partnership is proposed to create a zooplankton genomic
              (ZooGen) database of DNA type sequences for calanoid copepods and euphausiids.
              The ZooGen database will be designed to include all species of these groups and
              to allow expansion to additional zooplankton groups. The ZooGen partnership
              includes four P.I.s and thirteen expert taxonomic consultants from seven
              countries. Zooplankton samples will be sorted from existing archival
              collections, obtained in coordination with planned oceanographic research
              efforts, and collected during National Marine Fisheries Service field surveys.
              The taxonomic experts will confirm species' identifications; DNA sequencing
              will be done at the University of New Hampshire and, in some cases, in other
              partners' laboratories. For each species, a DNA type sequence will be
              determined for a portion of the mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase I (mtCOI)
              gene; multiple mtCOI sequences will be included as necessary to reflect
              intraspecific variation. The ZooGen database will be designed, created,
              managed, maintained, and distributed as part of the proposed work; the data
              will be integrated into the Ocean Biogeographical Information System (OBIS).
              Education and outreach efforts will include: training of graduate students at
              UNH and UW; a hands?on Molecular Systematics Workshop at UNH during Summer,
              2001; exchanges between the P.Ls, international partners, and their colleagues
              and students; inclusion of ZooGen molecular and environmental data in the OBIS
              database, among others; creation and maintenance of a project web site;
              production of a CD with the ZooGen database and simple search tools; and
              informal education with the assistance of UNH Sea Grant Educators and Marine
              Docents.

