Title       : Establishing an Ecological Database for the Analysis of Archaeological Land
               Snail Remains from the Black Belt Physiographic Province
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a0003833

Award Number: 0003833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40860              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan Peacock peacock@anthro.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Evan Peacock and student assistants
              will collect a series of land snails in the Black Belt zone of Northeastern
              Alabama and determine their value as ecological indicators. While much research
              has been conducted on the taxonomy of North American species, relatively little
              is known about their habitat preferences and it is highly likely that
              individual species thrive best in, and are closely associated with specific
              micro habitats.  If, as Dr. Peacock hopes, such relationships can be
              established it is then possible to use ancient land snails recovered in
              archaeological and other prehistoric contexts to reconstruct temperature,
              moisture and ground cover. To accomplish this Dr. Peacock will collect modern
              control samples of land snails from 50 leaf/grass/soil samples distributed
              through all niche types in the region. Twenty more samples will be taken from a
              wide variety of humanly disturbed land surfaces in the same vicinity. Forest
              Service histories for each niche will be collated with soil chemistry details
              and all data will be incorporated into a geographic information system. Dr.
              Peacock will collect associated leaf and grass litter and record the physical
              features at each collection site. This information will include landform type,
              slope, aspect, elevation, vegetation type, soil moisture and organic content
              and soil chemical parameters such as pH and available phosphate.  Species
              identifications will be verified at the Chicago Field Museum and results will
              be compared with large snail assemblages from several Black Belt sites in the
              1250-1650 AD time range.

This research is important for several reasons. It
              will allow archaeologists to address  anthropologically significant questions
              such as the timing of the introduction of maize agriculture to the region and
              the extent to which prehistoric peoples modified their environment. The
              resulting data base will be of use to researchers in other disciplines and
              highlight the potential value of land snails as paleoenvironmental indicators.
              

