Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: In Situ Dielectric Sensing and Modeling of
               Complex Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0003760

Award Number: 0003760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred C. Loos aloos@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5918,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0003760
Loos

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research in
              materials research involves Alfred C. Loos, Co-Director of the Science and
              Technology Center for Composite Materials and Structures at Virginia
              Polytechnic Institute and State University, David E. Kranbuehl of the College
              of William and Mary, Gerard Seytre and Gisele Boiteux of the Universite de Lyon
              I and Henry Sautereau and others at the Institut National des Sciences
              Appliquees in Lyon, France. The project addresses studies of polymer forming
              and non-polymer forming systems. The objective is to monitor chemical and
              physical phenomena in polymers.  Specifically the investigators will develop
              new modes for processing through the application of so-called time of flight
              techniques to a variety of polymer resins and blends.  Changes in polymer resin
              states will also be monitored.  The US group brings to this collaboration
              expertise on cure processing models of polymer resin transfer molding, resin
              film, and use of dielectric sensors for in situ monitoring. This is
              complemented by French expertise in structure-property relationships of polymer
              materials and synthesis and formulation of polymer blends.

This award
              represents the US side of a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National
              Center for Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living
              expenses for the US investigators and graduate students.  The CNRS will support
              the visits of French researchers to the United States. The collaboration will
              advance fundamental understanding of the macroscopic processing parameters of
              polymers.  The research has potential commercial applications in composite
              fabrication, reactive processing, coatings, and curing of polymer materials.

