Title       : Concentrating Vorticity Near the Ground: An Investigation of the Interaction of
               Precipitation Processes and Flow Dynamics in Supercells and Other Severe
               Thunderstorms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2002  
File        : a0003869

Award Number: 0003869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $473273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik N. Rasmussen rasm@ucar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry M. Straka  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Davies-Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              During the Springs of 1994 and '95, a field program entitled the Verification of
              the Origins of Rotation in Tornadoes Experiment (VORTEX) was executed by a
              combination of NSF and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrations
              sponsored scientists.  The primary objective of VORTEX was to evaluate several
              hypotheses pertaining to low-level mesocyclone intensification, and tornado
              formation, maintenance, and demise.  The observations collected included
              ground-based (mobile and stationary) and airborne Doppler radars, mobile
              surface and balloon borne meteorological instruments. 

Under this award, the
              Principal Investigators will continue their ongoing research intended to
              advance state of knowledge of the life cycles of tornadoes.  This goal will be
              accomplished through careful examination of data-rich case studies of the
              Dimmitt, Friona,  and Wheeler (all in Texas) tornadic storms as well as other
              storms (some tornadic, some not) from the VORTEX and subsequent experiments.
              

As a result of prior research, it has become apparent that future
              investigations must be expanded to cover a variety of closely related processes
              to understand tornadogenesis and tornado longevity.  Among these
              are:

-factors that govern the amount and type of precipitation that
              forms/descends in rear flank
     downdrafts (RFD) at the rear of supercell
              updrafts;
-how this precipitation and its type is related to formation of
              RFDs;
-how RFD generate vorticity and/or barotropically redistribute it:
-how
              outflow from the RFD can be confined to the region below the updraft;
-how
              RFDs lead to the formation of tornado cyclones, and whether the angular
              momentum of the
      tornado cyclone is maintained by the RFD or merely
              "spins down" from some initial 
      distribution;
-whether the RFD can lead
              directly to a tornado cyclone through largely barotropic processes;
-whether
              the tornado cyclone forms from upward tilting of helicity-rich inflow
              air;
-whether only one or both of the above processes is required for
              tornadogenesis;
-whether the depth, size and shape of RFDs are relevant to
              tornadogenesis.

Most of these questions can be, or have been, cast in the
              form of testable, refutable hypotheses.  

The Principal Investigators will
              emphasize the development of theories and models for RFD vorticity processes
              and the effect of precipitation in redistributing angular momentum in a
              mesocyclone-scale vortex.  The Principal Investigators also will investigate
              the role of hydrometeors and water phase changes in forcing the kinematic
              structures.

Successful completion of this research could lead to a reduction
              in tornado warning false alarm rate while maintaining adequate lead times. 

