Title       : CEDAR: Investigations of Sporadic E Layers and Quasiperiodic Echo Structure in
               Puerto Rico Using Arecibo and a Coherent Scatter Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0003168

Award Number: 0003168
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202064             (Estimated)
Investigator: Miguel F. Larsen mlarsen@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony T. Y. Lui  (Principal Investigator former)
              David L. Hysell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 4202      UPPER ATMOSPHERIC FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 1323,9150,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study quasi-periodic (QP) echoes associated with sporadic
              E layers using the Arecibo Observatory incoherent scatter radar, a high
              frequency (HF) coherent scatter radar to be located on St. Croix, and the
              Arecibo sodium lidar.  Sporadic E and the QP echoes are the result of complex
              neutral atmosphere/ionization interactions in the mesosphere and lower
              thermosphere.  The goals are (1) to determine the horizontal spatial structure
              of the ionization and the relationship between that structure and the location
              of QP echoes observed with the coherent radar, (2) to determine the vertical
              spatial extent of the ionization structures, and (3) to determine the
              relationship between the motion of the ionization structures and the Doppler
              velocities and range rates measured by the coherent scatter radar.  To
              accomplish this, dual-beam azimuth scans will be carried out with the
              incoherent scatter radar to provide information about the horizontal spatial
              variations and the vertical extent of the electron density structure and to
              determine the velocity at which the structures move from one beam to the other.
               The coherent scatter high frequency radar will be set up in a location on St.
              Croix so that the beam will be perpendicular to the magnetic field lines in the
              E region above the Arecibo Observatory so that the two radar have a common
              volume in the E region.  The sodium lidar will be operated in dual-beam mode as
              well in order to provide information about the horizontal and vertical spatial
              structure in the lower E region and the motions of the neutral atmosphere.  By
              combining the various measurements, the dataset can be used as a test of the
              various theories that have been proposed to explain the initiation of the QP
              echoes.

