Title       : Collaborative Research: A Systematic of Solute Transport Influenced by
               Preferential Flow Paths at the Decimeter and Smaller Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0003914

Award Number: 0003914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89662              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Gorelick gorelick@geo.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003914
Gorelick

Recent studies at the Macrodispersion Experiment (MADE)
              site in Columbus, Mississippi have indicated that the preferential flow paths
              resulting from aquifer heterogeneities at decimeter (dm) and smaller scales
              appear to have a dominant effect on plume-scale solute transport.  This
              collaborative research responds to the general lack of studies on the effect of
              dm-scale heterogeneities on plume-scale solute transport as observed at the
              MADE site.  Our intent is to systematically study the characteristics of solute
              transport influenced by dm-scale preferential flow paths, and rigorously test
              the hypothesis that a dual-domain mass transfer approach can provide an
              effective representation of such characteristics.

Four specific elements are
              integrated into the proposed research.  (1) Generate 3-D geologically plausible
              networks of dm-scale fluvially deposited channels and simulate detailed
              transport in such systems.  (2) Assess the ability of the dual-domain mass
              transfer model, and possibly other alternative models, to represent the key
              characteristics of solute transport. (3) Conduct a series of large-diameter
              column experiments to measure the mass transfer model parameter values under
              different heterogeneity configurations and flow rates.  (4) Conduct tracer
              tests at the MADE site to obtain the mass transfer model parameter values,
              using dye-tracing, soil coring and image analysis aimed at providing direct
              field evidence of preferential flow paths.  We will attempt to relate the
              lithologic characteristics to the mass transfer model parameters obtained from
              the tracer tests.

