Title       : Collaborative Research: Emperical Analyses of Competitive Bidding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a0003352

Award Number: 0003352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61368              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew S. Shum mshum@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposed project consists of four empirical studies of competitive bidding
              behavior in several different auction markets.  We develop a sequence of
              estimation and testing methods for bidding models, focusing on common value
              environments where the competing bidders are assumed to be differentially and
              incompletely informed about the value of the object(s) for which they are
              vying.  The second study involves on-going joint research with Professor Phil
              Haile in the University of Wisconsin.

A distinguishing feature of common
              value auctions, and a recurring theme in the analysis, is the winner's curse,
              which arises because the winner in an auction will tend to be the bidder who
              has "overestimated" the object's value the most.  Rational bidders will avoid
              this undesirable outcome by bidding less aggressively.  In the first project,
              we use data from procurement auctions run by the New Jersey Department of
              Transportation in order to address whether equilibrium bidding becomes more or
              less aggressive as the number of bidders increases and, therefore, whether
              attracting additional bidders will lower equilibrium procurement costs.

In
              the second project, we formalize a nonparametric statistical test for the
              presence of common value elements by exploring the variation in the number of
              bidders which is present in many auction datasets. This test relies on
              detecting the effects of the winner's curse, which are present only in common
              value environments.

In the first two projects, a symmetric model of
              competitive bidding has been assumed. In the third project, we extend our
              estimation method to allow for ex ante bidder asymmetries and use this method
              to analyze the auctions used by the United States Department of the Interior
              since the late 1950s to allocate offshore oil and gas drilling rights in the
              outer continental shelf of the Gulf of Mexico.

While the first three studies
              focus on bidding in single-object common value auctions, the fourth project is
              an empirical analysis of double auction markets. Using data from milk quota
              auctions administered in the province of Ontario, Canada, we investigate,
              first, whether common values are present in these auctions (arising from
              producer uncertainty and private information about future milk prices) and, if
              so, whether the implied winner's curse is leading to more conservative bidding
              for producers who wish to transact large amounts of quota.  Second, we measure
              the extent of market power possessed by large bidders in this market by
              developing a structural model of bidding behavior.

The results of this
              research have potentially important policy implications given the prevalence of
               auctions as allocation mechanisms in practice.  Government agencies at the
              municipal, state, and  federal levels routinely procure services through a
              competitive bidding process.  Similarly, across many states, there are plans to
              allow for competitive demand and supply bidding in deregulated electricity
              markets via uniform-price double auctions. Finally, agricultural subsidies--of
              which milk production quotas are one example--are a perennial bone of
              contention amongst the G7 countries.  While the fourth project does not
              directly address the desirability of these subsidies, it does shed light on the
              efficiency of a competitive bidding environment in allocating these
              subsidies.

 More broadly, the ideas of increasing competition and lower
              prices are often inseparable in competi-tion and regulatory policy, but this
              research highlights the possibility that when market participants  have
              imperfect information about their environment, increasing competition might be
              associated with higher prices, if winner's curse effects are strong enough. In
              short, there appear to be important efficiency and revenue lessons to be
              learned from the proposed projects.

