Title       : Collaborative Research: The Effects of Aquatic Photochemistry on the Proton and
               Metal Binding Properties of Dissolved Organic Matter in Freshwater Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0003680

Award Number: 0003680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei-Jun Cai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003680
Cai

Freshwater dissolved organic matter (DOM) strongly affects many
              important processes, particularly
in organic-rich systems. Recent reports show
              that (1) the major term in the proton balance of the highly
colored Satilla
              River is "organic alkalinity," and (2) that photoreactions in this water,
              catalyzed in part by
Fe, consume O2, bleach color, and form CO, CO2 (the major
              product), and Fe(II). We hypothesized that
CO2 arises by Fe-catalyzed
              "photodecarboxylation":
DOM-COO-H + O2 + hv_______ Fe
DOM-H + CO2
a
              well-known reaction for simple molecules. The implied massive loss of the
              principal organic ionizable
groups should profoundly influence many important
              properties of photo-altered DOM (hv-DOM): e.g.
metal-binding capacity,
              acid-base properties, hydrophobic binding,
              adsorption/coagulation,
bioavailability, optical properties, and perhaps
              behavior in water purification (e.g. chlorination).
However, an initial study
              determining and modeling Satilla water's whole pH titration curves before
              vs.
after photolysis (solar simulator) falsified the hypothesis above: for
              every CO2 formed only ~ 0.1 acidic
group was lost; pH decreased (stronger
              acids formed than were consumed). Furthermore, Fe was involved
in the changes
              observed.
Objectives: Hence we are proposing (1) better characterizing the
              relationships among CO2 evolution,
proton binding sites (concentrations and
              affinities), and other variables: [Fe], pH, [O2], light dose, and
wavelength;
              (2) assessing the generality and environmental variability of these effects by
              studying other
riverwaters, sampled in different seasons; (3) examining the
              effect of these changes on an important
physico-chemical property of hv-DOM:
              its copper binding strength and capacity, and (4) formulating a
better
              heuristic scheme than the hypothesis above to rationalize the results
              chemically. Clearly to some
extent photo-generated CO2 does not originate
              simply from -COO
-
groups. Acidic groups, if lost, seem to
be replaced by
              similar but not identical new acids from DOM photo-oxidation.
Work Plan and
              Methods: This is a collaborative effort among a postdoctoral associate and two
              PIs with
experience in organic/inorganic alkalinity-pH-CO2 properties, and DOM
              photochemistry. We are using
optimizations of methods demonstrated to apply to
              this problem, and well-known Cu-binding study
methods. The Altamaha, a more
              typical second river chosen for study, is also DOM-rich. Its DOM is
thought to
              be derived from both allochthonous and autochthonous sources, in contrast to
              the Satilla's
mainly allochthonous, highly colored DOM. Suwannee River water
              and well-known isolates of its humic
and fulvic acids (SRFA, SRHA) are also
              being studied, since in organic-rich colored waters these
fractions comprise a
              major portion of the DOM, organic alkalinity, and light-absorbing
              material.
Education: This project contributes to training in environmental
              science by involving an independent-working
postdoctoral associate and
              graduate students at UGA and WHOI.
Societal Impacts: This study increases our
              understanding of processes potentially affecting water
transparency,
              potability and treatment (e.g. chlorination), aquatic biota, and also the
              binding, transport,
and transformations of agrichemicals and pollutants
              (especially Cu).
