Title       : Strategic Renewal of Large Floodplain Rivers: Integrated Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a0003208

Award Number: 0003208
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $795000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Sparks rsparks@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. White  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Braden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Isserman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel W. Schneider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Misganaw Demissie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Zorica Nedovic-Budic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5209      ENVIR SOCIAL & BEHAVIOR SCIENC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1237,9189,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Large rivers and the valleys through which they flow support a rich array of
              aquatic and flood-tolerant plants and animals as well as a diverse set of human
              economic activities.  Ecological systems naturally evolved in response to
              periodic flood pulses, but the construction of large dams along these rivers
              has disrupted these cycles, as has the conversion of land from natural cover to
              managed land uses.  A challenge facing those involved in management of rivers,
              floodplains, and other parts of large river valleys is to develop management
              strategies and practices that sustain ecological systems without disrupting the
              human economic and settlement systems that have evolved in the same areas. 
              This interdisciplinary project builds on the efforts of a team of hydrologists,
              ecologists, economists, and regional scientists currently engaged in adapting
              system-component models to an 80-mile section of the Illinois River between the
              LaGrange and Peoria dams in west-central Illinois.  A hydrological component of
              this project will involve the calibration of 1-D and 2-D models and the testing
              of their modeling of high-frequency flood events and strategic management
              changes.  An ecological component will involve the creation of dynamic,
              hydrology-driven models of floodplain forest and marsh vegetation.  Habitat
              suitability indices and professional judgments will produce estimates of
              consequent changes in fish and wildlife species mix and population levels. 
              Economic research will estimate changes in regional income and employment and
              identify sub-county areas that will be particularly affected under different
              management scenarios.  Work on these component models and on linkages among
              them will be conducted in the high speed computing and advanced data management
              environment available through the National Center for Supercomputing
              Applications.  This supercomputing environment also will be employed to develop
              visualization tools for communicating spatially dynamic research findings to
              stakeholders.  This project will develop a suite of interrelated, dynamic
              models of hydrology and ecology of a river/floodplain system and will link them
              to the local economy.  The project focuses on gaps within and linkages among
              the component models and will create visualization tools to communicate the
              modeling results.  The models will be used to simulate, test, and communicate
              with stakeholders about alternative restoration strategies related to the
              general hypothesis that: river hydrology and floodplain lands can be managed in
              ways that restore ecosystem services while not diminishing the overall economic
              well-being of the affected region.

