Title       : PGE/SEP: Adventures in Computers, Engineering, and Space (ACES)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2000    
File        : a0003185

Award Number: 0003185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99893              (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire L. McCullough claire-mccullough@utc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neslihan Alp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cecelia Wigal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy Winters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie Smullen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Chattanooga
	      615 Mccallie Avenue
	      Chattanooga, TN  374032504    423/425-4141

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, in partnership with Girls, Inc. and
              the UTC Challenger Center will conduct a program entitled Adventures in
              Computers, Engineering, and Space (ACES) to encourage girls to consider careers
              in these fields, and to continue their education in science and mathematics. 
              ACES will include a one-week residential summer workshop for 24 girls entering
              seventh and eight grades.  This workshop will provide space-related activities
              at the Challenger Center and hands-on activities in computer science and
              electrical, mechanical, and industrial engineering, as "Whole Person"
              activities such as nutrition, professional etiquette, and exercise.  Follow-up
              activities will include small design projects that encourage originally in
              solving problems with constraints.  To widen the influence of the project, an
              ACES Fair, featuring hands-on engineering, computer, and space activities, will
              be conducted at selected elementary and middle schools, and community centers. 
              Participants for all activities will be drawn from both economically
              disadvantaged groups and the general population; each group will be assessed
              and tracked separately so that the efficacy of ACES in influencing attitudes of
              each can be measured.  ACES will serve as a model for other communities
              concerned with under-representation of women in technical careers.
