Title       : Archaeological Implications of Bofi Foraging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0003988

Award Number: 0003988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen D. Lupo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dave N. Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Meat-sharing with close kin and unrelated adults is believed to be one of
the
              most significant dietary changes to occur in the course of human
evolution.
              Despite its importance there is no consensus on when, why or how
sharing
              emerged among ancestral hominids. The problem lies not only in our
inability
              to confidently identify different sharing behaviors from the
archaeological
              record, but the lack of a theoretical framework for
understanding how and why
              sharing operates. With National Science Foundation
support Dr. Karen Lupo and
              a team of researchers will conduct two seasons of
ethnoarchaeological research
              on meat-sharing among Bofi foragers. The Bofi
occupy lush forested regions of
              the Ngotto Forest Reserve in the Central
African Republic and procure most of
              their food by hunting and gathering.
The research is guided by a larger
              theoretical context which views sharing
among family and between unrelated
              adults as fulfilling very different
goals. Provisioning, or sharing among
              family members, enhances the
survivability of close kin. But sharing with
              unrelated adults is aimed at
enhancing a hunters social status. The theory
              predicts that hunters will
vary their choice of prey depending upon their
              overall goal (provisioning or
status enhancement). The research team will use
              direct observations,
informant interviews and animal bone collections from
              different hunters and
their households to test salient aspects of this theory.
              These techniques
will allow the team to collect quantitative data on what
              hunters procure and
how much of it is shared and consumed by close family and
              unrelated adults.
Data collected with these techniques will be used to
              investigate the
following research questions: 1) Does meat-sharing vary
              predictably by prey type? If so, what
characteristics predict which prey will
              be shared with family and unrelated
adults? 2) Do hunters vary their pursuit
              effort of different types of prey depending
on their overall goal (provision
              family or enhance status)? 3) What is the material link between different
              sharing behaviors and the archaeological record?

The importance of this
              research is far-reaching. This project will be the
first systematic and
              quantitative study of prey choice and meat-sharing ever
conducted among
              contemporary foragers. This research will also examine and
identify the links
              between different sharing strategies, as reflected by
animal bones, and the
              material record. This latter point is particularly
important for
              archaeological investigations. The project combines
ethnoarchaeological
              research with a theoretical framework that will help
explain how and why
              sharing operates in a contemporary setting. By
extension, it will provide
              important new insights into the evolution of
sharing among ancestral hominids.
              Finally, very little is known about the
Bofi foragers. Thus far, only one
              other study has ever been conducted in
this area. This research will expand
              current understanding of contemporary
forager ecology.



