Title       : Workshop: AAAI-2000 Sigart / AAAI Doctoral Consortium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a0003142

Award Number: 0003142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ephraim P. Glinert                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8991               (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie A. Bienkowski bienkowski@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is a standard award to support the 5th AAAI Doctoral Consortium to be held
              as a workshop during the 17th AAAI conference in Austin, Texas.  The workshop
              will provide a unique opportunity for a group of PhD students to discuss and
              explore their research interests and career objectives together with a panel of
              established researchers.  The consortium has the following objectives:

	* To
              provide a setting for mutual feedback on participants' current research,
              and			guidance on future research directions
	* To develop a supportive
              community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative research
	* To support a
              new generation of researchers with information and advice on
              academic,			research, industrial, and non-traditional career paths
	* To
              contribute to the conference goals through interaction with other researchers
              and			participation in conference events.

The Doctoral Consortium will be
              held concurrently with other workshops preceding the AAAI'00 conference.   It
              is expected that it will attract a diverse group of student participants who
              reflect a wide range of topic areas and methodologies within artificial
              intelligence, and who have settled on their thesis directions but who still
              have significant research left to do.  Selection will be based on clarity and
              completeness of the submission packet, stage of research, advisor's letter, and
              other evidence of promise such as published papers or technical reports.
              Participants' thesis summaries will be published in the AAAI-00 conference
              proceedings.  NSF funds will be supplemented by a contribution from Microsoft
              Research to provide student participants with a travel reimbursement of $800.  
              Participants will also receive complimentary conference registration.   The
              organizing committee for the workshop consists of:   Marie A. Bienkowski,
              Chair, SRI International;  Janyce M. Wiebe, New Mexico State University;   Mary
              P. Harper, Purdue University;   Vibhu O. Mittal, Just Research and Carnegie
              Mellon University;   and Loren Terveen, AT&T Labs.   Panelists will include:  
              Bonnie Holte Bennett , University of St. Thomas;   Claire Cardie, Cornell
              University;  Russell Greiner, University of Alberta;   Mary P. Harper, Purdue
              University;   Evangelos E. Milios, Dalhousie University;    Raymond J. Mooney,
              University of Texas at Austin;    Leora Morgenstern, IBM T.J. Watson Research; 
               and Nils J. Nilsson, Stanford University.

