Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Role of bcl-2 Family Proteins in Protein
               Translocation Across Mitochondrial Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a0003797

Award Number: 0003797
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9686               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen W. Kinnally kathleen.kinnally@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003797
Kinnally

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research
              in cellular biology involves Kathleen W. Kinnally and her research group at New
              York University and Stephan Thierry Manon of the Universite de Bordeaux II in
              Bordeaux, France.  The collaboration is aimed at defining the role of  bcl-2
              proteins in protein translocation across mitochondrial membranes. The bcl-2
              family of proteins found in yeast regulate the release of mitochondrial
              proteins that cause cell death.  Experiments are planned to determine the
              fundamental mechanism by which the bcl-2 family regulates this release  and how
              the proteins are transported across membrane barriers. The US investigator
              brings to this collaboration expertise in electrophysiology techniques applied
              to native and reconstituted mitochondria membranes.  This is complemented by
              French expertise in performing protein import experiments and in generating
              yeast and yeast mitochondrial mutants.

This award represents the US side of
              a joint proposal to the NSF and the French National Center for Scientific
              Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses for the US
              investigator.  The CNRS will support the visits of the French researcher to the
              United States. The collaboration will advance fundamental understanding into
              the mechanism by which proteins are translocated across membranes.  These
              processes are important in many cellular functions including signaling,
              secretion, biogenesis of cell structures, compartmentation, and the mechanisms
              controlling tissue stability (homeostasis)  and  organogenesis. 

