Title       : Collaborative Research: Transient Protein Expression in Plant Tissue Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0003926

Award Number: 0003926
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne R. Curtis wrc2@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Russell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1402      BIOCHEMICAL & BIOMASS ENG
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1491,1504,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigators (PIs)' overall objective is to develop plant cell
              and tissue culture technology, which will permit rapid evaluation of
              heterologous gene expression in plants. This work includes the development of
              rigorous principles for the monitoring, control and operation of bioreactors
              for plant cell and tissue culture. These bioreactor operational principles will
              be utilized to correlate performance of transient expression systems using
              Agrobacterium co-cultivation for DNA transformation and the TMV vector or a
              single-stranded DNA geminivirus vector capable of DNA amplification for protein
              production (based on tobacco and corn seed endosperm) while testing expression
              and accumulation of three therapeutic proteins: a monoclonal antibody (NR-LU-10
              MAb), a cytokine (human growth hormone, hGH), and a blood transport protein
              (human transferrin, hTR). The specific objectives are to: (1) Develop
              operational and control strategies for bioreactor growth of plant cell and root
              culture, (2) Develop and optimize techniques / conditions for DNA delivery for
              transient expression, and (3) Utilize bioreactor control strategies and
              optimized transient therapeutic protein expression systems to evaluate
              heterologous transgene expression in plant cell and tissue culture, followed by
              correlation with performance in transgenic plants with the same proteins. 
              

This is a collaborative GOALI project involving three PIs with different
              complementary scientific and technological expertise. Wayne Curtis the primary
              PI at the Pennsylvania State University is an expert in the area of bioreactor
              technology, Hugh Mason the second PI at the Boyce Thompson Institute and
              Cornell University in the area of transgenic plants, and Doug Russell at the
              Integrated Protein Technologies of Monsanto in the area of production of
              proteins from transgenic plants.

