Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Quantifying the Sonority Hierarchy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0003947

Award Number: 0003947
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  2000  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7950               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Kingston jkingston@linguist.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The general topic of this dissertation is sonority. Specifically, the following
              issues will be addressed: (1) What is sonority? (2) What is the articulatory,
              acoustic, and/or auditory basis of sonority? (3) How should sonority be
              quantified? (4) Is the sonority scale universal or language-specific? and (5)
              What role should sonority play in formal phonological constraints?

It has
              long been recognized that sonority differences determine the sequencing of
              sounds within syllables, a pattern observed in all languages. In order to
              explain this universal effect, many linguists have suggested that sonority
              derives from differences in how sounds are pronounced or perceived. However, to
              date a phonetic definition of sonority (in articulatory, acoustic, or
              perceptual terms) has remained elusive. Consequently, a number of phonologists
              and phoneticians have questioned the theoretical validity of sonority
              altogether, claiming that this notion is impossible to characterize in a
              concrete way. Consequently, the potential contribution of this project is to
              resolve a long-standing controversy regarding the physical basis of
              sonority.

The goal of this project is to determine which of five physical
              parameters best characterizes sonority differences: intensity (loudness), peak
              rate of oral air flow, peak intraoral air pressure, constriction duration, or
              frequency of the first formant. Each of these characteristics will be
              systematically studied in the speech of multiple native speakers of both
              English and Spanish for all language-specific phonemes, consonants and vowels
              alike. The objective of this research is to demonstrate that sonority can be
              quantified in a precise, consistent, non-arbitrary, and phonetically-grounded
              way based on the values of one or more of these physical correlates.
