Title       : Electromagnetic Fields Produced by Self-Propagating High-Temperature Synthesis
               (SHS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2001  
File        : a0003015

Award Number: 0003015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Luss dluss@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mikael Nersesyan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Recent experiments have shown that a transient electrical voltage (
              electrochemical effect) and a weak magnetic field ( chemomagnetism) form during
              self-propagating high-temperature synthesis (SHS).  This is a combined
              experimental and theoretical study of the electrochemical effect and
              chemomagnetism induced by combustion processes with the goals of elucidating
              their origin, sign, magnitude, and shape, and providing a means to predict them
              and their impact.  Similar reactions, such as oxidation or nitridation of a
              metal, are done with metals from a row or group of the periodic table to give
              possible correlations with electronic structure, oxygen affinity, and oxidation
              state.  Experiments are conducted at various gas pressures, sample
              compositions, porosities and particle sizes to determine the effects of these
              factors as well as the relationships between the induced signals and reaction
              temperature and combustion wave velocity.  The small magnetic fields are
              measured with a high-Tc superconducting quantum interface device (SQUID).  A
              model to predict the electrical potential formation is developed, initially
              based on the assumption that an electrical change is formed in individual
              particles due to a  gradient of ions across a product layer formed during
              combustion.  The model predicts combustion wave velocity and profiles of
              voltage, temperature, oxygen concentration, and metal conversion in the
              combustion and post-combustion zones.  The predicted voltage profile is then
              used to calculate the induced magnetic signal.  The model in revised on the
              basis of the experimental results.
