Title       : Coastal Dynamics and Cultural Complexity on Choctawhatchee Bay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0003933

Award Number: 0003933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $119955             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca Saunders rsaunde@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Mikell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With funding from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Rebecca Saunders, Gregory
              Mikell, and their colleagues will explore the relationship between changing
              coastal landscapes and cultural complexity at two sites above Choctawhatchee
              Bay, Florida.  The sites appear to be part of a relatively large number (16) of
              middle Archaic sites exploiting the sandy terrace above the Mitchell River
              floodplain around 7000-5000 years ago.  When these two habitation sites were
              occupied, however, the floodplain environment appears to have been quite
              different from the freshwater marsh that is present today.  Mitchell River
              sites #1 and #4 contain dense shell midden (trash piles) composed of saltwater
              shellfish and fish species.  The researchers suspect that sea level was higher
              6000 years ago, and that estuarine conditions prevailed in the floodplain
              immediately adjacent to the site.  Their position on the terrace has preserved
              the Mitchell River sites and they are among the earliest coastal adaptations
              yet identified in the southeastern United States.  A fall in sea level may have
              precipitated site abandonment at about the same time that pottery began to
              appear in the region (ca. 2200 years ago).  When the site was re-occupied
              around A.D. 1000, no shellfish-of estuarine, brackish, or freshwater
              species-were exploited, leading the researchers to speculate that the terrace
              was not again an attractive habitation spot until horticulture was adopted by
              Native Americans in the region.

The investigators have marshalled an arsenal
              of investigative techniques to reconstruct the coastal geomorphology and
              archaeology of the Mitchell River area.  One field season of excavation is
              directed towards a reconstruction of the lifeways of the inhabitants of
              Mitchell River #1 and #4.  Systematic subsurface testing and block excavations
              will uncover information on: diet, seasons of site occupation(s), time period
              of occupation, intrasite settlement pattern, degree of sedentism, long distance
              trade, and, to the extent possible, on social and political organization. 
              Collaborations between the archaeologists and a coastal geomorphologist (Dr.
              Gregory Stone), a palynologist (Dr. John Wrenn), a diatomist (Dr. William
              Krebs), a paleobotanist (Katherine Roberts), a zooarchaeologist (Irvy R.
              Quitmeyer), and specialists in fish otolith (earbone) seasonality (Coastal
              Fisheries Institute, LSU) will allow the principal investigators to correlate
              changes in the dynamic coastal environment with changes in flora and fauna. 
              These, in turn, will be used to inform the study of the adaptation of Native
              Americans to the coast.   The investigators believe that their results can be
              used by researchers worldwide to study early coastal adaptations and the
              development of cultural complexity.  Results will also be of interest to
              geologists and other researchers interested in sea level rise, coastal
              dynamics, and paleoenvironmental reconstruction.

