Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Enamel Defects, Well-Being and Mortality in a
               Medieval Danish Village
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2000   
File        : a0003019

Award Number: 0003019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6720               (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Wood jww3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The reconstruction of the demography and health of past populations has been one
              of the major endeavors in physical anthropology, not only to understand how
              specific populations lived and developed, but to better understand the general
              biological interactions between humans and their environments.  Developmental
              defects within tooth enamel called accentuated striae (AS), which form during
              periods of physiological stress, have been used in previous studies of
              skeletons as a measure of the past population's nutrition and disease
              experience, since studies of living people have shown that tooth defects are
              associated with periods of nutritional stress and disease.  However, the
              assumption that a higher number of AS in a skeletal sample indicates a
              population with poorer nutrition and a higher disease load is confounded by two
              factors.  First, it is not clear that the presence of AS in an individual's
              dentition necessarily means that the individual had a higher risk of death than
              other individuals, since the individual would have to have survived a stress
              event in order to acquire the defect.  Second, even if AS are associated with a
              higher risk of death, the fact that individual levels of nutrition and disease
              vary within a population will result in a skeletal sample that is highly
              selected for the "weakest" individuals, thus elevating the apparent levels of
              nutritional stress and disease in the once-living population.  This study uses
              survival analysis methods to test for a relationship between AS and age at
              death in skeletons from a medieval Danish village to determine whether those
              individuals with a higher risk of death (those dying at younger ages) had a
              higher incidence of AS.  Using survival analysis corrects for the selective
              skeletal sample that results from a population with heterogeneous levels of
              health.  The project may show that the relationship of AS to health is much
              more complex, but also more informative, than previously thought, and will
              contribute to a method that continues to be used in paleodemographic research
              to understand the relationship between skeletal pathology and health and
              between health and preindustrial population processes.
 


