Title       : NSF I/UCRC in Pharmaceutical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0003064

Award Number: 0003064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Nail   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dane O. Kildsig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The University of Purdue proposes to establish a multi-university National
              Science Foundation Industry/University Cooperative Research Center in
              Pharmaceutical Processing.  Partner universities are the University of
              Connecticut and the University of Puerto Rico.  The purposes of the Center are
              to explore and develop new technology for pharmaceutical processing, to foster
              collaborative research projects between industrial and academic scientists, and
              to promote an interdisciplinary approach to training students in pharmaceutical
              process research and development.  The organizational structure of the Center
              comprises an Industrial Advisory Board, consisting of one member from each
              participating company, establishes research priorities and approves all
              spending by the Center.  The Center Director manages day-to-day operation of
              the Center and acts as liaison with member companies as well as the University
              administration.  The University Policy Committee assures that graduate student
              research is appropriate for the degree objective, that faculty development is
              not adversely affected by participation in the Center, and that Center
              activities are carried out in accordance with University policy.  Dr. Ken
              Hemilich, retired Executive Director of Pharmaceutical Research and Development
              at Merck, will serve as external evaluator for the Center
