Title       : Coral Reef Adventure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2001  
File        : a0003650

Award Number: 0003650
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg MacGillivray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MacGillivray Freeman Films
	      P.O. Box 205
	      Laguna Beach, CA  92652    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MacGillivray Freeman Films is producing a large format film about the
              exploration and new scientific research aimed at understanding and responding
              to changes in coral reef ecosystems.  The film will examine the complex
              behavior and interactions among unique Pacific coral reef animals, illustrate
              the role of scientific research in addressing the declining health of reefs,
              and stimulate public interest in pursuing further learning and careers in coral
              reef and marine science.  In five coral reef sites the film will feature
              science researchers who are each a part of the global effort to understand and
              protect coral reef ecosystems as they document reef diversity and animal
              behavior, investigate symptoms of reef degradation, provide information on past
              environmental change through core sampling, and explore life in extreme ocean
              environments.  Outreach materials will include a Museum Resource Guide, Family
              Fun Sheet, Activities for Informal Education Groups, Teacher Guide and Poster,
              Web Site/Virtual Field Trip, and Scientist Speaker Series.  

Greg
              MacGillivray will be the PI for the project and also will serve as
              Co-Producer/Co-Director/Co-Director of Photography.  Alec Lorimore is
              Co-Producer and Howard Hall is Co-Director of Photography/Sequence Director/and
              Cameraman.  Science Advisors include:  Gerald Allen, Conservation
              International; Richard Aronson, Dauphin Island Sea Lab and University of South
              Alabama; Gisele Muller-Parker, Shannon Point Marine Center and Western
              Washington University; Joseph Levine, WGBH and Discovery Magazine; and Richard
              Pyle, University of Hawaii and Bishop Museum.


