Title       : Dissertation: Technological Style, Exchange, and the Organizational Scale of
               Pueblo IV Zuni Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2000   
File        : a0003191

Award Number: 0003191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7540               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kintigh kintigh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, MS Deborah Huntley will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. Using both chemical and stylistic techniques she
              will analyze a series of ceramics from prehistoric Zuni sites located in west
              central New Mexico. Between 1250 and 1400 AD at least 28 large pueblos were
              built, occupied and abandoned. These large structures contained up to 400
              rooms, were defended from external attack and were of sufficient size to
              function as independent communities. They were often spaced within 5 - 10 km.
              of each other. While excavation has provided insight into individual pueblo
              function, archaeologists do not understand how these communities, which clearly
              share a wide range of cultural traits, interacted with each other and to what
              extent the formed an integrated functioning system. Models vary from
              hypothesized community autonomy, through alliance to ritual complementarily. To
              examine this question MS Huntley will study ceramics excavated at a series of
              contemporaneous sites and also conduct similar chemical analyses on localized
              deposits from which clay was extracted. She will use electron microprobe
              analysis, Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry and Instrumental Neutron
              Activation Analysis to characterize both clay and pottery glaze to reconstruct
              the Zuni manufacturing and exchange system. Combined with a stylistic analysis
              she will be able to determine where individual ceramics were made, whether
              unique local styles exist and the degree and direction finished vessels moved
              between pueblos. These data will provide insight not only into the overall
              amount of interaction but the extent to which alliances among different pueblos
              existed.

Anthropologists consider the prehistoric Zuni to represent a
              "Middle Range Society", defined on the basis of settled village agriculture and
              a local centralized form of social organization. Such entities were widespread
              during late prehistoric times, in many areas survived into the historic period
              and originally set the stage for the emergence of civilization. Because of
              their widespread occurrence and significance, it is important to understand how
              they functioned and MS Huntley's research will contribute to this process. This
              work will shed light on an important period of U.S. prehistory and assist in
              training a promising young scientist.

