Title       : A Symposium: Learning and the Brain: Myths and Realities, September 2000, Art
               Institute of Chicago
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0003877

Award Number: 0003877
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5452               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea G. Shindler AndreaFHP@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Found for Human Potential
	      428 Wilshire Drive East
	      Wilmette, IL  600913150    /   -

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	As the fifth in a series of symposia focusing on the relationship between
              learning and brain function, this symposium will now focus on the myths and
              realities which have emerged from recent research data.  

	During the Decade
              of the Brain, researchers produced significant amounts of new information about
              the practical application of findings in neuroscience, as reported in
              newspapers, magazines, and books by a variety of authors.  The question is, How
              much of this information is accurate:  Who is interpreting it?  Why?  We have
              learned more about the brain during the last 20-30 years than in all of human
              history.  It is now time for the experts to debate the myths and realities
              associated with learning and the brain research findings.  The purpose of this
              symposium is to present a program in which learning will occur in a public
              forum among educators, scientists, parents, artists, health professionals,
              cultural anthropologists, students, and the general public.  Through the
              exploration of the many related issues, the audience will have the opportunity
              to consider and integrate the material for practical use in daily life and,
              particularly for the education of children.  Lectures and panel discussions
              will be designed for specialists and students alike.  A post-symposium
              publicaton is planned, as are additional outcome-related news media stories.

