Title       : Spectral Problems and Inverse Spectral Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2001      
File        : a0003268

Award Number: 0003268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Percy A. Deift   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator will consider a variety of problems concerning the
              asymptotic behavior of finite and infinite dimensional systems containing
              external parameters such as space and time, as the parameters become large.  In
              particular, the Principal Investigator will consider the long-time behavior of
              solutions of the perturbed focusing Nonlinear Schrodinger equation, with
              initial data that is close to a solution.  In addition, the Principal
              Investigator will consider statistical problems arising in the theory of
              permutations of N numbers as N becomes large, as well as questions concerning
              the rational approximation of special numbers such as z (5) where z is the
              Riemann zeta function.  The Principal Investigator will also consider the
              computation of various physical constants arising in integrable models.  In all
              the above  problems, a key analytical role will be played by the steepest
              descent method for Riemann-Hilbert problems introduced by Xin Zhou and the
              Principal Investigator in 1993.

	Much of the work proposed by the Principal
              Investigator has a strong interdisciplinary flavor.  For example, the
              statistical problems mentioned above for permutations of N numbers, are
              intimately related to a model for the condensation of a supersaturated liquid
              on a substrate and also to a version of solitaire ("patience sorting"), and
              also to the problem of re-ordering a library in which books have been
              improperly shelved.  In addition, a key objective of the Principle Investigator
              will be to prove "universality" for a variety of physical systems.  For
              example, motivated by earlier work with Xin Zhou, the Principal Investigator
              plans to show that solutions of the perturbed focusing Non-Linear Schrodinger
              equation behave just like solutions of the unperturbed focusing Non-linear
              Schrodinger equation, once the "scales" of the problem are properly adjusted. 
              This is a key step in the development of models for a wide variety of physical
              phenomena, in particular for phenomena arising in the transmission of signals
              along optical fibers.

