Title       : Evolution of Intraplate Magmas: An Experimental Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a0003443

Award Number: 0003443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Lindsley dlindsley@sbmp04.ess.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Scoates  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hanna Nekvasil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lindsley and Nekvasil
EAR-0003443

Rocks of within-plate magmatic suites
              commonly show a wide range in composition, yet occur together in time and
              space.  These suites fall into alkalic and tholeiitic types, each forming
              distinctive chemical trends. This work focuses specifically on three of these
              suite-types:  1.  hy-normative alkalic rocks from both continental and
              ocean-island settings;  2. ocean-island tholeiites and associated rocks, and 
              3. continental tholeiites and their associated evolved rocks, together with the
              distinctive suites associated with Proterozoic massif anorthosites, ranging
              from high-Al gabbro through ferrodiorite (high-Fe; high Fe/Mg) to fayalite
              granite.  Much remains unknown about the relationship among the suite-members
              of these three types or any possible relationship linking these suite-types. 
              We will continue experimental simulation of step-wise fractional
              crystallization under variable conditions of pressure and water content for the
              three suite-types in order to provide constraints on their compositional
              evolution. The least-evolved magmas from each of the three suite-types appear
              to emanate from a similar tholeiitic basalt.  If the three suite-types indeed
              share a common parentage, then the differences in trends of the more evolved
              members must have arisen primarily from secondary factors such as differences
              in pressure of fractionation, decompression history, or volatile content. 
              Experiments will be continued that explore this possibility.  The conditions
              leading to melts that simulate most closely the observed rock compositions
              within each suite will be applied to the other suite-types in attempt to divert
              them from their standard path and onto trends subparallel to the path most
              relevant to the conditions imposed.  Success in this would have far-ranging
              implications about the processes at work in magma generation and evolution in
              hot-spot and early-rifting settings.


