Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Local-Area Helioseismology 118
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a0003813

Award Number: 0003813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25272              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip H. Scherrer pscherrer@solar.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Duvall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Kosovichev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003813
Scherrer

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Phillip Scherrer of Stanford University and Professor
              Hiromoto Shibahashi of the University of Tokyo in Japan.  The researchers will
              undertake a study of local-area helioseismology 118.  Local-area
              helioseismology enables researchers to investigate subsurface flows and
              small-scale magnetic fields, which have been beyond the reach of 'traditional'
              helioseismology based on observation of normal modes of solar oscillations. 
              Combined with 'traditional' solar physics and with 'traditional'
              helioseismology, local-area helioseismology can pave the way to the
              understanding of the solar activity cycle, and the Sun itself as an
              astrophysical plasma laboratory.  The collaboration aims at advancing
              local-area helioseismology, with active American solar observation programs
              (GONG and MDI/SOHO) and the Japanese program (Solar-B).  The proposed research
              is focused on developing new methods of data analyses and theoretical
              interpretations and inferences.  First, they will develop methods of data
              analysis and interpretation for the local-area helioseismology and analyze the
              data from the currently running projects, to carry out 3D tomography for flow
              and sound-speed anomaly due to the magnetic field, and to detect the leakage of
              wave into the chromosphere.  If they can detect waves that travel to the
              backside of the Sun and them come back, through the central region of the Sun,
              probing the solar core will be possible too.  Second, they will investigate the
              possibility of local-area helioseismology using very high-resolution velocity
              field data such as is expected from the Solar Optical Telescope (SOT) on-board
              Solar-B and other future high-resolution ground-based and space projects. 
              

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of their research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

