Title       : Footsteps through Time: Four Million Years of Human Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0003610

Award Number: 0003610
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1955500            (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Sharon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rose A. Tyson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego Museum of Man
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92101    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A new, permanent exhibition at the San Diego Museum of Man will reflect the
              great scientific strides made in unraveling the mysteries of our uniquely human
              biology.  The exhibit of 7,000 sq. ft. will take visitors on a 65-million year
              journey through time and even go beyond the present with glimpses of current
              technologies which will shape the future of human evolution.  The exhibit
              development is being guided by a team of renowned scholars, museum
              professionals and community members in order to insure that the material is
              scientifically accurate, current and comprehensive.  Evaluation and community
              input combined with engaging exhibitry will further enhance the informal
              science learner's experience.

The exhibit will be about time, genetics and
              the environment.  Dioramas, casts, artifacts and engaging interactives will
              convey the storyline.  As a result of the development of culture, technology is
              refined and becomes intertwined with the human evolution.  The exhibit will
              unify and draw together other halls in the museum.  Further hands-on discovery
              will be encouraged in an outdoor archaeological site.  Associated programming,
              which will foster the integration of research and education, will include a
              lecture series, on-line chats and guidebooks, as well as resources for teachers
              and students.

