Title       : Biogeoinformatics of Hexacorallia (Corals, Sea Anemones, and Their Allies):
               Interfacing Geospatial, Taxonomic, and Environmental Data for a Group of Marine
               Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2000 
File        : a0003970

Award Number: 0003970
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daphne G. Fautin fautin@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Buddemeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              As part of the Census of Marine Life, we will create a taxonomic database to the
              Hexacorallia (phylum Cnidaria) that adds to the inventory of sea anemones
              compiled by Fautin (biocomplexity.nhm.ukans.edu/anemones/images/ Version.html),
              all species of orders Ceriantharia (tube anemones; by Molodtsova), Scleractinia
              ("stony" or "true" corals; by Cairns and Veron), and Zoantharia (zoanthids; by
              Ryland). Specimen?based, it will contain three-dimensional distribution data
              (including geospatial precision of each record) and bibliographic reference to
              description of each species. In addition to current features, an application by
              Ardelean will permit retrieval of data by all synonyms of a species, flagging
              taxonomic and nomenclatural problems. Interacting with this database will be
              physicochemical and ecological databases important to marine biogeography. The
              core databases will be those assembled and linked as part of the
              LJNEP/GEF?funded program within the LOICZ (IGBP) Typology effort
              (www.nioz.ni/loicz). We will develop and adapt tools to allow interactive
              analyses of the biological and environmental data, including by visualization
              on map displays. This project will: link across spatial scales; greatly augment
              the minimal biogeographic data available for most benthic marine invertebrates;
              permit formulation and testing of biogeography and biodiversity models; and
              support forecasting and hindcasting of distribution changes due to
              environmental change.
