Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Understanding Sick Role, Social Networks,
               Information-seeking and Health Behaviors During the "Uncertainty" Phase of
               Illness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0003953

Award Number: 0003953
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet W. McGrath jwm6@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              It is well known that people who have active illnesses assume a special role in
              society, with different expectations of behavior, known as the "sick role". 
              This dissertation research project studies how people diagnosed with diseases
              of uncertain prognosis that last their lifetime, but are invisible to others,
              deal with their identity as "sick" persons.  The student, an anthropologist
              from Case Western Reserve University, will interview a sample of 40 women
              diagnosed with breast cancer to examine their willingness to claim a sick role
              status; to describe their health-seeking behaviors and plans; to determine the
              characteristics of their social networks related to their ability to access
              information about treatment options; and to compare these issues in women
              taking ongoing treatment with women not taking therapy during the "uncertainty
              phase" of their illness.  Participants will be drawn from breast cancer
              patients involved in a larger study in the Cleveland metropolitan area. The
              method will be intensive interviews recorded and transcribed.  
This research
              will advance our theoretical understanding of the sick role as it applies to a
              broader disease context, of a potentially fatal disease that is hidden from the
              uninformed and has an unknowable outcome. It will also advance our
              understanding of how social networks work to facilitate information in
              situations of relative personal crisis.  

