Title       : Planning Grant for an IMAX Film: THE SEARCH FOR INFINITY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a0003387

Award Number: 0003387
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Kirsch jkirsch@rhfleet.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Reuben Fleet Space Theatr
	      
	      San Diego, CA  92101    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0003387
KIRSCH

The Reuben H. Fleet Space Center is developing "The Search
              for Infinity," a large-format film on mathematics and nature.  The current
              concept, based on a film idea developed in collaboration with Sir Arthur C.
              Clarke, is to center the film on an intelligent computer running an unmanned
              space probe.  By following the actions of the computer, audiences will learn
              about mathematical fractals and the relationships between fractals and the
              natural world.  A key effect planned for the film will be a prolonged zoom into
              the endless details of the celebrated Mandelbrot Set fractal.

Jeffrey
              Kirsch, Director of the Reuben H. Fleet Space Center, will be PI and Executive
              Producer for the film.  The Co-Executive Producer will be Christina Schmidlin,
              Vice-President of XAOS, Inc, one of the world's leading computer graphics
              studios, and the Producer-Director will be Ronald Fricke.  This production team
              will work with Sir Arthur Clarke to write the treatment for the film. 
              Scientists working directly in the pre-production phase of the project include
              Ian Stewart, Professor of Mathematics at the University of Warwick, and Rudy
              Rucker of San Jose State University.  Other advisors include:  Benoit
              Mandelbrot, Yale University; Maxine Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago;
              Bernard Pailthorpe, San Diego Supercomputer Center; and David Brin, Science
              Fiction author and astrophysicist.

During this planning phase the project
              will:  (1) identify subjects that are best suited to illustrate the fractal
              geometry of nature in large format film; (2) conduct front-end evaluation to
              assess the potential educational benefits of such a film; (3) write a treatment
              and develop a storyboard for the film;
 conduct formative evaluation of the
              treatment; (4) produce a motion picture sequence to demonstrate the educational
              power of the large format film medium to convey complicated ideas related to
              computer processes; and (5) develop interactive web-based activity concepts to
              exploit the film's distribution in the museum-dominated large format film
              community.


