Title       : Petrogenesis of Archean Granitoids and Implications for the Chemical Evolution
               of Cratonic/Lithosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2001   
File        : a0003638

Award Number: 0003638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122931             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Rapp rapp@sbmp04.ess.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rapp
EAR-0003638

Despite comprehensive field, petrologic, isotopic,
              geochemical, and structural studies in a number of well-exposed early- to
              late-Archean terrains (2.7-3.8 Ga old), some relatively basic issues regarding
              the origin and early growth of the continental crust remain unresolved.  These
              include the tectonic setting in which early continental growth took place, the
              ultimate source of the granitoid magmas that helped stabilize continental
              masses in the Archean, and the nature of the relationship between granitoid
              magmatism within the evolving Archean continents and the stabilization of deep
              cratonic roots (keels) in the underlying mantle. The proposal seeks funding to
              conduct high-pressure experiments in the multi-anvil apparatus aimed at
              constraining the origin of Archean granitoids, and designed to provide insight
              into the extent to which the mantle was involved in  their origin.  Previous
              experimental studies have shown that low degrees of melting of hydrous basalt
              at 1-3 GPa produces liquids with the general chemical composition of Archean
              tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite suites (TTG), the dominant granitoid rock in
              Archean high- and low-grade terrains, but with some minor but perhaps
              significant discrepancies. Late-Archean (2.6-2.9 Ga old) granite-greenstone
              terrains in the Superior and Slave Provinces of the Canadian Shield (members of
              the so-called "sanukitoid suite"), possess chemical characteristics (such as
              high Cr and Ni contents) that are inconsistent with a simple origin by partial
              melting of metabasalt, and that suggest a mantle lineage.  Yet in terms of most
              geochemical parameters, TTG granitoids, derived from partial melting of mafic
              crust, appear to be compositionally continuous with presumably mantle-derived
              granitoids of the sanukitoid suite.  A number of explanations, which will be
              tested experimentally, could account for these observations: (1) assimilation
              of mantle peridotite  by TTG melts, (2) the basaltic source for Archean TTG was
              more magnesian than the starting materials used in the basalt melting
              experiments at1-3 GPa, or (3) sanukitoids result from partial melting of mantle
              that had been previously modified by TTG melts. Possibilities (1) and (3), of
              course, involve intimate chemical interaction between TTG melts and peridotitic
              mantle, with potentially profound implications for the chemical evolution of
              the sub-continental mantle.   


