Title       : Cross-Arc Geochemical Variations in the Southern Washington Cascades
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0003612

Award Number: 0003612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25001              (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Leeman leeman@esci.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Leeman
EAR-0003612

It is widely accepted that chemical compositions of
              volcanic arc lavas reflect the imprints of subducted components on their
              primary mantle sources, and that the extent of material transfer in subduction
              zones [SZs] depends on such factors as subduction geometry, thermal state of
              the slab, the type and amount of sediments subducted, and age and degree of
              alteration of the underthrust oceanic crust.  To address the effects of
              progressive heating of a subducting slab and the release of its volatile
              constituents it is proposed to analyze primitive basaltic lavas from a
              cross-arc transect of the Quaternary southern Washington Cascades.  This SZ is
              one of the warmest known, and this arc represents an important end member
              example where slab-derived contributions are minimal and characteristics of the
              mantle wedge may be more easily discerned.  On the other hand, previously
              measured cross-arc variations in certain geochemical parameters (e.g., B/Zr,
              ?11B, Pb isotopes) indicate small but significant slab inputs below the forearc
              and volcanic front ranging to negligible contributions below the backarc
              region.   This contrast affords an opportunity for quantitative definition of
              slab contributions to a well-defined wedge composition.  In the proposed study,
              compositions of melt inclusions (MIs) in olivine phenocrysts will determined;
              such inclusions are more likely to retain original proportions of volatile
              components than extruded lavas, and thus more representative compositions of
              primitive magmas.  Analyses will include major and trace element compositions,
              and volatile (H2O, CO2) contents.  Work will focus on a small number of
              representative lavas, from locations spanning the width of the arc, that have
              been previously characterized for major and trace element and Sr-Nd-Pb isotopic
              compositions.  This comprehensive body of data will allow us to address the
              relative retentivity of the analyzed elements in the Cascadia slab, and to
              evaluate effects on magma compositions due to geochemical fractionations
              associated with magma ascent through mantle wedge and crust.   Our goal is to
              understand and quantify the spatial variability of volatile and fluid-mobile
              constituents in primitive magmas, and to evaluate the hypothesis that
              temperature variations in the slab (as calculated from models of conductive
              heating and mantle convection) largely dictate the composition and magnitudes
              of slab-derived contributions to arc magma sources.

