Title       : A Multi-Site Ethnoastronomical Investigation of African Stellar Navigators and
               Their Communities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  2000  
File        : a0003234

Award Number: 0003234
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jarita C. Holbrook   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : C,Holbrook
	      
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241301    /   -

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,9283,SMET,
Abstract    :
              NSF has extended its support of the research project "African Stellar Navigators
              and Their Communities"  for a third year of study.  It is a study of one of
              Africa's astronomy traditions - the tradition of using the stars for
              navigation.  Africa today and in antiquity has been the site of several forms
              of astronomy including artistic representations, stone circle calendars, and
              astrology.  Stellar navigation was chosen as the focus of study after Dr.
              Holbrook completed a preliminary field site investigation of Tunisia, North
              Africa.  That investigation revealed that the fishermen living on the Kerkennah
              Islands use stellar navigation to reach their fisheries at night. The goals of
              the project include  videotaping the fishermen using stellar navigation.  The
              resulting video footage will be included in a planetarium show featuring
              stellar navigators and the physics, mathematics, and astronomy behind their
              techniques.  Other goals include continuing to study the various aspects of the
              interaction between stellar navigation and introduced technologies, to learn
              more about the navigators and their communities,  to film stellar navigation in
              action, and continue to publish articles of the findings in Tunisia and at the
              other two fieldsites in Fiji and the United States. The extra year of funding
              is important for making a return trip to Tunisia and completing research in the
              Annapolis archives.
