Title       : Collaborative Research: Salp Swarm Dynamics: Energetics, Growth and Reproduction
               of Two Bloom-Forming Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2000   
File        : a0003272

Award Number: 0003272
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Miller starfish@astro.ocis.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Salps are holoplanktonic grazers that have a life history, feeding biology and
              population dynamic
strikingly different from copepods or other crustacean
              zooplankton. They can occur in very dense populations that cover large areas,
              and these blooms have been shown to have major impacts due to grazing and
              production of fast?sinking fecal pellets. However the conditions supporting
              bloom formation, and the energetics, reproduction and behavior of the
              bloom?forming salps are still poorly understood.  This study will focus on two
              species of salps that are global in their distribution and representative of
              two genera that commonly form large blooms. Salpa aspera regularly occurs
              during the summer in high concentrations in the slope waters of the
              Mid?Atlantic Bight, while Thalia democratica regularly forms dense populations
              during the winter spring in the Georgia Bight. The investigators will examine
              feeding, metabolism, growth, reproduction and population dynamics of these
              salps. They will use two independent modeling approaches, grounded in
              experimental and field data, to extend their observations to other time and
              space scales. interpret ouexperimental and modeling results will be interpreted
              within the context of the environmental conditions to which the salps are
              exposed.  This integrated approach will provide the best basis for
              understanding how salp blooms form and persist.  Results of this study will
              extend to other species that occur in high densities in many locations,
              allowing scientists to better evaluate the importance of salps in
              biogeochemical cycles and in structuring the pelagic environment.

