Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Study of Charge-Transfer Coupling Dynamics in
               Liquid-Liquid Two-Phase Microparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2001   
File        : a0003774

Award Number: 0003774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Mirkin michael_mirkin@qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan A. Rotenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003744
Mirkin

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Michael Mirkin, of CUNY's Queens College in New York
              and Professor Takashi Kakiuchi of Kyoto University in Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake a study of charge-transfer coupling dynamics in liquid-liquid
              two-phase microparticles.  The goal of this proposal is to combine several
              unique microelectrochemical and spectroscopic approaches developed by co-PI's
              for characterization of charge transfer processes at the interface between two
              immiscible liquid phases.  These electrochemical and optical techniques will be
              used to probe heterogeneous reactions in two-phase microscopic particles. 
              Among such microparticles are microemulsions, biological cells and organelles,
              and phospholipid vesicles.  Although these systems are very different, their
              common feature is the presence of a micrometer or susbmicrometer-sized
              liquid-liquid interface either clear or covered with a molecular film of a
              surfactant (e.g., phospholipid).  The main focus will be on experimental and
              theoretical studies of coupling of electron transfer (ET) and ion transfer (IT)
              processes at microscopic liquid interfaces.  The approaches developed for model
              liquid interfaces will then be used to probe the dynamics of charge transfer
              coupling in biological systems.

The project brings together the efforts of
              two laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. 
              Results of this research should significantly improve our understanding of the
              mechanisms of charge transfer reactions at liquid interfaces with important
              implications for biological cells, sensors and biomedical systems.  This
              research advances international human resources through the participation of
              postdocs and graduate students.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of
              their research in scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific
              meetings.

