Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Learning Nature's Strategies for Making Natural
               Products: Pathways, Mechanisms, Functional Genomics, and Biosynthetic
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a0003819

Award Number: 0003819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tadhg P. Begley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Hung-Wen Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5921,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0003819
Begley

This award supports the participation of American scientists
              in a U.S.-Japan seminar on learning nature's strategies for making natural
              products: pathways, mechanisms, functional genomics and biosynthetic
              applications, to be held in Girdwood, Alaska, from June 24-29, 2001.  The
              co-organizers are professors Tadhg Begley of Cornell University and Professor
              Yutaka Ebizuka of Tokyo University in Japan.  Under the impact of genomics, the
              field of biosynthesis is likely to undergo major growth and development over
              the next decade.  Biosynthesis is an important field of study for many reasons:
              From a fundamental point of view, it is essential to understand the chemical
              logic used by cells from diverse environments, in order to understand how the
              cell works.  From a practical point of view, many natural products are
              important in medicine and almost all of the top 25 drugs are either natural
              products or are based on them.  The primary aim of the seminar is to discuss
              how scientists interested in biosynthesis of natural products can exploit the
              enormous amount of information being generated from genome sequencing and most
              effectively contribute to functional genomics.  The intellectual interactions
              among the participants, drawn from a broad range of disciplinary backgrounds,
              will have a strong influence on how this growth occurs.  

The Seminar will
              consist of the following topics:  1) complete genome sequencing for more than
              90 bacteria;  2) development of new tools in genomics research with
              applications in biosynthesis;  3) manipulation of biosynthetic gene clusters to
              generate new polyketide and polypeptide antibiotics;  4) elucidation of a new
              terpene biosynthesis pathway;  5) structural studies on biosynthetic enzymes in
              the terpene, polyketide, vitamin and b-lactam biosynthetic pathways; and  6)
              new techniques for studying biosynthesis in unculturable soil microorganisms. 
              Seminar organizers have made a special effort to involve younger researchers as
              both participants and observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese
              experts in this field will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work,
              and will set the stage for future collaborative projects.  Dissemination of
              information on the seminar will be available on the World Wide Web.

