Title       : Conference on Frontiers of NMR in Molecular Biology VII to be held on Jan.
               21-26, 2000 in Big Sky, Montana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0003850

Award Number: 0003850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley J. Opella   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keystone Sympo Molec & Cel
	      Drawer 1630
	      Silverthorne, CO  90498    970/262-1230

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Opella, Stanley J.
MCB-0003850

This award provides partial support for the
              VIIth Keystone Conference on Frontiers of NMR in Molecular Biology.  NMR is
              playing an increasingly important role in the determination of macromolecular
              structures and the study of protein and nucleic acid dynamics.  This growing
              importance of NMR in structural biology is powerfully illustrated by the number
              of novel structures of biological macromolecules determined by this technique
              over the last few years with approximately 250 new NMR structures deposited in
              the PDB each year.  But NMR is not only a technique for structure
              determination; it is also able to provide a wealth of information, which is
              complementary to the structural data.  NMR data on dynamics and solvation of
              proteins and nucleic acids is becoming available as well as NMR
              characterization of partially folded or unfolded protein and polypeptide
              states.

A major research goal is to increase the size of the protein or
              macromolecular complex that can be analyzed by NMR.  This requires the
              development of even higher-field spectrometers, which will yield higher
              sensitivity and better resolution, thereby improving the quality of structures
              of all sizes.  Hand in hand with these instrument developments will be
              methodological approaches to overcome or minimize the correlation time problem.
               Despite major advances, NMR data collection still represents a substantial
              investment in real time and in equipment time and may require several months
              for one structure.  Avenues for increasing the number of NMR structures are
              sought through high thoughtput approaches or streamlining experiments.  NMR is
              one of very few techniques which will be able to provide structural and
              dynamical data on partially folded and heterogeneous protein systems, i.e.,
              amyloids.  Studies on these will have major implications for pathology and
              disease.

The meeting will be the forum to present the newest structures of
              important proteins, nucleic acids and complexes thereof, illuminating key
              functional questions in molecular biology.  Methodological and functional
              discussions will be given equal weight.  This award will help to support the
              participation of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.

