Title       : Seasonal Dynamics of Giant Agglutinated Foraminifera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0003639

Award Number: 0003639
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308965             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel S. Bowser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443455    518/431-1200

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A seasonal study of the dominant agglutinated foraminiferal assemblage in
              Explorers Cove, McMurdo Sound, Antarctica is the focus of this research. 
              Studies have shown that the agglutinated foraminifera ("forams") at this
              locality consume a wide variety of prey, ranging from bacteria through a
              taxonomically diverse group of metazoans, including juvenile invertebrates.
              These studies have been restricted to specimens collected in
October, November
              and early December, i. e., immediately following the Austral winter and
              before
the summer burst of under-ice and benthic primary productivity. Little
              information is available regarding the foraminiferal response to this summer
              food pulse.  The aim of this work is to utilize the planned extention of
              logistic support in the region.  The Specific Aims of this proposal are:   To
              document Austral spring to late- 
summer changes in relevant abiotic and
              biotic factors in the Explorers Cove benthos; and to characterize corresponding
              responses in agglutinated foram community structure (species composition,
              densities, size distribution). These first aims will be accomplished by
              traditional sediment coring, biomass determinations, and microscopic sorting
              methods.  Additionally, an -situ approach for documenting fine-scale changes
              using novel underwater microscopy equipment will be utilized.  Molecular tools
              to examine seasonal foram community dynamics initially focusing on the timing,
              of reproductive events multiple fission, gametogenesis will be perfected. 
              Additional work will focus on newly refined sediment core embedding methods to
              explore the fine-scale seasonal changes in foram life position. In related lab
              experiments, 	the trophic mechanisms of the key agglutinated species will be
              analyzed.  Time-resolved stable isotope analyses of lipids extracted from
              freshly collected and "snap frozen" forams will be used to determine if and how
              these mechanisms change in response to available food sources. These combined
              approaches will lead to a more complete understanding of
the roles played by
              larger agglutinated forams in the Explorers Cove benthic food web, and how
              these roles change with respect to the summer food pulse. Because Explorers
              Cove and its agglutinated foram assemblage are closely comparable to many
              bathyal and abyssal deep-sea localities, the results of these studies will have
              wide significance in the ocean sciences.

