Title       : SenseLab: Integration of Multidisciplinary Sensory Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0003983

Award Number: 0003983
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon M. Shepherd   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NIH Div of Extramural Rese
	      Nat Inst on Deafness and Other C
	      Bethesda, MD  208927180    /   -

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The overall goal of this Program Project, which embodies three research
              components, is to capitalize on previous work by this research group, involving
              SenseLab, to develop a set of neuroinformatics tools for supporting g the
              analysis of the functional organization of the olfactory system.  The
              underlying rational is that, in the analysis of brain function, the generation
              of experimental data currently exceeds the means for archiving, analyzing, and
              integrating these data.  The aim of project 1 is to understand the molecular
              sequences of the neural operations underlying olfactory perception; to this end
              the project will develop 4 databases.   Project 2 will perform the necessary
              informatics research to support the other two projects and transfer the results
              to the programming core for practical applications.  Project 3 will use data in
              the developed databases to construct and validate models of interacting neurons
              in the olfactory system.  A main focus will be the understanding of the
              integrative properties on the mitral cells for the olfactory bulb. The
              databases and tools will enhance the understanding of neural mechanisms.  They
              will be generalizable to other systems, to provide tools of wider use for
              integrating and searching neuroscientific data.

This research is funded in
              part by the National Science Foundation through its participation in the Human
              Brain Project, which is a Federal interagency research initiative, mandated by
              Congress as part of the "Decade of the Brain".



