Title       : Acquisition of a CCD-Detector Single Crystal Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0003201

Award Number: 0003201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140288             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Hughes hughesjm@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Rakovan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hailiang Dong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Miami Univ
	      
	      Oxford, OH  45056    513/529-2161

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003201
Hughes

This grant provides partial support for a single crystal
              x-ray diffractometer with a CCD detector, to be housed in the X-ray
              crystallography laboratory at Miami University, Ohio. The PIs, John M. Hughes,
              John Rakovan, and Hailiang Dong, are all from the Department of Geology.  The
              group includes a mid-career researcher with extensive single-crystal x-ray
              experience, and two early-career researchers with expertise in emerging areas
              of the Earth Sciences (mineral surface structure and biomineralization).  Miami
              University students will be extensively involved in the studies to be
              undertaken.

The addition of the CCD-detector diffractometer at Miami
              University will allow the investigation of samples that were previously too
              small for characterization through x-ray structure analysis.  The instrument
              will be used to investigate material properties of natural materials such as
              apatite, tourmaline, clay minerals, and biominerals.  The studies are of
              importance in the studies of environmental mineralogy, medical mineralogy,
              earth science, and the formation of minerals by organisms.  The facility will
              also by used by other researchers on a time-available basis.  The instrument
              will be housed in a newly renovated room in Hughes Hall on the Miami campus,
              and will complement the existing powder x-ray diffraction equipment, atomic
              force microscope, and single-crystal x-ray cameras.  In addition to support
              from the Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program (EAR/IF),
              matching funds are provided by the State of Ohio and Miami University.

***

