Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Ceramic Production and Distribution in
               the U.S. Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0003267

Award Number: 0003267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10174              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Crown pcrown@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the Direction of Dr. Patricia Crown, MS Valerie King will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze a specific type of pottery, Chuskan
              greyware which is present in large numbers at the prehistoric site of Chaco
              Canyon located in New Mexico. The canyon is unique in the US Southwest because
              of its scale of development. Beginning in the 900s AD and reaching an apex in
              the late 1000s a few sites within the canyon were characterized by the presence
              of monumental architecture, the presence of rare exotic items which were
              obtained from long distances and what appear to be an extensive network of
              constructed roads. In outlying communities a series of "great houses" exhibit
              the characteristics of Chacoan construction techniques, thus implying the
              existence of an areally extensive cultural system. The nature of Chaco Canyon's
              development, fluorescence and decline has been the focus of intense research
              and archaeological debate from the early 1900s to the present day. Researchers
              are uncertain of the level of societal complexity attained and can not agree on
              the geographic extent of its influence. Some archaeologists argue that Chaco
              served a center for a broad redistribution system, others that its function was
              largely ceremonial and yet others that it was in fact a center of agricultural
              production. Some believe that it was minimally occupied for most of the year
              and that people aggregated there only for special events. MS King will address
              the site's function through pottery analysis. She wishes to determine whether
              Chuskan greyware pottery which was produced in an outlying region was
              manufactured under tight centralized control. If such were the case this would
              suggest that Chaco in fact exercised considerable political and economic
              control over a large region and lay at the core of a centralized highly
              stratified system. Based on ethnographic and archaeological analogies, a strong
              correlation exists between such specialist production and stratified social
              organization. To accomplish her goal MS King will examine a large series of
              greyware ceramics and determine the extent of standardization in form, 
              decoration and method of manufacture. In addition to recording macroscopic
              properties she will conduct both petrographic and trace element analysis.
              Samples drawn from different chronological points will provide the comparative
              basis necessary to assess changing complexity over time. 

This work is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will shed new light into an important prehistoric US culture
              and assist in training a promising young scientist.

