Title       : Solid State Geochemistry: High Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy of
               Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0003533

Award Number: 0003533
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $618706             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter R. Buseck pbuseck@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Buseck
EAR-0003533

The goal of this project is to examine chemical and
              structural deviations from ideality in geologically and environmentally
              significant minerals. Such deviations can hold important clues to geological
              processes and to the geological past. Electron diffraction, electron
              spectroscopy, high-resolution TEM imaging, computer simulation of images, and
              calculation of structure models will be combined to solve problems of micro-
              and nanocrystalline minerals. The serpentine minerals are important
              constituents of ultramafic rocks underlying the oceanic basins. They are likely
              significant carriers of water into the mantle during subduction; the release of
              that water promotes partial melting and magmatism in the overlying mantle
              wedge, leading to volcanism. Subducted serpentines also influence the
              development of earthquakes at depth. Given their tectonic importance, it is
              important to obtain as much fundamental knowledge as possible about them. The
              proposed research will resolve structural problems regarding antigorite and
              chrysotile serpentine, with potential geophysical implications.  Garnets have
              nominally cubic symmetry, but many display non-cubic properties. Preliminary
              HRTEM and XRD measurements suggest cation ordering as the source of their lower
              than cubic symmetry. These data will be refined and, if confirmed, be used to
              produce a model of chemical ordering to explain their anomalous
              characteristics.  Many minerals that are of great environmental importance form
              at or near Earth's surface. Knowledge of the structural states of poorly
              crystallized materials is important for understanding weathering, heavy-metal
              deposition, and soil formation. These low-temperature assemblages typically
              occur in intimate, heterogeneous mixtures of fine-grained minerals. Using
              electron nanodiffraction (END), it is possible to study volumes of a few nm3 -
              many orders of magnitude less than by any other diffraction method. END will be
              used to investigate the hydrous ferric oxide minerals that are collectively
              called ferrihydrite and their biological cousin ferritin and materials such as
              clays that suffer rapid radiation damage during electron microscopy.

