Title       : Overpressure and Fluid Flow in New Jersey Continental Slope: Implications for
               Slope Stability and Cold Seeps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2001   
File        : a0003467

Award Number: 0003467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Flemings flemings@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Overpressure and Fluid Flow in New Jersey Continental Slope: Implications for
              Slope Stability and Cold Seeps

Principal Investigator: Peter B.
              Flemings

Observations, theory, and experiments will be used to characterize
              the temporal and spatial evolution of fluid pressure and stress on the
              continental slope, offshore New Jersey. PI will image the porosity of the slope
              sediments using core data, well logs, and seismic velocities. Fluid pressures
              will be predicted using a porosity-effective stress relationship. This approach
              will provide a regional map of the porosity and fluid pressures. Greg Mountain
              (Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory) will aid them in correlating the pressure
              distribution to key Miocene-to-present stratigraphic surfaces. Fluid pressures
              will also be correlated with exposed submarine canyons to evaluate the impact
              high pressures have on slope stability. A numerical model that couples
              consolidation theory and groundwater mechanics will simulate the porosity and
              pressure evolution. Porewater geochemical data will be used in concert with
              porosity data to validate the flow model. PI will perform laboratory
              experiments, at ExxonMobil Upstream Research Company, on samples from ODP Site
              1073 to determine the compressibility and permeability of slope sediments. The
              experiments will also provide fluid pressure estimates that can be compared to
              the pressures predicted from porosity and those simulated in the flow models.
              After constraining the fluid pressures, their origins, and their distribution,
              we will evaluate the stress evolution, which is intimately tied to the fluid
              pressures and to slope stability.

The proposed research will provide
              quantitative insights into how hydrodynamics and state of stress are linked on
              rapidly deposited margins. This local study has broad application to a variety
              of geological settings and societal problems. The study has the potential to
              estimate the location of sea floor seeps and the volume of fluids they expel;
              fluid flux relates to the size and diversity of biotic communities that use
              nutrients supplied by seep fluids. The pressure-stress field is important to
              understand for subsurface exploration and to evaluate slope stability. A
              definitive understanding of the origin of pressures and the focussed flows they
              can generate will be easily exportable to industry. The coupling of fluid
              pressure and stress will define the role excess fluid pressures play in
              sculpting continental slopes and may serve as a way to evaluate potential
              submarine landslide hazards.

