Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Prehistoric Ceramic Traditions of the Southern
               Coastal Plain of North Carolina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0003901

Award Number: 0003901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincas P. Steponaitis vin@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              For his doctoral dissertation research the PI will develop an archaeological
              ceramic sequence for the coastal plain of North Carolina.  While excavations
              indicate that this region has a long history of Native American occupation and
              document both an earlier hunting and gathering and later agricultural way of
              life, research has been severely hindered by lack of a cultural chronology. 
              Many sites are contained within loosely consolidated sandy soil which results
              in vertical movement in material.  Thus detailed stratigraphic reconstruction
              is often difficult.  Because of the chemical composition of such soils, organic
              material is rarely preserved and radiocarbon dating is rarely possible.  The PI
              wishes to remedy this situation through the construction of a detailed ceramic
              chronology which is anchored in time by thermolumenescence dating.  This
              technique measures time dependent radiation damage within individual potsherds
              and preliminary analysis has produced internally consistent and
              archaeologically reasonable results.  A series of sherds from stratigraphically
              secure contexts will be studied.  Changes through time in method of
              manufacture, as determined through petrographic and compositonal analysis, as
              well as stylistic attributes will be described and the resultant sequence will
              be anchored with thermolumenescence dates.  Once this is accomplished,
              materials from surface and disturbed sites can be incorporated and the PI can
              then plot spatial distributions to delineate prehistoric cultural groupings and
              determine how they changed over time.                                          
                                                                                             
                                   The coastal North Carolina plain is of archaeological
              interest because although its inhabitants incorporated maize agriculture into
              their hunting and gathering way of life when this cultigen became available, in
              contrast to most other Native American groups they apparantly did not adopt a
              settled village way of life but continued a highly mobile lifestyle.  For the
              many archaeologist interested in the development of cultural complexity and the
              sedentization which usually accompanies this, the region provides an important
              study case.  However lack of a securely dated sequence severely limits
              research.  The PI's work should help to remedy this situation
