Title       : Dissertation: The Temporal Resolution of Oxygen and Carbon Stable Isotope
               Measurements in Tooth Enamel
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0003143

Award Number: 0003143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel E. Lieberman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This doctoral dissertation research project will permit MS Felicitas Wiedermann
              to conduct a three stage research project to develop an effective protocol to
              extract climatic information from tooth enamel. Enamel is a dense, low porosity
              structure which is well preserved in many archaeological situations and is
              resistant to contamination from burial environment. Because the oxygen and
              carbon in the organic component of enamel ultimately derives from food and
              water consumed by the individual (and its mother) they closely reflect the
              isotopic ratio of the materials from which these derive. The oxygen isotope
              ratio of both freestanding and food-incorporated water is affected by both
              temperature and amount of rainfall and these climatic variables are thus
              reflected in tooth enamel. Carbon isotope ratio varies with the type of plants
              an animal consumes and enamel carbon ratios provide insight into vegetation
              cover. Sheep teeth, which constitute the basis for this study grow in
              increments and through analysis of the individual sections one can examine the
              degree of seasonal change across the year. Such knowledge provides an
              environmental context for understanding prehistoric human behavior. In a
              multistage study MS Wiedermann hopes to develop a robust analytic methodology.
              In the first stage she will feed laboratory sheep isotopically labeled water as
              well as timed biogenic markers which will permit her to determine the rate and
              geometry of tooth growth. With this information she will develop a strategy for
              sectioning teeth to remove chronologically relevant samples. She will then
              apply this technique to modern teeth from the Near East. Since the materials
              will be obtained from specific locales where vegetation, temperature and
              vegetation are known it will be possible to draw tight links between isotope
              ratios and these environmental variables. Finally she will apply the technique
              to samples from the Neolithic archaeological site of Ain  Ghazal, Jordan.  This
              will allow her to determine the extent to which such ancient teeth are subject
              to in ground alteration and to apply the technique directly to a significant
              archaeological question. 

This work is important because, if successful, it
              will develop a technique which will provide valuable data to prehistorians and
              other scientists who reconstruct the past. I will also help to train a very
              promising young scientist.

