Title       : Dissertation: An Analysis of Private Sector Craft Specialization in the
               Artisan's Village of Deir el Medina of Ramesside Period Egypt
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a0003635

Award Number: 0003635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Betsy M. Bryan betsy.bryan@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Betsy Bryan, Ms Kathlyn Cooney will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. She will utilize extant written records and
              surviving objects to analyze the economic and social organization of craft
              production at the ancient Egyptian village of Deir el Medina, located near
              Thebes. Most habitation sites in ancient Egypt were located in the Nile's
              alluvial plain and have since been covered with millennia of silt deposits.
              Deir el Medina, on the other hand represents an extraordinary and rate
              habitation site preserved in the desert. The remarkable well-preserved mud
              brick homes and associated living debris belonged to the workmen who built,
              carved and decorated the royal tombs in the Valley of the Kings during the
              Eighteenth, Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties. Many of these individuals were
              literate and, in addition to their official work, functioned as
              semi-independent craftsmen who fashioned coffins and other ritual and funerary
              related objects for private sale. It appears that the state supported such
              private enterprise and provided the necessary wood and other raw materials.
              Much of such work was arranged on a contractual basis as individual items were
              made to order and the dry desert environment has preserved thousands of written
              documents, including many contracts between artisan and purchaser.  These
              provide an unprecedented opportunity to understand the economic and social
              organization of a craft industry within the context of a centralized state
              controlled enterprise. Although it is unlikely that specific items and
              contracts can be matched, many objects produced by Deir el Medina workers have
              been recovered, are curated in museum collections and available for study. 
              With National Science Foundation support, Ms Cooney will visit archives which
              contain copies of the documents, study craft objects themselves in several
              museums and conduct fieldwork at the site of Deir el Medina to gain insight
              into the spatial organization of craft production.

The processes which led
              to the rise of civilization in Egypt occurred independently in many parts of
              the world and thus reflect not historic chance but rather an underlying set of
              principles. To achieve their goal of understanding how complex societies
              evolve, archaeologists must rely heavily on objects, most often ceramics,
              recovered through excavation and then use these remains to reconstruct the
              social and economic systems they  indirectly reflect. In recent years
              scientists have focused on the context within which such items were produced.
              On this basis further speculation about social organization and degree of
              political centralization are possible. However because there is rarely an
              independent control, it is difficult to know whether such an analytical
              framework and the conclusions which derive from it are correct. Deir el Medina
              situation offers a unique opportunity to address this issue since it is
              possible to compare the patterning of material objects with information derived
              from the written record. Preliminary work, for example, indicates that the
              distinction between centralized and individualized control may be overly simple
              since both existed side by side, and likely reinforced each other at the
              site.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data
              of interest to many archaeologists and help to refine an important area of
              archaeological theory. It will also assist in training a promising young
              researcher.

