Title       : Collaborative Research: Lithospheric Structure and Evolution of the Rocky
               Mountains - beginning Phase 2 Geodynamic Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0003540

Award Number: 0003540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110483             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl E. Karlstrom kek1@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mousumi Roy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jane Selverstone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003540
Karlstrom


The western U.S. is one of the best places in the world
              to study continental evolution because there is a preserved unique record of
              the growth, stabilization, maturation, rifting, and incipient dismemberment of
              a continent.  In particular, we can see how older lithospheric structures (in
              this case Archean and Proterozoic) influenced younger tectonic events,
              including development of the huge, presently active, orogenic plateau that
              dominates the western U.S. and the progressive dismemberment and dispersal of
              continental fragments along its active western margin.  

Continents are the
              long-term record keepers of plate interactions before 200 Ma.  However,
              accumulated modification often obscures the previous record.  The western U.S.
              is unique in that this part of the continent was assembled in the Proterozoic
              around an Archean "cratonic core",  then was truncated in the Phanerozoic at a
              high angle so as to create a new continental margin oblique to the Precambrian
              structures.  The result was the creation of a wide region - the western U.S. -
              where nature "caught" all stages of structural reactivation and continental
              modification.

The main goal of the CD-ROM (Continental Dynamics of the Rocky
              Mountains) Project is to understand the processes of formation and modification
              of continental lithosphere.  Phase 1 of the CD-ROM experiment was a three year
              project to improve our structural and petrologic knowledge of the lithosphere
              and to test the hypothesis that the lithospheric structure produced during
              assembly of southwestern North America has profoundly influenced physical and
              chemical modification of the continental lithosphere during all subsequent
              magmatic and tectonic events, including those related to the ongoing
              asthenospheric flow.  The principal investigators studied two Proterozoic
              structures with a range of seismic and geologic methods:  the Cheyenne Belt and
              the Jemez lineament.  Reflection, refraction, and teleseismic investigations
              are providing crustal - and lithospheric - scale images of major structures.  A
              more complete picture of the evolution of the lithosphere has been added by
              geologic studies of Precambrian shear zones and Phanerozoic structures,
              xenolith studies, and geomorphologic and exhumation studies of present
              landforms.  Phase 1 brought together 18 investigators from 14 institutions,
              including collaboration with a German-funded refraction team.  

With these
              awards, one year of funding is provided to continue to process, interpret, and
              integrate the diverse data sets generated in Phase 1 and to begin developing
              geodynamic models.  The Principal Investigators will also explore new methods
              of data integration towards the goal of developing a "master model" for
              lithospheric structure.
***




