Title       : Dissertation: Understanding Ritual Reorganization in Late Prehistoric Western
               Pueblos: A Case Study on Homol'ovi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0003049

Award Number: 0003049
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11992              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. Charles Adams ecadams@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. E. Charles Adams Mr. Vincent LaMotta will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. His goal is to understand the factors which
              permitted effective functioning and coordination of activities of late
              prehistoric period Pueblo people in the Four Corners region of the Southwestern
              USA. The period known as the Pueblo III-IV transition, beginning in the
              mid-13th century AD and continuing through the early 1400s was characterized
              throughout the northern Southwest by major demographic shifts. The Four Corners
              region was largely abandoned by 1300, populations having emigrated to a few
              large settlement clusters with some sites housing over a thousand people. By
              the mid 14th century, average settlement size had increased by up to 500% or
              more over levels of just 50-100 years before. Aggregated Pueblo IV communities
              departed radically from the more typical pattern of dispersed low-density
              settlements that characterized the prehistory of the region up to that time.
              While earlier Puebloan experiments with aggregated life were relatively
              short-lived, Pueblo IV community patterns persisted for centuries into the
              historic period. These characteristics of such communities have stimulated much
              debate about the social mechanisms that facilitated aggregation and
              integration. Several archaeologists have proposed that Puebloan peoples
              developed rituals which played a central role in effecting and sustaining this
              pattern. 

For many years the Arizona State Museum has conducted excavation
              at a series of Homol'ovi sites which span this transitional period and these
              will form the basis for Mr. LaMotta's research. He believes that "ritual
              sodalities" observed in the ethnographic present emerged during the late
              prehistoric period and served an important integrating function. A ritual
              sodality is a ceremonial organization whose membership cross-cuts kinship lines
              and which typically performs public and semi-public rituals. The problem, as
              Mr. LaMotta notes is how to identify solidalities in the archaeological record
              and distinguish them from other types of family and kin based ritual groups
              which also were likely to exist. He has developed a series of criteria which
              serve this goal and with NSF support will supervise the analysis of excavated
              faunal and floral remains to determine whether, and when in the archaeological
              sequence the data conform to the expected pattern. This research is significant
              for the insight it will provide into how complex societies arise and are
              maintained. The work will also contribute to training a promising young
              scientist.

