Title       : Support for ICSU Activities in Environment and Global Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : GEO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0003206

Award Number: 0003206
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Louis B. Brown                          
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2000 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1065000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Rosswall thomas.rosswall@icsu.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry Kohler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Int Council of Sci Unions
	      51 Boulevard de Montmorency
	      Paris, FR  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 0000      UNASSIGNED
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The International Council for Science (ICSU) will promote coordination of
              environment- and global change-related activities of he various ICSU unions,
              committees and other bodies.  ICSU's Advisory Committee on the Environment
              (ACE), with support from ICSU's environmental sciences officer, will keep under
              review and will identify and address scientific issues that cut across the four
              major international global change research programs -- the World Climate
              Research Programme (WCRP); the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
              (IGBP); the International Human Dimensions (of Global Environmental Change)
              Program (IHDP) and Diversitas.

Such issues already singled out include:
              carbon, water, food, and fiber cycles; climate and agriculture; and science for
              sustainability.  Efforts will be also be undertaken to improve the flow of
              data, information and scientific results from scientists to policymakers. 
              Improved linkages between natural and social sciences related to global change
              will be explored, as will the relationship between health and the environment,
              including global change.

Other issues that ICSU/ACE will address include (1)
              the relationship between the global observing systems and the global research
              programs and (2) implications for global change and environmental research of
              the UN general Assembly's resolution on a new science agenda for
              sustainability.  Potential new scientific initiatives will be explored in these
              areas and scientific workshops and similar scientific planning meetings will be
              convened.  Special attention will be paid to the need to further involve
              scientists from developing countries in the full range of ICSU activities
              related to global change.  Finally, ICSU will, as a co-sponsor of the WCRP with
              the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), continue its support for the
              WCRP.

