Title       : Collaborative Research: A GPS Network to Determine Crustal Motions in the
               Bedrock of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet: Phase I-Installation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0003861

Award Number: 0003861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198853             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Bevis bevis@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003861
Bevis

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a collaborative research
              program to initiate a Global Positioning System (GPS) network to measure
              crustal motions in the bedrock surrounding and underlying the West Antarctic
              Ice Sheet (WAIS). Evaluation of the role of both tectonic and ice-induced
              crustal motions of the WAIS bedrock is a critical goal for understanding past,
              present, and future dynamics of WAIS and its potential role in future global
              change scenarios, as well as improving our understanding of the role of
              Antarctica in global plate motions. The extent of active tectonism in West
              Antarctica is largely speculative, as few data exist that constrain its
              geographic distribution, directions, or rates of deformation. Active tectonism
              and the influence of bedrock on the WAIS have been highlighted recently by
              geophysical data indicating active subglacial volcanism and control of ice
              streaming by the presence of sedimentary basins. The influence of bedrock
              crustal motion on the WAIS and its future dynamics is a fundamental issue.
              Existing GPS projects are located only on the fringe of the ice sheet and do
              not address the regional picture. It is important that baseline GPS
              measurements on the bedrock around and within the WAIS be started so that a
              basis is established for detecting change.

To measure crustal motions, this
              project will build a West Antarctica GPS Network (WAGN) of at least 15 GPS
              sites across the interior of West Antarctica (approximately the size of the
              contiguous United States from the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific coast) over a
              two-year period beginning in the Antarctic field season 2001-2002. The planned
              network is designed using the Multi-modal Occupation Strategy (MOST), in which
              a small number of independent GPS "roving" receivers make differential
              measurements against a network of continuous GPS stations for comparatively
              short periods at each site.  This experimental strategy, successfully
              implemented by a number of projects in California, S America, the SW Pacific
              and Central Asia, minimizes logistical requirements, an essential element of
              application of GPS geodesy in the scattered and remote outcrops of the WAIS
              bedrock.

The WAGN program will be integrated with the GPS network that has
              been established linking the Antarctic Peninsula with South America through the
              Scotia arc (Scotia Arc GPS Project (SCARP)). It will also interface with
              stations currently measuring motion across the Ross Embayment, and with the
              continent-wide GIANT program of the Working Group on Geodesy and Geographic
              Information Systems of the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR).
              The GPS network will be based on permanent monuments set in solid rock outcrops
              that will have near-zero set-up error for roving GPS occupations, and that can
              be directly converted to a continuous GPS site when future technology makes
              autonomous operation and satellite data linkage throughout West Antarctica both
              reliable and economical. The planned network both depends on and complements
              the existing and planned continuous networks. It is presently not practical,
              for reasons of cost and logistics, to accomplish the measurements proposed
              herein with either a network of continuous stations or traditional
              campaigns.

The proposed WAGN will complement existing GPS projects by
              filling a major gap in coverage among several discrete crustal blocks that make
              up West Antarctica, a critical area of potential bedrock movements. If crustal
              motions are relatively slow, meaningful results will only begin to emerge
              within the five-year maximum period of time for an individual funded project.
              Hence this proposal is only to initiate the network and test precision and
              velocities at the most critical sites. Once built, however, the network will
              yield increasingly meaningful results with the passage of time. Indeed, the
              slower the rates turn out to be, the more important an early start to
              measuring. It is anticipated that the results of this project will initiate an
              iterative process that will gradually resolve into an understanding of the
              contributions from plate rotations and viscoelastic and elastic motions
              resulting from deglaciation and ice mass changes. Velocities obtained from
              initial reoccupation of the most critical sites will dictate the timing of a
              follow-up proposal for reoccupation of the entire network when detectable
              motions have occurred.


