Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: Differential Responses of Native
               and Exotic Understory Plants to Different Rate of Nitrate Deposition: A
               Mechanism of Invasion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0003822

Award Number: 0003822
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisamarie Windham windham@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    610/758-3021

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5956,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003822
Windham
The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S.
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour months of research
              abroad.  The program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental
              conditions abroad.
This award will provide Dr. Lisamarie Windham of Lehigh
              University with support for twenty-four months to work with Dr. Juan Jose
              Armesto, at the Universidad de Chile in Santiago, Chile.  Support for this
              project is through the U.S.-Chile Program.
The spread of exotic plant species
              has become an increasingly important facet of global change when the
              replacement of native plants with exotic invaders alters community structure
              and nutrient cycling.  A method used by researchers to predict which exotic
              plants will invade which landscapes is through surveys and models.  To this
              end, the PI has considered how many mature forests of North America have high
              nitrate deposition rates and large populations of exotic understory plants,
              whereas Chilean old-growth forests have neither.  To determine if nitrate
              deposits influence exotic plant success, the PI will examine nitrate use by
              exotic and native understory plants at three field sites and in greenhouse
              experiments with controlled nitrate deposition.  Specifically, she will survey
              the forests of Chiloe for the presence of exotic plant populations and measure
              rates of nitrate reductase activity in populations of plants in Chile as well
              as other sites in the U.S., such as New York.  The results will be provided to
              institutions of conservation and natural resource management.
Dr. Armesto is
              an authority on plant communities of Chilean oldgrowth forests.  The
              Universidad de Chile has been actively involved in the establishment and study
              of the system of National Parks and Reserves.  The proposed research overlaps
              with current efforts to understand patterns of biodiversity in Chilean
              forests.

