Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Transient Electromagnetic Field Generation on
               Active Volcanoes-A Comparative Study of the Response from Long Valley Caldera
               and Aso Volcano, Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a0003706

Award Number: 0003706
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16242              (Estimated)
Investigator: Malcolm J. Johnston mal@usgs.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Geological Sur-Menlo Park
	      
	      Menlo Park, CA  94025    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003706
Johnston

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Malcolm Johnston of the Geological Survey in Menlo
              Park, California and Professor Yoshikazu Tanaka at Kyoto University in Japan. 
              The researchers will be undertaking a study of the transient electromagnetic
              field generation on active volcanoes: a comparison of the response from Long
              Valley Caldera in California and the Aso volcano in Japan.  The generation of
              electric and magnetic fields on volcanoes and the relation these have to the
              role of stress, heat, fluids and gases in volcano processes are fundamental
              questions that have long gone unanswered because little data is available on
              active volcanoes and there is a poor understanding of the processes involved. 
              They will bring together the observations on Aso, Unzen and Long Valley's
              active volcanoes with theoretical and laboratory measurements on self potential
              generation to provide some understanding on what the data means.  They will
              then separate processes that complicate interpretation of these data and
              investigate the practical implications that these data have for volcano process
              monitoring.  In particular, they hope to identify the physics involved in
              generation of self-potential anomalies.  They expect to show that the primary
              contribution to self-potential at temperatures high enough to generate a gas
              phase arises from gas-related charge transport processes.  At lower
              temperatures, the primary contribution is from electrokinetic effects modulated
              by elevation effects.  The researchers will then quantify these last two
              effects in field experiments at volcanic areas and also in regions where no
              volcanic activity has occurred, but known subsurface fluid flow occurs. 
              

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories that have
              complementary expertise and research capabilities.  Results of the research has
              implications for the detection of active dikes and sills and, more importantly,
              for detection of changes in intrusion activity.  This research advances
              international human resources through the participation of graduate students. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

