Title       : The Cosmos in the Classroom: Involving Community College Instructors in a
               Hands-on Symposium on Teaching Astronomy and Space Science to Non-Science
               Majors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2000    
File        : a0003154

Award Number: 0003154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Havlen rhavlen@stars.sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Fraknoi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Astronomical Soc of Pac
	      390 Ashton Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941121722    /   -

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7429,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Astronomy (11) Approximately 250,000 students (mostly non-science majors) take
              introductory astronomy courses in colleges, universities, and adult education
              programs around the country each year. These courses represent one of the most
              important interfaces between the astronomy/space science community and the
              public. Surveys reveal that about half of these courses are taught at
              institutions that do not have a significant astronomy research program, often
              by people whose training is in other fields besides astronomy and space
              science. Whatever their background, many people teaching these courses have too
              little initial training or exposure to effective teaching strategies and
              resources in astronomy. This 2.5-day national symposium at the Annual Meeting
              of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific is designed to assist instructors at
              all levels in doing a better job in their teaching of non-science majors.
              Mentor instructors, innovators in laboratory and on-line teaching, researchers
              in educational techniques, and creators of the best written and on-line
              resources are among the presenters. Much of the symposium is in the form of
              interactive panels and hands-on workshops. The organizers are actively seeking
              out the participation of three groups who are not normally represented at such
              meetings: full-time community college instructors, part-time community and
              small college instructors, and colleagues in other fields who wind up teaching
              astronomy.
