Title       : Electronically Scanning Antennas using CTS Technology and Ferroelectric
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0003335

Award Number: 0003335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62337              (Estimated)
Investigator: Magdy F. Iskander   (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhengqing Yun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-6903

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003335
Iskander

With this proposal the PI's respectfully request the NSF
              funding of this SGER grant to carry out fundamental research towards the design
              and development of a low-cost antenna array with full 2D beam steering
              capability.  The proposed technology is based on the use of the Continuous
              Transverse Stub (CTS) array design with the steering capability provided
              through the use of Ferroelectric material.  With the development of the fund
              understanding that will lead to the reduced losses and increased gain in this
              low cost CTS technology, the proposed design is expected to have significant
              impact on wireless communications (Satellite and terrestrial) and in both the
              commercial and military application sectors.

Initial development of this
              technology which combines the CTS antenna array design and the use of
              Ferroelectric materials to provide the beam steering capability, is presently
              being funded in collaboration with Ferroelectric materials research group in
              the Army Research Office. The intended application in this case is for the low
              cost, light weight antennas for helmets in the PM Soldier Program. In this
              case, manufacturability issues are being addressed through participation by the
              Raytheon Systems Company. The presently funded one-year study is simply
              intended to demonstrate proof of concept, and conduct simulations that will
              provide evidence for the possible utilization at frequencies of specific
              interest to the PM Soldier Program.

The requested support, however, is
              intended to address some fundamental research issues related to understanding
              the full capability of this technology and its potential utilization in the
              next generation, broadband, and adaptive wireless communications systems.  One
              of the fundamental limitations of present designs is the high conductor losses
              and the inability to improve the gain to help increase the range while saving
              the battery power.  Preliminary  simulations by our group showed that through
              the use of multilayer Ferroelectric materials (also produced by ARL), it may be
              possible to reduce the conductor losses.  It is postulated that with multilayer
              Ferroelectric materials, and with the proper selection of the type and
              dimensions of the various materials, it may be possible to propagate surface
              waves near the dielectric interfaces and away from the transmission line
              conductors feeding and connecting the array elements in the CTS array.  This
              clearly may lead to reducing the losses and hence increasing the	antenna gain
              and realizing the associated benefits in range and battery life.  This
              preliminary observation will be further studied to identify types of
              propagating modes in the proposed multi-layer CTS design, and the dependence of
              the characteristics of these modes on the types and dimensions of the
              Feffoelectric materials in the multiplayer structure.  The successful
              development of this effort and the implementation of its results is expected to
              have significant impact on antenna array designs for future wireless
              communications systems.

Other research issues that they intend to
              investigate as part of this SGER grant are related to the use of the coaxial
              configuration of the CTS technology (invented at the University of Utah) for
              multiband (frequency hop) communications systems.  The new coaxial CTS design
              is shown to provide significant broadband and improved impedance matching
              characteristics, and hence its potential use for multi-band wireless
              communications systems is considered revolutionary.  The proposed work thus
              combines two research components, one in the development of low-loss and
              multilayer Ferroelectric materials, and the other which involves the full
              development of the CTS distributed antenna array architecture with a beam
              steering capability.  This effort is expected, therefore, to lead to
              significant breakthroughs in the traditional and often bulky phased antenna
              array designs and will have significant impact on the design of low-cost
              antenna arrays for the next generation wireless communications systems.

