Title       : Permian-Triassic Paleobotany and Paleoclimate of the Central Transantarctic
               Mountains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  2003  
File        : a0003620

Award Number: 0003620
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edith L. Taylor etaylor@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003620
Taylor

This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics
              Program of the Office of Polar Programs, supports a project to study Permian
              and Triassic fossil plant material from the Transantarctic Mountains. The
              overall goal is to achieve a better understanding of Permo-Triassic flora and
              how this relates to general plant evolution and Permo-Triassic
              paleoenvironmental conditions. The terrestrial rocks of the central
              Transantarctic Mountains have been a source of outstanding fossil discoveries
              over the last 30+ years, including Permian and Triassic permineralized peat
              with cellular detail preserved, fossil forests silicified in growth position,
              and compression floras with plant cuticle preservation, as well as megafossils
              from the Cenozoic age Sirius Group, and the first Jurassic dinosaur from the
              continent. The rare juxtaposition of sites that include many different types of
              plant fossil preservation (permineralization, compressed/impressed remains, in
              situ forests, mummified wood), the exceptionally high quality of the
              preservation, and the richness of the sites make this area unique in the world.
              It is especially important in that, on a worldwide basis, relatively little is
              known about plants from the Permian and Triassic (280-210 million
              years).

The proposed research will center on the biodiversity, structure,
              and paleoclimate of previously collected Permian and Triassic plant fossils
              from the Beardmore Glacier area in the central Transantarctic Mountains.
              Specifically the program of investigation will:

1) Provide the opportunity
              to reconstruct several plants and place them within an evolutionary context,
              including the reproductive organs of several seed plant groups that have been
              suggested as precursors of flowering plants.

2) Use Permian and Triassic
              plants as records of past climates that can be tested against hypothesized
              physical climate models. This will be accomplished by analyzing tree rings as
              well as by close examination of the structure and morphology of individual
              plants. Particular attention will be paid to plant features that allowed them
              to adapt to growth at high latitudes, including the extreme polar light
              regime.

3) As a result of the above, it will be possible to more accurately
              understand these Permian and Triassic communities and their relationships to
              other ecosystems, i.e., other southern hemisphere (Gondwana) floras of the same
              age. This multifaceted approach will also provide information about
              plant/animal interactions, based on coprolites (fossil fecal pellets), and the
              relationships of fungi that functioned as either decomposers or mutualists.


