Title       : Connected Mathematics: Making Sense of Complex Phenomeana through Building
               Object-Based Parallel Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0003285

Award Number: 0003285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Finbarr C. Sloane                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57306              (Estimated)
Investigator: Uri Wilensky uri@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Connected Mathematics:  Making Sense of Complex Phenomena through Building
              Object-based Parallel Models


The content area of the project is learning
              about "complexity".  Complexity is the study of systems in which phenomena or
              global behaviors arise from the interactions of simpler parts.  Many everyday
              phenomena exhibit complex behavior:  the growth of a snowflake crystal, the
              perimeter pattern of a maple leaf, the dynamics of the Dow Jones or of a fourth
              grade classroom.  These are all systems which can be modeled as composed of
              many distributed but interacting parts.  They all exhibit non-linear or
              emergent qualities which place them beyond the scope of current K-12
              mathematics curricula.

The project goal is to make complexity accessible to
              students through the use of object-based parallel modeling languages (OBPML). 
              Students build models of complex mathematical and scientific phenomena from
              "scratch" as well as extending models they are given from a library of
              "extensible models".

Through these activities, the researchers seek:
*To
              understand how learners make sense of complex phenomena when engaged in buiding
              object-based parallel models
*To design computational tools and activities
              that foster learner's in a) building models of complex phenomena and b)
              building intuitive conceptions of complexity
*To investigate the ways in which
              learners engage in this kind of modeling change their beliefs about and
              attitude towards the mathematical and scientific enterprises
*To investigate
              patterns in the kinds of symbolization developed by learners engaged in
              object-based parallel modeling.  

OBPMLs afford a probabilistic and
              statistical approach to modeling.  One outcome of the project is a strengthened
              and broadened role for probability and statistics in the mathematics and
              science currucula, combining it with computational techniques such as Monte
              Carlo simulations -- thus developing a new subject area perhaps better called
              stochastic.  In this respect and others, we expect to develop new mathematical
              contents areas--content areas which live in an object-based parallel medium. 
              
  




