Title       : Wireless Measurement and Control of the Indoor Environment in Buildings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2000  
File        : a0003010

Award Number: 0003010
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Butcher                         
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward A. Arens earens@uclink.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              K J. Pister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              As the information available to a building's control system is increased, its
              control can become more sophisticated, and improve the operation of the
              building.  Improvements can be obtained through:  reduced energy consumption in
              lighting, ventilation, and temperature control systems, improved comfort and
              productivity of occupants, and improved safety.  Unfortunately, the cost of
              adding to a building's sensor network is significant; involving not only the
              cost of the sensors themselves, but also the expense of running wire between
              the sensor and the control system.  As a result, most buildings are operated
              with few sensors installed, a situation that contributes to low efficiency,
              poor indoor environmental quality, and increased operating cost.

Recently,
              sensors based on micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) technology have been
              developed that offer the potential to run indefinitely without the need for
              wires for either communication or power.  MEEMS technology uses the
              semi-conductor fabrication techniques traditionally employed in making
              integrated circuits, to produce many types of devices, including sensors,
              radios, batteries, and power collecting devices.  The technology has the
              potential to eliminate the wire required for sensors in buildings because the
              devices can be made extremely small, thus requiring little power.

In this
              research, the building control capabilities of the Center for the Build
              Environment (CBE) at UC Berkeley are combined with the microfabrication
              capabilities of the Berkeley Sensor and Actuator Center (BSAC), also at UC
              Berkeley.  This project is intended to provide the initial funding for a
              program designed to investigate the potential for applying MEMS technology to
              building control systems.  It is expected that the cost reduction potential and
              increased information density achievable with MEMS technology will
              fundamentally change the way that buildings are controlled.

