Title       : FASEB Conference: Signal Transduction in the Immune System to be held July 8-13,
               2000 in Saxton's River, VT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2000       
File        : a0003828

Award Number: 0003828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher E. Rudd   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence Samelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This application seeks partial funding for a FASEB Summer Conference on "Signal
              Transduction in the Immune System" to be held from July 8th through 13th, 2000
              in Saxton's River, Vermont.  The major goal of the conference is to provide a
              comprehensive focus on recent advances in the knowledge of signaling mechanisms
              of immune cells.  An understanding of signal transduction pathways is central
              to an understanding of the molecular basis of various immune functions. 
              Widespread interest in immune cell signaling exists in universities, research
              institutes and biotechnology.  However, signal transduction at immunology
              meetings is generally covered as an adjunct subject, with little detailed
              coverage.  An annual meeting with an in-depth focus on the details of signal
              transduction in the immune system has been missing.  Signal Transduction in the
              Immune System" will fill this gap by covering a spectum of topics from
              tyrosine, serine and lipid kinases to adaptor proteins (SLP-76, LAT, FYB/SLAP,
              3BP-2 etc) to signaling in thymic differentiation and in response to cytokines.
               There will be three main objectives of this conference:

(1) To provide a
              critical and intensive overview of the current status of signaling proteins
              that control various immune functions.  The meeting will cover a full range of
              topics, from an in-depth analysis of specific signaling molecules and networks
              to the application of this knowledge to immunobiology.
(2) To bring together
              senior scientists and young investigators in a convivial atmosphere of
              presentations and informal discussions.  It is hoped that this environment will
              help develop the investigative skills and enthusiasm of students and young
              investigators by interacting with established investigators.
(3) To begin an
              annual forum for investigators interested in a comprehensive focus on signaling
              events in the immune system.


