Title       : Interagency Agreement to Support The National Imagery and Mapping Agency
               University Research Initiatives - NURI Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2000    
File        : a0003930

Award Number: 0003930
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Berg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : National Imagery and Mappi
	      4600 Sangamore Road
	      Bethesda, MD  208165003    /   -

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This action provides funds to be transferred from the National Science
              Foundation (NSF) to the National Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA).  These
              funds will be used by NIMA to help support a project on Spatio-Temportal
              Panning and Zooming that has been selected through a NIMA-administered
              competitive evaluation process as part of the NIMA University Research
              Initiative (NURI) program.  The project will be conducted by Kathleen Hornsby
              and colleagues at the University of Maine.

Spatio-temporal knowledge
              representation often requires changing from one level of detail to another so
              that users can carry out a desired task.  Although abstraction, or the opposite
              task of shifting to more detailed views, are routinely and intuitively carried
              out by humans, formalizing these shifts for integration into information system
              query languages offers many challenges.  Current geographic information systems
              (GIS), for example, allow for zooms based on geometric properties only. 
              Similarly, GIS users can change only their perspective of data by panning. 
              This project goes beyond graphic zooming or panning by considering another
              important perspective - time.  This project will develop a formal model to
              support changes in levels of temporal detail.  Using the identity-based
              approach, a set of temporal pan and zoom operators will be introduced.  These
              operators will be embedded into a spatial query language and ultimately
              integrated with the spatial pan and zoom operators to become a set of
              spatio-temporal operations.  The project will also examine the utility and
              mathematical properties of using lattices as an underlying structure for
              organizing views of objects at different levels of temporal detail. 
              

Temporal panning and zooming result in either simpler views that are easier
              to understand or more detailed views that uncover information that is otherwise
              unknown.  The research will advance the theory on temporal abstractions, which
              is important for users of very large geospatial databases.  The findings will
              be of particular relevance to information management of massive databases, and
              will be applicable to a variety of phenomena that involves time such as
              meteorological occurrences and population movements.

