Title       : Quantitative Analysis of the Semicircular Canals of Fossil Primates: A Test of
               Hypotheses About Locomotion in Extinct Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0003920

Award Number: 0003920
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195471             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan C. Walker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Humans are primates - animals with a long history of adaptation to life in
              trees. As the link between animals and their environment, locomotion is one of
              the most important animal behaviors.  Researchers have made hypotheses about
              the evolution of locomotion in primates by studying fossil limb bones.  These
              ideas have been based on biomechanical analyses and comparative anatomy. 
              

Here, the researchers intend to test hypotheses regarding this association
              by studying a part of primate anatomy that is intimately linked to locomotion
              but independent from the limbs.  Primate semicircular canals, which are part of
              the inner ear, are tuned to the demands of locomotion.  Their sensitivity,
              surrogates for which can be measured, is increased in fast moving species and
              decreased in slower ones.  In this research the investigators will study the
              details of the canals in skulls of modern species and a series of fossil
              primates by using the non-destructive method of ultra-high-resolution computed
              tomography.  This X-ray technique does not harm rare museum specimens of
              species that are now endangered in the wild nor irreplaceable fossil skulls. 
              The scientists shall make X-ray slices of skulls and reconstruct their details
              by computer.  These computer images then become the raw data for the study. 
              The details of the canals of modern species, in which the locomotion is known
              from field observations, will be used as a yardstick by which to infer the
              locomotion of the ancient ancestral and extinct species.  

