Title       : Collaborative Research: Three-Dimensional Magmatic Strain and Emplacement of
               Laccoliths and Bysmaliths in the Henry Mountains, Utah
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a0003463

Award Number: 0003463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79378              (Estimated)
Investigator: Basil Tikoff basil@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003574  Sven Morgan
0003463  Basil Tikoff
This project is designed to
              understand the three-dimensional fabrics and strain associated with magmatic
              forceful expansion by comparing simple natural and experimental examples. The
              project involves data collection using: 1) anisotropy of magnetic
              susceptibility (AMS), 2) shape preferred orientations (SPO), 3) computed X-ray
              tomography (X-ray CT), 4) field measurements on the magmatic fabrics and
              strains associated with sills, laccoliths, and bysmaliths in the Henry
              Mountains, Utah, and 5) lab measurements on particles within artificial flows.
              The Henry Mountains intrusives are Oliogocene - Miocene age and intruded the
              upper crust of the Colorado Plateau, which is a late Paleozoic and Mesozoic
              section of flat-lying sandstones and shales.

The goal is to relate magmatic
              fabrics to the displacement of the wallrocks caused by magmatic intrusion
              (inflation), and the intrusives in the Henry Mountains provide the best
              opportunity to understand this fundamental process. The floors, walls,
              interiors, and roofs of these intrusions are all very well exposed in the
              desert plateau of southern Utah. These plutons have raised the overburden by
              either bending the overburden or faulting the overburden immediately above the
              intrusion. The shapes of the intrusions represent a complete gradation between
              sills and laccoliths. By documenting the magmatic fabric in these bodies, the
              temporal fabric development of the intrusions is being interpreted and related
              to steps in the evolution of flow in the physical models.

The boundary
              conditions of intrusion are well understood: laccoliths, bysmaliths, and sills
              intruded into the undeformed, horizontal strata of the Colorado Plateau. The
              strata act as markers to record the translation, rotation, and internal strain
              caused by magma intrusion. Moreover, the plutons intruded into a part of the
              Colorado plateau that has not experienced regional deformation. This setting
              precludes tectonic forces being involved with emplacement and allows an
              interpretation that unambiguously describes fabrics in terms of magmatic
              processes.

The project involves a detailed field study to document the
              foliation and lineation within these intrusions.  In addition, the
              three-dimensional SPO of the phenocrysts is being recorded and the intrusions
              are being sampled for AMS. The AMS technique will be corroborated by X-ray CT
              techniques, which will allow the documentation of the orientation and spatial
              distribution of magnetite on the same samples.  

The field studies are being
              conducted in tandem with physical experiments of non-uniform flows.  These
              intrusives are the perfect examples to be modeled since their shapes are simple
              and known, and the low crystal content of the magmas is well constrained. The
              flows that are being modeled include decelerating flow and cylindrical flow,
              which provide a first-order approximation of magma intruding a laccolith and a
              bysmalith, respectively. Passive, neutrally-buoyant markers are being placed in
              these experiments in order to obtain quantitative strain associated with
              various amounts of fluid flow into a chamber. The results are being compared
              with the fabrics from the Henry Mountains intrusives, which were emplaced with
              varying amounts of magma. Using this variety of techniques, and the ideal
              setting provided by the Henry Mountains, the three-dimensional fabric
              associated with forceful emplacement of magmatic intrusions will be understood.
              

