Title       : Application of Stochastic Theories and Three-Dimensional Particle Tracking
               Velocity (3D-PTV) Experiments to Study Anomalous Dispersion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2001   
File        : a0003878

Award Number: 0003878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Cushman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003878
Cushman
Model developed to simulate in porous media often consider the
              dispersive flux of the contaminant species to be proportional to the
              concentration gradient via a constant, or time-dependent dispersion
              coefficient.  These models are a crude approximation for transport in porous
              media with evolving scales of heterogeneity on the scale of observation.  It is
              said that a porous medium behaves in a fickian fashion if the dispersion tensor
              is constant, it is quasi-fickian if the tensor is time dependent, and it is
              convolution fickian if the flux is a convolution.  More general forms of the
              dispersive flux are possible, and in any case, dispersive fluxes are called
              anomalous if there is no constant coefficient of proportionality between the
              dispersive flux and the gradient of concentration.

A main purpose of the
              proposed effect is to use existing models of the mixing process in conjunction
              with three-dimensional particle tracking velocity (3D-PTV) to study the
              accuracy of these theories for various types of heterogeneity.  In addition, it
              is proposed to extend these models by using the full intermediate scattering
              function and concepts from nonlinear dynamics such as finite-size Lyapunov
              exponents.  The specific experimental objectives are: (i) to construct a
              sequence of matched index, heterogeneous, porous-matrix fluid mixtures; (ii) to
              use 3D-PTV to reconstruct lagrangian particle trajectories; (iii) to use the
              trajectories to determine mean square displacements, velocity distributions
              velocity correlation (single and multiparticle) functions, classical dispersion
              tensors, self-part and full intermediate scattering functions, generalized
              wave-vector and frequency dependent dispersion tensors, and finite-size
              Lyapunov exponents; (iv) to investigate buoyancy driven flow of air in glycerol
              in matched index formations, both homogeneous and heterogeneous on the lab
              scale.  The specific theoretical objectives are: (i) to examine the adequacy of
              existing models of transport in heterogeneous media using experimental data: 
              (ii) to develop the relationship between the finite-size Lyapunov exponents and
              dispersion in heterogeneous media; (iii) to develop a theory of dispersion in
              porous media with evolving heterogeneity which relies upon multiparticle
              correlation functions, the full intermediate scattering function, and the
              finite-size Lyapunov exponents; and (iv) to test the new theory with data
              obtained experimentally.        

