Title       : International Conference on Functional Mapping of the Human Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0003981

Award Number: 0003981
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter T. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Institutes of Health
	      
	      Washington, DC  20014    /   -

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant will be used to support the annual meeting of the Organization for
              Human Brain Mapping (OHBM).  The mission of the OHBM is to promote the field of
              structural and functional brain mapping.  In particular, OHBM emphasizes
              non-invasive, image-based investigation of the functional organization of the
              human brain.  The principal activity of the OHBM is to organize an annual,
              international meeting.  For meetings inside the US, funding will be used for
              100 student stipends.  For international venues, funding will be used to pay
              the cost of invited US speakers.

The meetings are relevant to the Human
              Brain Project in that the presentations relate to the function and structure of
              the human brain, one-sixth of the scientific program is devoted to the latest
              methods for image acquisition, and the entire educational program is devoted
              exclusively to the methods used to study the brain, with a strong emphasis of
              image analysis and other aspects of nueroinformatics.

This research is
              funded in part by the National Science Foundation through its participation in
              the Human Brain Project, which is a Federal interagency research initiative,
              mandated by Congress as part of the "Decade of the Brain".


