Title       : U.S.-Japan Joint Seminar: Symbioses Between Plant and Microorganizms for
               Sustainable Agriculture and Bioremediation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2001    
File        : a0003729

Award Number: 0003729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Sadowsky sadowsky@soils.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 5921,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0003729
Sadowsky

This award supports the participation of American
              scientists in a U.S.-Japan seminar on symbioses between plant and
              microorganisms for sustainable agriculture and bioremediation, to be held in
              St. Paul, Minnesota from August 8-12, 2001.  The co-organizers are professors
              Michael Sadowsky of the University of Minnesota and Professor Yoshikatsu
              Murooka of Osaka University in Japan.   Biological nitrogen fixation continues
              to remain a top priority research area among scientists in the U.S. and abroad.
               Nitrogen fixation has been targeted for emphasis due to its enormous
              importance for agriculture, and its ecological significance an sustainability. 
              This is especially true of symbiotic nitrogen fixation, the area to be covered
              by the seminar.  Plant growth and productivity is limited by nitrogen
              availability.  Research efforts directed towards improving the efficiency of
              symbiotic nitrogen fixation and to extend nitrogen fixation to other major food
              crops, including rice, wheat, and corn, will have a major impact on food
              production and population growth.  In recent years significant advances have
              been made in our basic understanding of biological nitrogen fixation, extending
              far beyond potential crop improvement.   The topic areas to be discussed will
              include information concerning both the plant host and their bacterial
              counterparts in the symbiotic nitrogen fixing-process.  Areas to be discussed
              in detail are enzymology, molecular genetics, plant cell biology, whole plant
              physiology, molecular microbial ecology, plant genetics, and genomics.  

The
              Seminar will consist of the following topics:  1)  genomics of both symbiotic
              partners in plant-microbe interactions;  2) molecular communications in
              plant-microbe interactions; and  3) applications of symbioses for sustainable
              agriculture and bioremediation.  Seminar organizers have made a special effort
              to involve younger researchers and graduate students as both participants and
              observers.  The exchange of ideas and data with Japanese experts in this field
              will enable U.S. participants to advance their own work, and will set the stage
              for future collaborative projects.  Dissemination of information on the seminar
              will be available on the World Wide Web.

