Title       : Early Evolution of Ligaments and Shell Microstructure in the Bivalvia, with a
               Comprehensive, Polythetic, Phylogenetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0003431

Award Number: 0003431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Carter clams@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Early Evolution of Ligaments and Shell Microstructure in the
              Bivalvia, with a Comprehensive, Polythetic, Phylogenetic Analysis

Dr. Joseph
              G. Carter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

     Although
              ligaments and shell microstructures are important sources of phylogenetic
              information for the Bivalvia, these features remain poorly known for most early
              and middle Paleozoic genera and species.  The recent discovery of relict
              aragonitic ligaments and shell microstructures in Ordovician bivalves from
              Kentucky and in Silurian bivalves from Gotland suggests that these features may
              be traceable throughout the Phanerozoic.  The funded research will develop an
              extensive database of Paleozoic bivalvian ligament and shell microstructure,
              focusing on selected Paleozoic faunas representing localities in the United
              States, Arctic Canada, Sweden, Sardinia, the Czech Republic, China, Australia,
              New Zealand, and Antarctica.  These data will then be combined with other
              paleontological data and limited inferences of soft anatomy to provide a series
              of taxonomically comprehensive, rigorously phylogenetic analyses of Paleozoic
              bivalves based on parsimony, likelihood, and distance methods, tested against
              stratigraphic data, traditional evolutionary systematics, and modern molecular
              phylogenies.  The final phylogenetic synthesis will be used for a revised
              phylogenetic classification of Paleozoic bivalves.  In addition to clarifying
              the early evolution of ligaments and shell microstructures, this research will
              help resolve many outstanding questions of bivalve evolution, and will provide
              a firm foundation for future phylogenetic analyses of post-Paleozoic
              bivalves.

