Title       : Paleomagnetic Databases- Update 2001-2004
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0003374

Award Number: 0003374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil D. Opdyke drno@ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Opdyke 
EAR-0003374 
New Title:  "Update of Paleomagnetic Databases for the
              years  2001-2002".  

This award will fund continued maintainance and
              updating of numerous paleomagnetic databases.  The update of the paleomagnetic
              databases is in a transitional phase during this two-year period. Dr Michael
              McElhinny is retiring and has handed over this task to Dr Sergei Pisarevsky at
              the Tectonics Special Research Centre, University of Western Australia, Perth,
              Western Australia. Although Dr Pisarevsky is well-versed in databases,
              including their design and operation, Dr McElhinny has agreed to act in a
              supervisory capacity during this transitional phase. At the present time the
              databases are set up under either MS Access 97 or MS Access 2000. This will be
              continued for the present, but the possibility that a more modern database
              system could be used is being investigated under the new Geoinformatics and
              other database initiatives being  developed in the Geosciences. Until now the
              databases have been updated annually, but this will now be undertaken every six
              months. Updates will appear immediately on the web through the web-site at the
              Geological Survey of Norway as has been available for updates over the past
              three years. Indeed as far as the Global Paleomagnetic Database (GPMDB) is
              concerned this web-site is the way in which most users currently access the
              database. The following databases will be automatically updated: GPMDB - Global
              Paleomagnetic Database for directions and pole positions MAGST- World-wide
              Database for magnetostratigraphy. PSVRL - Paleosecular Variation from Lavas for
              the past 5 Myr.   The following databases rely heavily on researchers sending
              in their data, since the details are often not given in publications. SECVR -
              Secular Variation from Lake sediments and Holocene deposits. These data are
              never published in detail (only plots of Declination and Inclination versus
              Time are given. At present this database has as much data as can currently be
              obtained. Many researchers have not responded to requests for their data. TRANS
              - Reversals transitions database. Reversal transitions from lava sequences are
              published in the literature in full, lava flow by lava flow. However,
              transitions observed in sedimentary sequences are not given in detail horizon
              by horizon and again must be obtained from authors. This database is up to date
              as far as has been possible to get these sedimentary records in detail.   The
              following databases are compiled and updated by others: PINT - Global
              Paleointensity Database. This is compiled and updated by Dr Mireille Perrin at
              the University of Montpellier, France. ARCHEO - Archeomagnetic Database. This
              is compiled and updated  by Dr Don Tarling at the University of Southampton,
              UK.   


