Title       : Sedentism and Social Competition: Archaic and Formative Archaeology in Apizaco,
               Tlaxcala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2000   
File        : a0003961

Award Number: 0003961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31342              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Lesure lesure@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Richard Lesure will conduct one
              field season of archaeological and geomorphological survey in the Mexican state
              of Tlaxcala which is located ca. 80 km. East of Mexico City. From an
              archaeological perspective, the region is famous because it acquired a
              sufficient degree of power and centralized social organization to resist Aztec
              imperialism and eventually allied itself with the Spanish conquistadors in the
              Aztec conquest. Thus the area bears testimony to the development of complex
              highly organized society. Dr. Lesure wishes to understand the early phases of
              this development and in the process gain insight into the factors which lead to
              a sedentary existence. Preliminary data suggest that a large prehistoric lake
              once existed in this region and because lakes can provide significant
              subsistence resources, it is necessary as a first step to reconstruct the past
              environment. Dr. Lesure and his colleagues will excavate or extract cores from
              relevant sediments for this purpose. The team will then survey for
              archaeological sites and select several for test excavation. The data thus
              collected should permit them to establish a solid cultural chronology for the
              region and also, through analysis of faunal and floral remains provide insight
              into subsistence activities.

Humans spent much of prehistory as nomadic
              hunter-gatherers, but during the last 10,000 years people across the globe have
              shifted to increasingly sedentary lives. Because this occurred independently in
              many different areas, scientists assume that it reflects a basic underlying
              process rather than historical happenstance and they wish to understand the
              underlying principles involved. For many years it was believed that sedentism
              was simply a consequence of the adoption of agriculture and sedentary lifeways
              and the emergence of food production seem often to have been closely related.
              However the relationship is not a simple one because preagricultural sedentism
              has been documented both archaeologically and historically. Two models have
              been proposed to explain the origins of sedentism and they invoke very
              different causal mechanisms. One is based on subsistence productivity and
              focuses on changing human-environmental relationships. The other envisions a
              process of social competition and argues that the process is at least fueled by
              competition for status among individuals and groups. Dr. Lesure believes that
              the two models would have clearly different signatures in the Tlaxcala region
              which thus offers an excellent research venue for such a study.

This project
              is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will also shed new light on the processes which led to the
              rise of complex society.

