Title       : Dissertation: Water Resource Management by the Ancient Maya of Yucatan, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a0003281

Award Number: 0003281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11964              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heather I. McKillop hmckill@1su.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Heather McKillop, Mr. Terance Winemiller will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will conduct archaeological survey,
              mapping, excavation, and surface collections at 22 Maya sites located
              throughout northern Yucatan, Mexico.  From the earliest ancient Maya occupation
              of the Yucatan Peninsula to the development of cities, the scarcity of surface
              water was a fundamental consideration in locational decisions.  Environmental
              conditions commonly cited as factors that limit dispersal of human populations
              and stimulate centralization, such as extreme aridity, are not characteristic
              of the region.  Several scholars have related the seasonality and scarcity of
              water with centralization and the rise of Maya civilization on the peninsula. 
              Mr. Winemiller constructs a spatial predictive tool using existing site
              reports, maps, satellite imagery, air photos, the latest geographical
              information systems technology, and locational statistics to test whether
              Wittfogel's hydraulic society model and Carneiro's circumscription model
              account for the appearance of centralized elite administrative centers in an
              environment where other models predict widely dispersed small-scale
              settlements.  
By design, the study takes advantage of a large body of
              published data pertaining to this research.  The project, a regional settlement
              pattern study, includes five operational goals:  collection of existing data
              housed in INAH regional offices; verification of spatial data recorded on
              existing site maps, and collecting GPS coordinates for principal architecture
              and water management features at 12 upper-ranked sites; intensive surveys of
              nine upper-ranked sites one from each of nine physiographic districts in the
              region including interpretation of air photos, satellite imagery, and
              geological, topographical, and hydrological maps, and GPS site mapping, and
              develop intrasite resource access and usage models; survey and GPS mapping of
              nine third or fourth-ranked sites by physiographic district; test by ground
              survey whether parts of northern Yucatan having no documented settlements but
              evidence of potential water catchment areas contain cultural features such as
              the mounded remains of structures, structures, or water-management features.  
              If population growth precipitated the establishment of organizational
              hierarchies based on control, development, and distribution of water, this
              research should document recurrent patterns of clustered elite administrative
              hierarchies around natural sources of water and evidence of public works to
              divert or store water within the spatial core of cities.  Mr. Winemiller's
              study will ultimately provide academics with a substantive appraisal of
              water-resource management systems employed by the ancient Maya of northern
              Yucatan, Mexico.  It will also assist in training a promising young
              scientist.














	

