Title       : The Life Cycle Dynamics of Teleconnection Patterns
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2002   
File        : a0003039

Award Number: 0003039
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357219             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven Feldstein sbf@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sukyoung Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 1324,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The Pacific North Atlantic (PNA) and North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO)
              teleconnections are known to play a very important role in climate variability
              and perhaps climate change. Most studies have emphasized their time-averaged
              (i.e.,  monthly, interannual, and interdecadal) properties. However, the PIs
              recently found that both the PNA and NAO undergo full lifecycles of growth and
              decay within a time period on the order of two weeks, indicating that most PNA
              and NAO studies are examining data that is time-averaged over several life
              cycles.  The framework for the relationship between climate variability/change
              and these teleconnections can be established only with a knowledge of the very
              nature of the physical processes involved in these teleconnections. The goal of
              this grant is to identify physical processes governing the evolution of both
              the PNA and NAO. The approach adopted combines both diagnostic analyses of
              observational data and also an examination of data from idealized model
              calculations. Specific questions that will be addressed are (i) the mechanisms
              that account for the excitation of the PNA and NAO; (ii)  the dynamical
              processes that account for the saturation i.e. termination of growth of the PNA
              and NAO; (iii)  the role of low-frequency fluxes in the growth and decay of the
              PNA and NAO; and (iv) how the short timescale properties of the PNA and NAO are
              related to interannual variability.  The work is important because it will
              further basic understanding of the physical processes governing the life cycle
              of major teleconnection in the Northern Hemisphere. In addition, these results
              could impact the accuracy of forecasts on time scales of weeks to seasons.


