Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Structural Analysis of Histamine
               N-methyltransferase and Development of Specific Inhibitors for Clinical Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a0003815

Award Number: 0003815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiaodong Cheng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003815
Cheng

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Xiaodong Cheng of Emory University in Georgia and
              Professor Masahiro Nishibori of Okayama University in Japan.  The researchers
              will be undertaking a study of the structural analysis of histamine
              N-methyltransferase and the development of specific inhibitors for clinical
              use.  Histamine mediates a variety of physiologic and pathologic responses in
              different tissues and cells.  In addition to being an important chemical
              mediator of inflammation, histamine is also involved in neurotransmission.  In
              the central nervous system, histamine signaling is terminated by methylation
              via N.-methyltransferase (HNMT) which converts histamine to methylhistamine. 
              The goal of the proposal is to design specific and potent inhibitors of HNMT to
              elevate the histamine level in the central nervous system.  The researchers
              will determine the ternary structures of human HNMT in complex with histamine
              (substrate) and known inhibitors.  These structures will illustrate (l) the
              interaction between the enzyme and histamine and the reason for it's restricted
              specificity and (2) the interactions between the enzyme and inhibitors, and the
              origins of potency and selectivity.  The combined knowledge could lead to
              development of more potent and selective inhibitors. 

The project brings
              together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
              research capabilities. Since Alzheimer's disease is associated with a decrease
              of the histamine level in the brain, the results of the research could have a
              potential therapeutic value for treatment of Alzheimer's disease. This research
              advances international human resources through the participation of postdocs. 
              Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our
              base of basic knowledge and promote international understanding and
              cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of the research in
              scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific meetings.

