Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Spatio-Temporal Variation in Plant Demography:
               Development and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  2001   
File        : a0003711

Award Number: 0003711
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal Caswell hcaswell@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003711
Caswell

This award supports a two-year collaborative research
              project between Dr. Hal Caswell of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute in
              Massachusetts and Professor Takenori Takada of Hokkaido Tokai University in
              Japan.  The researchers will undertake research on the spatio-temporal
              variation in plant demography: development and applications.  Environments vary
              in space and time, and among the central problems in ecology are the
              documentation, analysis, and understanding of the consequences of this
              variation.  Demographic models provide a powerful way to link data on
              environmental variation in individual rates of birth, survival, growth, and
              development to the resulting consequences for population growth.  This project
              will combine recent developments in such models with a unique long-term data
              set documenting both spatial and temporal variation in a population of
              Erythronium japonicum, a perennial forest understory herb in Japan.  They will
              use linear, nonlinear, and stochastic matrix population models to describe the
              population dynamics.  Extensions of life table response experiment (LTRE)
              analysis will be used to quantify the contribution of each stage in the life
              cycle to spatial and temporal variation in (i) population growth rate, (ii)
              equilibrium population density, and (iii) stochastic population growth rate. 
              The results will be the most complete analysis ever attempted of
              spatio-temporal variation in plant population dynamics.

The project brings
              together the efforts of two laboratories that have complementary expertise and
              research capabilities.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
              project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The researchers plan to publish results of
              their research in scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific
              meetings.

