Title       : Theoretical Studies of Protein Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  2003    
File        : a0003722

Award Number: 0003722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold A. Scheraga has5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Sheraga, Harold A.
MCB-0003722


	The intellectual goal of this project is
              not, primarily, to predict protein structure but, rather, to gain an
              understanding of how inter-residue interactions determine the three-dimensional
              structure of a globular protein (the protein folding problem).  For such an
              understanding, use is made of an ab initio approach, i.e. one based solely on
              the global optimization of a potential energy function (including the role of
              the solvent), without the use of secondary-structure predictions, homology
              modeling, threading, etc.  Such an approach requires both a reliable potential
              function and an efficient procedure for global optimization; one cannot
              implement one without the other.  Therefore, the specific aims are (i) to
              improve the potential function, (ii) to improve procedures for global
              optimization, and (iii) to apply them, first, to globular proteins of known
              structure and, then, to proteins of unknown structure in the CASP-like blind
              tests.  

	The potential function is being improved by ab initio calculations
              plus refinement by the same global optimization procedure that was used for ab
              initio predictions of crystal structures (an analog of the protein folding
              problem).  

	The multiple-minima problem (due to the existence of numerous
              local minima in the multidimensional potential energy surface) is being
              surmounted by a newly-developed hierarchical method, which incorporates (among
              other procedures) a united-residue (UNRES) description of the polypeptide
              chain, a Conformational Space Annealing (CSA) method, and the
              Monte-Carlo-plus-energy minimization (MCM) method and its descendant [the
              Conformation-Family Monte Carlo (CFMC) method]; this hierarchical method for
              global optimization was very successful in the CASP3 blind test, and is being
              significantly improved for later CASP-like blind tests.

	With the PI's own
              PC-Linux cluster, and considerable allocated time on both the NT clusters of
              the Cornell Theory Center and the supercomputer at the San Diego Supercomputer
              Center, sufficient access is available to the necessary resources to carry out
              this project.

	The proposed theoretical approach will provide a basic
              understanding of the conformational and folding properties of proteins, and
              will provide training, not only for the two research associates carrying out
              this research, but also for several postdocs and graduate students working
              together with these research associates.




