Title       : Systems Dynamics of Detention/Retention in Ponds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0003408

Award Number: 0003408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Torgersen thomas.torgersen@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred L. Ogden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pieter T. Visscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0003408
Torgersen

Small ponds are traditional for control of stormwater and
              chemical runoff.  However, 'events' has been observed that result in
              significant internal loading, hyper-eutrophication and export of nutrients and
              contaminants from the ponds.  We hypothesize that ordinary bacterial processes
              within the sediments/benthic-boundary-layer coupled with aperiodic
              shallow-pond-specific processes are responsible for this internal loading and
              downstream contamination.  Thus, the coupled interactions of physics chemistry
              and biology in detention/retention ponds control the state of the pond more
              than any individual processes.  This internal loading and coupled dynamics of
              ponds significantly alters the application of ponds in environmental
              engineering.
We will test hypotheses for internal loading 'events' in ponds
              with continuous-recording instruments (WEB-addressable) and measure the dynamic
              responses of ponds to internal loading 'events'  (rainfall, spring, accidents,
              etc.) We will observe and quantify significant bulk processes involved in the
              removal of nutrients and contaminants from retention ponds as well as the
              processes that regenerate/release nutrients and  metals.  With monitored pond 
              response, coupled with direct sampling and wet chemical analyses, we will
              define a coupled dynamic pond model.
We will develop a loading history model
              of ponds building upon CASC2D as a function of land use to predict when the
              critical lifetime of a pond has been reached and remediation is required. 
              Development of the 1) pond-loading model and 2) pond dynamics model will
              contribute to the appropriate use and application of ponds as
              detention/retention devices in the environment.  We will develop the
              web-addressable monitoring equipment with the possibility of creating an
              Instrumented  Environmental Systems Laboratory for use in undergraduate
              teaching, honors theses and extensions to high school..  
The pond loading and
              pond dynamics models developed from this study of two ponds can be tested with
              simplified studies in other ponds. Continuing projects will evaluate pond
              dynamics across a variety of climatic zones and land use types.  The ultimate
              product will be a database and models that will significantly improve pond
              design and management.

