Title       : Upgrading of the Scanning Electron Microscope/X-Ray Microanalysis Facility at
               Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0003529

Award Number: 0003529
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277865             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Olsen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dee Breger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark H. Anders  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrico Bonatti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond N. Sambrotto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Fairbanks  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0003529
Olsen

This grant provides 70% support of the costs of acquiring a
              modern software-based scanning electron microscope (SEM), energy-dispersive
              X-ray microanalyzer (EDX), and new sample preparation equipment for
              Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory to replace the aging analogue units jointly
              funded by NSF and ONR in 1983-1984.  The combined remaining 30% is contributed
              by Lamont, Columbia University, and the American Museum of Natural History. 
              The eight Principal Investigators, led by P. Olsen of Lamont and including the
              Facility Manager (D. Breger), represent a range of multidisciplinary users from
              the three participating institutions.  In addition to providing traditional
              high vacuum/high voltage imaging and analysis of conductive dry samples, the
              new system will allow low vacuum and low voltage operation, imaging of hydrated
              and uncoated samples, and X-ray mapping. While primarily dedicated to the earth
              sciences, the reinvigorated Facility will follow the successful open approach
              of the current Facility, which is available to academic users from any
              discipline or institution.

The new system will directly benefit numerous
              current and future research programs of a large number of scientists as well as
              the education and training of students in the earth sciences, materials
              sciences, engineering, and other fields.  This variety of use will have
              far-ranging impact for advancing knowledge in a number of intended and
              unforeseen directions and promote interdisciplinary and inter-institutional
              collaborations.  Formal academic coursework utilizing this Facility will be
              developed, including online. Public outreach and K-12 school programs will
              continue to expand current activities.  The new instrumentation and equipment
              will be housed in Lamont's existing Electron Optics Laboratory complex under
              continued management by Breger.  This complex has been dedicated to electron
              microscopy since 1969 and is optimized for the purpose.  Support for this grant
              is shared by the Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program
              (EAR/IF), the Division of Ocean Sciences' Oceanographic Instrumentation and
              Technical Service Program (OCE/ITS) and the Marine Geology and Geophysics
              Program (OCE/MGG).

***

