Title       : Experimental Investigation of the Rheology of Eclogite and Its Constituent
               Minerals at High Pressure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0003631

Award Number: 0003631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry W. Green HGREEN@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Krassimir N. Bozhilov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Green, Harry W.

EAR-0003631 

Eclogite is the densest normal rock exposed
              at the surface of Earth, typically consisting of approximately equal amounts of
              garnet and omphacite, +/- small amounts of quartz, kyanite, zoisite, and/or
              amphibole. Eclogite forms from high-pressure, high-temperature metamorphism of
              rocks of basaltic composition. This transformation may contribute to the
              subduction of oceanic crust to great depth, may affect the distribution of
              intermediate-focus earthquakes, and has been suggested to produce a strong
              layer that may delaminate from the rest of the lithosphere. The investigators
              propose a detailed experimental study of the rheology of eclogite and its
              constituent minerals. They presented preliminary results acquired with their
              unique, 5 GPa, deformation apparatus showing that it is now technically
              possible to acquire high-quality data at the pressures required for such
              studies (2-4 GPa). These preliminary results show that eclogite has a strength
              comparable to harzburgite, the rock type located immediately below the oceanic
              crust; this equality is achieved because the great strength of polycrystalline
              silicate garnet is compensated by the weakness of omphacite. The extraordinary
              strength of polycrystalline silicate garnet supports previous suggestions that
              the lower portion of the mantle transition zone (~500-700 km) may be a layer of
              enhanced viscosity. 



        Toward a better understanding of deep
              subduction processes, the investigators plan to build on their preliminary
              results with a three-year expanded study of the rheology of eclogite and its
              constituent minerals at pressures of 2-4 GPa to map out in detail their flow
              laws, deformation mechanisms and microstructural characteristics. They will:
              (a) Elaborate the rheology of 50-50 eclogite over a larger domain of
              temperature and strain rate at 3 GPa and selected experiments at P = 2.0-4.0
              GPa; (b) perform analogous experiments on the monomineralic omphacite and
              garnet end members to determine their flow parameters;(c) conduct comparable
              experiments and equivalent analysis of specimens with H2O added; and (d) if
              time permits, they will synthesize majoritic garnet in our multianvil apparatus
              and conduct qualitative deformation experiments within the majorite stability
              field using short cylindrical specimens of majoritic and pyropic garnets, one
              on top of the other, which will determine the relative strengths of these two
              phases. 


