Title       : Structure and Thermoelastic Properties of Al- and Fe- Bearing High Pressure
               Silicate Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0003456

Award Number: 0003456
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Bukowinski markb@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bukowinski
EAR-0003456

Although the gross outlines of the mineral
              composition of the Earth's mantle are reasonably well known, geophysics remains
              unable to interpret seismic shear properties and tomographic maps of lateral
              heterogeneity in the lower mantle and transition zone with much confidence. 
              Laboratory measurements of elastic wave velocities are still confined to
              pressures corresponding to the upper mantle.  In addition, little is known
              about the effects of Al and Ca on the properties of (Mg,Fe)SiO3-perovskite,
              likely the dominant component of the lower mantle.  Recent experiments indicate
              that a small amounts of Al in silicate perovskite significantly enhances its
              compressibility, and hence forces a re-examination of compositional models that
              ignore Al altogether, or assume that it has little effect on the elasticity of
              silicates.  The effect of Al is known to be sensitive to the concurrent
              presence of Fe3+, but the mechanism is not fully understood.  The role of Al
              and Ca in stabilizing garnets below the 660 km discontinuity also needs to be
              better understood.  Even less is known about the mineralogy of the D'' zone,
              whose properties gain in complexity with every new seismic examination. We
              propose to develop a model of silicate minerals that will allow an accurate
              examination of elastic properties by combining low pressure data with density
              functional theory.  This semi-empirical model will be based on the
              Variationally Induced Breathing (VIB) theory of bonding in "ionic" materials. 
              In addition to the proven density-functional energy, the new model will
              incorporate parametric covalent contributions, which will compete with
              inter-ionic charge transfer in response to electronegativity equalization.  The
              parameters will be constrained with low pressure data on elastic velocities and
              vibrational spectroscopy.  Preliminary investigations show this to be a very
              promising approach.  The unique strength of the method lies in its high
              efficiency relative to fully first-principles approaches.  Furthermore, the
              method promises to effectively bootstrap high quality low pressure elasiticity
              data into deep Earth conditions, thus greatly enhancing their utility.  It will
              thus be possible to efficiently search for mineral structures and to examine
              their dependence on various geophysical conditions. The fully developed model
              will be used to generate phonon spectra, elastic constants and equations of
              state.  It will also be used to examine the effects of coupled Al and Fe3+
              substitution into (Mg,Fe)SiO3 perovskites. This will allow the generation of
              seismic velocities for candidate lower mantle mineral assemblages, and an
              examination of how they are affected by crystal structure and the presence of
              relatively low abundance components like Al, Ca and Fe3+.  An attempt will also
              be made to evaluate the temperature dependence of these properties.  The
              minerals to be investigated include silicate perovskites, garnets, various SiO2
              phases, and other minerals composed of MgO, SiO2, CaO, Al2O3, and FeO that may
              be present at lower mantle and D'' zone conditions.  

