Title       : Dissertation: Landscape Learning in the Late Glacial Recolonization of
               Northwestern Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2000  
File        : a0003709

Award Number: 0003709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Kuhn skuhn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              With the support of Dr. Steven Kuhn, Ms. Marcy Rockman will collect and
analyze
              data for her doctoral dissertation.  Using the example of the
resettlement of
              northwestern Europe at the end of the last Ice Age, she
will study how humans
              come to know and use natural resources when they
can only learn about them
              from the landscape itself.  During the last
Ice Age, which dates to
              approximately 20,000 to 14,000 years ago, the
ice sheets reached almost to the
              location of present-day London and
human populations were concentrated in
              southwestern France and in the
central Rhine valley.  By the time the ice
              retreated, the region from
the Paris Basin northward through the British Isles
              had been abandoned
for at least 6,000 years.  The first humans to re- enter
              this area had
to learn the locations and limitations of the region's natural
              resources
anew, using only their knowledge of landscape from which they had
              come
and their own experiences in the unfamiliar environment.  While
              such
colonizations with limited information have taken place many
              times
throughout human history, the actual process by which humans learn a
              new
landscape is not yet well understood.  Ms. Rockman's research
              will
develop a means of studying this process and focus closely on the
              very
beginnings of the modern human occupation of northwestern Europe.

In
              this study, the landscape learning process will be studied from
              the
perspective of human discovery and early use of outcrops of chert,
              a
fine-grained rock commonly used to make stone tools in prehistory. 
              Ms.
Rockman will collect published stone tool sourcing, radiocarbon date,
and
              other artifact assemblage information from sites dating between
approximately
              14,000 and 9,500 years ago from England, northern France,
and eastern Belgium.
               Selected extant stone tool collections
representing this full time range will
              be studied in regard to the range
of rock and particularly chert types
              represented.  Using the stone tool
sourcing information as a guide to specific
              geological features and
areas, Ms. Rockman will take field measurements of the
              topography of the
chert sources. All this data will then be combined in
              geographic
information systems (GIS) analyses.  Final interpretations will be
              made
from the characteristics and use patterns of individual chert
              sources
and comparison of the overall complexity of land use across the
              late
glacial and early post-glacial time periods.

This project will provide
              help to explain how humans learn to live in a new place.  It will
provide a
              base of both data and method against which archaeologists may
test other
              colonizations.  It will serve as an example of the potential
of combined
              archaeological, geological, and computer modeling research,
and it will
              contribute to the interdisciplinary training of a promising young
scientist.

