Title       : Multi-scale Modeling of Hybrid Fiber-reinforced Composite Overlays for
               Structural Repair and Retrofit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0201590

Award Number: 0201590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $138255             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Bolander jebolander@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The introduction of short discontinuous fibers into hydraulic cement composites
              can improve material toughness, strength, resistance to shrinkage cracking, and
              durability. The degree to which such improvements are achieved depends on many
              factors, including fiber type, fiber dosage, properties of the matrix,  phase,
              hygral and thermal loading  conditions and the spatial distribution of the
              constituents. Enhancing performance is paramount for repair and retrofit
              technologies that utilize such materials, including fiber-reinforced composite
              overlay systems. However, direct quantitative relationships between the basic
              material parameters and the desired composite performance measures are still
              lacking. One of the main complicating factors is the multi-scale,
              three-dimensional nature of cement composite materials, damage processes and
              transport mechanisms. The proposed research addresses the need for model-based
              simulation, experimentation and visualization procedures that tie the material
              parameters (including those of the fiber components) to performance measures
              defined at the structural scale. While the focus here is on overlay systems for
              structural repair and retro fit, the proposed methods have general application
              toward optimizing the use of fiber-reinforced cement composites within the
              civil works infrastructure. The project involves interactive, iterative
              comparisons between model-based simulation results and data from in-house
              experimentation. 

The numerical model development, including development of
              pre-and post-processing modules, and experimentation will be conducted. First,
              the basic numerical algorithms will be coded on locally available computer
              facilities. As the algorithms near maturity, large scale simulations will be
              performed using both in-house high-performance computing resources and
              resources at the National Partnership for Advanced Computational Infrastructure
              (NPACI) based at the San Diego Supercomputer Center.

