Title       : Probability and Statistics Problems Concerning DNA Sequence and Genome Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0201037

Award Number: 0201037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1962122            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Durrett rtd1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rasmus Nielsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles F. Aquadro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research supported by this grant will focus on mathematical and statistical
              analyses of genome rearrangements and the interaction of natural selection and
              spatial population structure in shaping genome diversity. Statistical methods
              will be developed to study the evolution of DNA sequences due to large scale
              processes: inversions within chromosomes, reciprocal translocations between
              chromosomes, transpositions that move genes, chromosome fissions and fusions,
              and duplication of whole genomes. Major goals are to obtain statistical
              estimates of the number of events with associated measurements of uncertainty,
              test hypotheses concerning for example, constancy of mutation rates among
              lineages, and to compare the likelihood of various genome duplication scenarios
              in Arabidopsis thaliana, maize, and other organisms. Mathematical results and
              statistical techniques will also be developed to distinguish the causes of
              observed levels and patterns of DNA sequence variation across genomes,
              concentrating on the effects of the fixation of advantageous mutations
              ("selective sweeps") and of spatial population structure. Statistical work will
              include the development of composite likelihood methods for data from large
              genomic regions for which full likelihood or Bayesian methods are not
              tractable. 

Research supported by this grant will focus on quantitative
              studies of variation in genomes within and between organisms. Two scales are
              considered. The first is the evolution of genomes due to large-scale processes
              which rearrange gene order on chromosomes or exchange genetic material between
              them. An understanding of the rates and sizes of these changes will be
              important for improving comparative maps between species. These maps which, for
              example, identify the mouse homologues of human genes or give the relative
              order of genes in cattle and sheep are important in medicine and agriculture. A
              second scale is the level of DNA variation observed within species.
              Mathematical and statistical studies will focus on distinguishing the effects
              of adaptation (natural selection) and spatial (geographical) population
              structure on shaping patterns observed in DNA sequence data from humans and
              other organisms. These results will provide insights into how organisms respond
              genetically to novel environments and challenges (including pathogens and
              environmental stress), and can help identify those genes important in that
              adaptation. These approaches will be important for understanding the enormous
              genome diversity detected in humans and most other organisms. An important
              component of the proposed activities is the training of researchers at the
              interface between biology and mathematics. This grant is made under the Joint
              DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical
              Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of
              General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health. 

