Title       : Mathematical Modules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0201077

Award Number: 0201077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Stark lsstark@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judi Sasser-Watkins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : City Coll of San Francisco
	      33 Gough Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941031214    415/239-3000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Today's industry garment manufacturing employees are seriously deficient in the
              needed math skills for quality control inspection, costing, data analysis,
              pattern-making, pattern grading, calculating piece work payments, and many
              other processes. The educational level of math skills of workers is not
              sufficient to carry out the tasks. Partly this is due to an immigrant work
              force and partly due to the misperception that the apparel industry is
              "fashion" rather than technically oriented. The lack of these skills leads to
              ineffective work processes because of repeated operations and lack of quality
              measures. This project develops, applies, and assesses mathematical curriculum
              modules as applied in manufacturing; specifically apparel manufacturing.  While
              the development of such curricula is not new, math concepts are  being created
              for an industrial setting where such a direct application is strongly needed.
              

A Teaching Factory allows educators to test theoretical materials and
              disseminate these materials to students in the apparel production program. This
              project uses educational resources to solve industrial problems at a core
              level. The success of the technical assistance, train-the-trainer, supervisory
              training, and modular training programs are founded in an understanding of and
              commitment to workplace and workforce development. 

The math modules
              developed are implemented in credit classes (apparel production, pattern
              making, CAD/CAM), at nearby community college and university classes (fashion
              merchandising, apparel technology), and in some non-credit classes
              (introduction to manufacturing, time study, supervisory training) held at the
              Teaching Factory.

