Title       : Large-Scale Influences on Tropical Cyclogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0201752

Award Number: 0201752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sumant Nigam                            
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406690             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Molinari molinari@atmos.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to study tropical cyclongenesis and, in
              particular, what roles different environmental flows play in it.  Three
              research avenues will be pursued.  The first one is to examine tropical
              cyclogenesis in the eastern Pacific using data from the East Pacific
              Investigation of Climate Processes (EPIC) experiment in which the PI actively
              participated and the Outgoing Long-wave Radiation (OLR) data from NOAA.  The
              focus will be the relationship between the intertropical convergence zone
              (ITCZ) and easterly waves before tropical cyclones form.  For the second
              avenue, the PI will attempt to reconcile two paradigms of tropical cyclogenesis
              in the western Pacific and Gulf of Mexico, namely, the spin-up of vortices in
              the monsoon trough versus easterly waves interacting with the Madden Julian
              Oscillation (MJO) as pre-cursors to cyclogenesis.  The working hypothesis is
              that tropical cyclogenesis often occurs under the following circumstances: 1)
              an active MJO producing a strong monsoon trough with westerlies to its south
              and 2) upstream waves reach the active MJO, grow in amplitude, and are
              ultimately the locus of depression formation.  In this way, the MJO, monsoon
              trough, and upstream waves all participate and interact in cyclone formation. 
              The third avenue is to conduct numerical simulations using shallow water and
              barotropic models to test the working hypothesis, using both idealized
              background states and those extracted from observational data with MJO
              signals.

Tropical cyclogenesis remains one of the most challenging tasks in
              weather prediction.  Increasing the understanding of how environmental flows
              affect genesis is important both from the prediction and modeling perspectives.
               The planned research has the potential of shedding some light in this area and
              the research will provide good opportunities for graduate studies.
