Title       : Problems in Quantum and Classical Statistical Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0201566

Award Number: 0201566
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132199             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Kennedy tgk@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ---------------------------------
PI: Tom Kennedy, University of Arizona
DMS
              0201566

Abstract:

The first part of the project concerns self-avoiding
              walks in two 
dimensions and their relation to Schramm's stochastic Loewner
              evolution 
process. Schramm's process is believed to describe the scaling
              limit of
a variety of two-dimensional models, including the self-avoiding
              walk.
The pivot algorithm provides a fast method for simulating
              
self-avoiding walks. Recently, the principal investigator has 
found a new
              implementation of this algorithm that is as much 
as eighty times faster in
              two dimensions.
This will be used to test both the conjectured conformal
              invariance of 
the self-avoiding walk and its equivalence with stochastic
              Loewner 
evolution. A version of the weakly self-avoiding walk in which the
              
penalty for self-intersections decays with the length of the loop 
produced
              by the self-intersection will be investigated by simulations and 
perturbative
              means. The second part of the project concerns 
excited states in quantum spin
              systems. Recent work by the principal 
investigator has developed a method for
              studying the dispersion
relation of one quasi-particle states and interface
              states in one dimension. 
The method is based on assuming a certain ansatz for
              the wave function 
of the states and then proving there is indeed an
              eigenstate of this
form by a contraction mapping argument.
This method will
              be used to study interface states in two dimensions and 
the excited states
              above these interface states. 

Self-avoiding walks are random walks which
              are not allowed to visit
the same place more than once. They provide a model
              for linear polymers 
in a dilute solution. The interest in this model is,
              however, much broader 
since it is one of the simplest models that exhibits
              critical phenomena and 
in two dimensions conformal invariance. Recently there
              has been 
an explosion of conjectures relating the self-avoiding walk and
              other 
two-dimensional models to a new two dimensional stochastic
process,
              called stochastic Loewner evolution, introduced by Schramm.
Part of the
              project will study many of these conjectures 
for the self-avoiding walk by
              Monte Carlo simulations and 
by perturbative methods. The simulations will be
              done with 
a recent implementation of the pivot algorithm by the principal
              investigator
that is much faster than previous implementations.
This fast
              algorithm will also be used to study versions of 
the self-avoiding walk that
              are important in physical chemistry.
Another part of the project is devoted to
              studying the low energy excitations
in a variety of quantum spin systems.
              These are models of the behavior
of the electron spins in crystals. At low
              temperatures the electron
spins tend to align. However, several domains may
              form within which 
the spins are aligned, but between which the spins point in
              
opposite directions. 
The interfaces between these domains will be studied
              by an 
approach which has proved very successful for studying 
one
              quasi-particle states. In particular, the nature of the excitations 
just
              above the interface states will be investigated. 




