Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Climate and Disturbance Variation
               on Post-Fire Regeneration of Madrean Pine-Oak Forests in Mexico's Sierra Madre
               Occidental
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0201807

Award Number: 0201807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas T. Veblen Thomas.Veblen@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,9278,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ecological effects of anthropogenic global climate change are of increasing
              concern for understanding and predicting climate driven vegetation change.
              Global circulation models exist that predict future climates and changes in
              coarse scale vegetation patterns. However, the efficacy of these models is
              limited by temporal and spatial scale problems and a poor understanding of how
              climate variation and human land use changes influence disturbance regimes and
              subsequent vegetation patterns. This doctoral dissertation research project
              will help to understand how annual to decadal scale climatic variation
              interacts with human influences on the landscape in north-central Mexico to
              effect changes in the fire regime and subsequently affect the regeneration
              success and species distributions of Madrean pine-oak ecosystems after fire.
              The specific objectives are: 1) to assess how climate variation and changes in
              human land use practices influence the fire regime in Madrean pine-oak
              ecosystems, 2) how climate variation and alterations to the fire regime
              interact to regulate seedling establishment and success, and 3) to test if
              ecosystem/community responses to climate and land use identified in other
              regions of North America are general ecological responses or are dependent on
              the life history traits of specific taxa. Standard tree-ring study techniques
              will be used to derive tree establishment dates, tree age frequencies, and
              reconstruct past fire regimes in a set of study sites that have been repeatedly
              disturbed by humans within a context of pronounced climatic variability. A
              combination of correlation analysis and regression analysis techniques will be
              used to identify temporal patterns of tree establishment at different spatial
              and temporal scales. The results of this study will be used to test the general
              hypothesis that seedling establishment in Madrean pine-oak ecosystems is
              related to climate variation and variations in the fire regime. Seedling
              establishment is predicted to occur during multi-annual to decadal periods of
              above average precipitation that follow widespread, biologically severe fires.
              Widespread fire years are predicted to occur during annual to multi-annual
              periods of below-average precipitation and above-average temperature. Humans
              are predicted to influence the occurrence and severity of fires by altering
              fuel quantity and continuity and serving as ignition sources. Ultimately, the
              site specific ecosystem/community responses to climate and land use variation
              identified in north-central Mexico will be compared with previous results from
              studies in other regions to test if these are general ecological responses, or
              if they are dependent on the life history traits of specific taxa.      

The
              study of how climate variation and human land use affect the fire regime and
              subsequent vegetation patterns has important consequences for predicting the
              ecological effects of global change. This study will provide basic information
              concerning how climate and human interactions with the fire regime affect the
              success of seedling establishment after fires in north-central Mexico. This
              research has broad ecological significance in that it will test previous
              hypotheses of climatic influences on fire, tree establishment, and tree
              mortality that were developed in other regions of North America with
              taxonomically different ecosystems under different precipitation and
              temperature trends. This study will also provide additional information to
              clarify the roles of climatic and human influences on vegetation change due to
              the climatic differences, and the differences in the timing of human migrations
              and subsequent land use practices throughout North America. Moreover, the
              differences in ecosystem characteristics between our sites in Mexico and other
              areas of North America will allow us to test whether the ecosystem responses to
              climate and land use changes identified in previous studies are general
              ecological responses or are if they dependent on the life history traits of
              specific taxa.   As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
              award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
              strong independent research career.


