Title       : Honeycomb and Re-entrant Periodic Architectures for Vibration Hazard Mitigation
               and Improved Performance of Structural Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0201371

Award Number: 0201371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301795             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panagiotis Tsopelas tsopelas@cua.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Massimo Ruzzene  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award will focus on the analysis of the dynamic behavior and wave
              propagation characteristics of cellular solids with deterministic periodic
              architecture.  The resulting periodic assembles generate frequency bands and
              directions where elastic waved do not propagate (stop bands) and the
              corresponding vibrations and sound radiation are substantially reduced.  The
              scalable geometry of deterministic periodic architectures allows for their
              application as innovative vibration control/hazard mitigation systems both to
              small-scale and large-scale structural systems.

Particular emphasis will be
              placed in the analysis of honeycombs with re-entrant architectures.  Their
              unique mechanical properties will be fully investigated emphasizing their
              potential for vibration hazard mitigation as well as impact energy absorption. 
              Efficient use of the intervening space will be also addressed for improving
              performance.

This award is a multidisciplinary and collaborative research
              effort, where analytical computational and experimental work will be
              interlaced.  The PIs will collaborate throughout the duration of the project in
              teaching common courses and in developing a new advanced course in Passive and
              Active Structural Control.  This team effort will foster both civil and
              mechanical engineering students' multidisciplinary background.  The concept and
              the results of this award will be progressively introduced in several courses
              of instruction in order to expose the students to innovative research ideas and
              their applications.  The student will be given hands-on experience that will
              contribute to the growth of their technical and professional skills.

