Title       : Integrative Models of Microorganism Motility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0201063

Award Number: 0201063
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1450005            (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa J. Fauci ljf@math.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Dillon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo Cortez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte K. Omoto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart F. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns the fluid dynamics and force-generating mechanisms of
              microorganisms, with applications ranging from dynein activation in a
              eucaryotic flagellum to the motility of pathogenic spirochetes. Computational
              models are developed that couple the internal molecular motors and elastic
              mechanisms of motile microorganisms with a viscous, incompressible fluid. A
              unified computational approach is adopted to model the internal axoneme
              mechanics of cilia and spermatozoa, the action of the internal periplasmic
              flagella of spirochetes, as well as mucociliary interactions. In addition to
              modeling the dynamics of a single organism, the collective hydrodynamic
              interactions of groups of organisms and their environment can be examined. The
              moving boundary problem posed by a flexible, swimming organism is very
              difficult to analyze, even when an organism's waveform is assumed to be known.
              In fact, the waveform of a microorganism is an emergent property of the coupled
              nonlinear system consisting of the organism's force-generating mechanisms, its
              passive elastic structure, and the external fluid dynamics. The investigators
              develop a mathematical model and a numerical method designed to study this
              coupled mechanical system. Modern methods in computational fluid dynamics are
              used to create a controlled environment where the measurement and visualization
              of locomotive effects can be made.

The motion of microorganisms in fluid is
              of fundamental importance in physiology. Human reproduction requires the
              successful journey of spermatozoa through both the male and female reproductive
              tracts. The robust locomotory ability of pathogenic spirochetes enable these
              bacteria to efficiently move through viscous fluids and mucosal surfaces. A
              multidisciplinary research team of mathematicians, computational scientists and
              experimental biologists coordinates their efforts to investigate the
              fundamental mechanics of cell motility in a number of systems. These systems
              include cilia and flagella, spirochetes (such as those that are the causative
              agents of Lyme disease and syphilis), bacterial biofilms and mucus-ciliary
              transport in the respiratory tract. A greater understanding of how the internal
              biochemistry and biophysical mechanisms of microorganisms are coupled to the
              fluid environment in which they move can have an impact on drug design for
              bacterial infection as well as infertility treatment. This project draws ideas
              from many disciplines such as fluid mechanics, scientific computing, cell
              biology, and numerical analysis. Our multidisciplinary approach enables
              significant progress in the understanding of microorganism motility.
              Furthermore, the algorithms and methods developed are useful in studying other
              biofluiddynamic problems and contribute to expertise in high performance
              computing. 

