Title       : Modeling evolution of quantitative traits with finite locus effects in
               structured populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0201173

Award Number: 0201173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $608180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith R. Miller miller@math.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew B. Hamilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Recent advances in quantitative genetics show that there is a distribution of
              locus effects on quantitative traits, with some loci (henceforth called QTLs)
              explaining a large proportion of the genotypic trait variance and others having
              minor but detectable effects on phenotype. For QTL results to be incorporated
              into existing theory, a crucial task is to develop models of quantitative trait
              variation that allow for a finite number of loci with finite effects. In this
              project, such models are developed and analyzed. Our theoretical work focuses
              on diffusion models, i.e. models in which both time and allele frequencies are
              continuous. The models developed are compared with previously-derived models,
              with the results of simulations, and with experimental data, with the aim of
              identifying models useful for predicting quantitative trait evolution in
              natural and agricultural populations. The results of the analysis and
              simulations are used to create statistical tests for the action of selection on
              quantitative traits in populations. 
	Quantitative traits are among the most
              conspicuous features of organisms, features that we immediately recognize.
              Examples abound, including the height of humans, the number of ears on a corn
              plant or the weight of piglets in a litter. The study of quantitative traits
              and their genetic basis is fundamental to our understanding of evolutionary
              biology as well as to applied genetics such as animal and plant breeding. Using
              recently developed technology, it is now possible to identify regions of the
              genome that contribute to quantitative traits. Such "QTL mapping" studies have
              revealed discrepancies between the data and classical theories intended to
              explain the contribution of individual genes to such traits. This project aims
              to extend our theoretical understanding of quantitative traits, and to use the
              theory developed to create practical statistical methods for analyzing
              quantitative trait data. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS
              Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This
              is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
              at the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General
              Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.
