Title       : U.S.-Czech Research on Down-Regulation of Cytokinin in Plants Through the
               N-Glucosyltransferase Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2002  
File        : a0201614

Award Number: 0201614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39190              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Auer Carol.Auer@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 5930,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Czech research project involves two teams led by Carol Auer of the
              University of Connecticut and her counterparts in Prague, Vaclav Motyka and
              Radomira Vandova, from the Institute of Experimental Botany, Czech Academy of
              Sciences.  Their collaboration features examination of a group of plant
              hormones called cytokinins which influence plant growth.  Plants regulate the
              level of active cytokinin molecules within tissues and cells to achieve normal
              vegetative and reproductive development.  In the complex process of cytokinin
              homeostasis, the regulatory mechanism is the reversible or irreversible
              conjugation of cytokinins to sugar molecules.  This US-Czech effort looks at
              irreversible conjugation that down-regulates active cytokinin levels in
              cells.

The goal is to biochemicaly characterize the enzyme
              N-glucosyltransferase (N-GT) so that we may understand its function in
              cytokinin homeostasis and plant development.  Radish and Arabidopsis are the
              primary experimental materials.  The Czech partners will define the biochemical
              properties and enzyme(s) of the regulatory pathway while isolation of mutants
              and eventually cloning of genes involved in N-GT will be conducted by the U.S.
              team members.   If successful, findings may be applicable in future efforts to
              manipulate plant growth and develop agricultural crops. 

This international
              project in plant hormone research fulfills the program objective of advancing
              scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied States and Central
              Europe to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas
              of strong mutual interest and competence. 
