Title       : Exploring Massive Gene Expression Data With A Novel Statistical Notion-Liquid
               Association
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0201005

Award Number: 0201005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $760000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ker-Chau Li kcli@stat.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Underlying most methods for analyzing gene expression is the key notion of
              profile similarity. Genes with similar profiles are likely to form structural
              complex or to participate in common cellular processes. Yet whether two genes
              are co-expressed or not is often affected by activities of other genes and
              sometimes a positive correlation can be turned into a negative one. In this
              research, Liquid association (LA) is introduced as a method to quantify changes
              in correlation. A preliminary study showed that LA can help identify
              functionally related genes that have no profile similarity. This development is
              harbored on three fronts: biological motivation, large scale computation, and
              statistical theory. The specific aims of the LA system include (1) to identify
              a small list of master expression genes- genes that have more expressional
              influence than others; (2) to help understand how genes regulate each other
              through important metabolic intermediates; (3) to analyze the co-expression
              pattern for genes associated with a known pathway; (4) to help the functional
              prediction of unknown genes; and (5) to provide an expression network through
              master genes. 
	Large scale gene expression profiling has become increasingly
              more popular in tumor research and many other biological areas. Microarrays
              enable the full genome mRNA measurement. They have been applied to monitor gene
              activities under various physiological or environmental conditions.
              Investigations on differential expression between normal and disease tissues or
              cell-lines have also led to the identification of genes with potential
              diagnostic and clinic values. The LA-system will help unearth the biological
              information hidden beneath many expression databases that are publicly
              accessible. The results will be available for free use by other academic
              researchers. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support
              Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This is a joint
              competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the
              National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General Medical
              Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.
