Title       : The Sixth Conference on Clifford Algebras and their Applications in Mathematical
               Physics, Tennessee Technogical University, May 20-26, 2002, Cookville,
               Tennessee
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0201303

Award Number: 0201303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafal F. Ablamowicz rablamowicz@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony J. Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DDMS-0201303
Rafal Ablamowicz and John Ryan

This award provides partial
              support for active research mathematicians and
scientists with limited means
              of support to attend in The 6th Conference on
Clifford Algebras and their
              Applications in Mathematical Physics to be held at
the Tennessee Technological
              University from May 20 through May 26, 2002, in
Cookeville, Tennessee. The
              award, together with other funding, will provide
travel support for some of
              the speakers and for some participants who do not
have funds available through
              other source, with priority given to graduate
students, recent Ph.D.'s,
              minorities and women. As part of the conference, a
Lecture Series on Clifford
              Algebras and Applications aimed at graduate students
and recent Ph.D.'s will
              be presented on May 18 and 19, 2002.

The 6th Conference will be sponsored by
              the National Science Foundation, the
American Mathematical Society, the
              International Society for Analysis, its
Applications and Computation (ISAAC),
              University of Arkansas, George Mason
University, and the Tennessee
              Technological University.  The organizers of the
conference look for
              interaction among mathematicians, scientists and engineers.
The conference
              will include the following speakers, five sessions, six 90 minute
lectures,
              and other activities:

Speakers: Christian Bar, Helga Baum, Carlos A.
              Berenstein, Michael Eastwood, Bertfried
Fauser, Alexander J. Hahn, Jacques
              Helmstetter, David Hestenes, Tadeusz Iwaniec,
Jan J. Koenderink, Bertram
              Kostant, Heinz Kruger, Anthony Lasenby, Shahn Majid,
Michael McCarthy, Marius
              Mitrea, Victor Nistor, Tao Qian, Lee Smolin, Joseph
Varilly, S.L. Woronowicz,
              Sijue Wu

Sessions:

- Clifford analysis (Dirac operators, Wavelets,
              non-linear transformations,
Harmonic analysis/Fourier analysis, Singular
              integral operators, Discrete
potential theory, Initial value and boundary
              value problems)

- Geometry (Geometric index theory, Conformal and
              noncommutative geometry,
Geometric integral transforms, Spin structures and
              Dirac operators,    Twistors,
tractors, and related topics, Invariant
              differential operators, Quaternionic
geometry)

- Mathematical structures
              (Hopf algebras and quantum groups, Category theory,
structural methods,
              Quadratic forms, Hermitian forms, Witt groups, Clifford
algebras over
              arbitrary fields, Lie algebras, spinor representations,
exceptional Lie
              algebras, super Lie algebras, Clifford algebras and their
generalizations,
              Infinite dimensional Clifford algebras and Clifford bundles)

- Physics
              (Perturbative renormalization and Hopf algebra antipodes, Spectral
triples and
              elementary particle physics, q-deformations and noncommutative
spacetime,
              Quantum Field Theory using Hopf algebras and other algebraic
techniques, Spin
              foams and quantum gravity, Quaternionic quantum mechanics and
quantum fields,
              Dirac equation in electron physics, Electrodynamics,
Non-associative
              structures, octonions, division algebras and their applications
in
              physics)

- Applications in computer science, robotics, engineering (Quantum
              computers,
error correction, algorithms, Robotics,  inverse kinematics, space
              control,
navigation, cybernetics, image processing and engineering, Neural
              networks)

Lectures on Clifford Algebras and Applications (May 18 and 19,
              2002):

Lecture 1: Introduction to Clifford algebras (Pertti
              Lounesto)
Lecture 2: Mathematical structure of Clifford algebras (Ian R.
              Porteous)
Lecture 3: Clifford analysis (John Ryan)
Lecture 4: Clifford
              algebras in mathematical physics (Heinz Kruger)
Lecture 5: Clifford algebras
              in engineering (Jon Selig)
Lecture 6: Clifford algebras in differential
              geometry (Tom Branson)

Additionally, poster session, round table discussion,
              and book exhibits are also
planned. The organizers expect to recruit two
              additional speakers.  Further
 information is available
              at
http://math.tntech.edu/rafal/cookeville/cookeville.html.

