Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Material Landscapes and the
               Consolidation of Agriculture: The Canoles Archaeological Survey Project(CASP),
               Valencia, Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0201977

Award Number: 0201977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Jochim jochim@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Michael A. Jochim, Ms Sarah McClure will collect data
              in eastern Spain for her doctoral dissertation.  She will conduct
              archaeological survey of the Canoles river valley in the Province of Valencia,
              Spain to identify changes in land use patterns during the transition from
              hunting and gathering to agricultural economies (8000-2500 BC).  Domestic
              plants (wheat, emmer and legumes) and animals (goats, sheep, pigs and cows)
              were introduced to the area by 5600 BC.  The remains of these domesticates are
              found in conjunction with the first ceramics of the region.  However, in stark
              contrast to other parts of the Mediterranean, the farmers of eastern Spain did
              not live in villages until over a millennium later.  The aggregation of people
              in villages indicates changes in their economies such as an intensification of
              agricultural practices and corresponding changes in social organization and
              cultural behavior. 

Current research in the Province of Valencia suggests
              that this reconstruction of the transition to farming may well be biased, since
              it is based largely on information from individual sites (caves and
              rockshelters).  Ms McClure will use a regional approach to characterize the
              timing and nature of the shift to village farming economies.  The primary aim
              of the study is to investigate the commonly held idea of a slow shift to
              intensified farming and to examine the social and ecological underpinnings of
              the transition.  The archaeological survey of the Canoles valley will elucidate
              the role available wild resources played in the transition to agriculture.  The
              Canoles valley is particularly suitable for this kind of analysis since it is a
              large valley connecting the Mediterranean coastal plain with the central
              plateau (Meseta) and contains a wealth of different ecological zones.  Land use
              patterns will indicate how people were using their landscape and how this
              changed with new forms of subsistence practices. 

The transition to
              agriculture was a major turning point in human and environmental history,
              setting the stage for the rise of civilizations and changing the relationship
              between humans and their environment.  In order to understand this transition,
              archaeologists must look to different regions of the world to identify
              fundamental similarities and differences in the timing, tempo, and impact of
              the cultural and organizational changes associated with the transition to food
              producing economies.  Ms McClure's research in eastern Spain will contribute to
              the understanding of this fundamental shift and will also assist in training a
              promising young scientist.

