Title       : Unitary Dual of Real Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0201944

Award Number: 0201944
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susana A. Salamanca-Riba ssalaman@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Salamanca-Riba
   
Dr. Salamanca Riba intends to investigate various
              problems in the representation theory of Lie groups. The first problem is the
              question of classifying all genuine unitary representations of the metaplectic
              group. Jeff Adams and Dan Barbasch have obtained a correspondence between these
              representations and a set of unitary representations of certain inner forms of
              the metaplectic group. The PI plans to study this correspondence and see if
              these representations go to interesting Zuckerman functor modules under this
              map. In addition, the PI will also work on a program already in progress in
              collaboration with David Vogan.  The problem they want to solve is the
              following conjecture: There is a bijection between the set of unitary
              representations of a Lie group G, whose lowest K type is associated to a fixed
              parameter, and the set of unitary representations of a special subgroup with
              lowest K types associated to the same parameter.
Lie groups have connections
              in many areas of applied Mathematics like 
Materials Science, Quantum Field
              Theory, Particle Physics, Control 
Theory and Robotics and Biology. For
              example, Control Theory and 
Robotics is related to some representations of
              certain compact Lie 
groups. In addition, Lie groups and their representations
              have also 
connections with other areas of pure Mathematics as well, like
              
Differential Equations, Harmonic Analysis, Topology, Geometry and 
Ergodic
              Theory. For example, the study of problems in Analysis such as 
the behavior
              of solutions of differential equations, partial 
differential equations,
              integral equations, etc. leads naturally to 
formulating these problems not
              only in Euclidean space, but on 
differentiable manifolds. Many examples of
              these manifolds are classical 
Lie groups of matrices. This is particularly
              true of problems of this 
type arising in classical mechanics and physics and
              in modern problems 
of Lie groups and homogeneous spaces. Modern Analysis,
              when it goes 
beyond local results, becomes analysis on differentiable
              manifolds and Lie groups.,

