Title       : 2nd International Summer School on Biocomplexity, July 14-21, 2002, in Hanover,
               New Hampshire
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0201760

Award Number: 0201760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Reynaldo Patino                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Metin Akay   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1155,9178,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The biological sciences have become more quantitative and information-driven
              since the emergence of computational and mathematical tools have facilitated
              collection and analysis of vast amounts of biological data. Complexity analysis
              of biological systems provides knowledge for the organization, management and
              mining of biological data by using advanced computational tools. The biological
              data are inherently complex and non-uniform and collected at multiple temporal
              and spatial scales. The investigations of complex biological systems and
              processes require an extensive collaboration between biologists,
              mathematicians, computer scientists and engineers to improve our understanding
              of biological processes from genes to systems. 
The objectives of this summer
              school are to expose undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral biological
              science and bioengineering students to relatively new mathematical and
              computational approaches and challenges in integrative biology;  knowledge
              discovery from biological data mining;  new directions in computational
              biology,  bioinformatics and molecular engineering research; and to facilitate
              rapid diffusion of these mathematical and computational tools in the biological
              sciences. These methods will be helpful, also, to both students and
              post-doctoral fellows in computer science and mathematics who are interested in
              pursuing research in biology and bioengineering, since the summer school
              provides exceptional insights into fundamental challenges in biology.
The
              summer school uses lectures, oriented toward biological science students, by
              expert faculty, and will focus on biological data mining and knowledge
              discovery that can be used to understand highly interconnected and complex
              biological systems. In addition to these lectures, the summer school will
              employ 3 two-hour panel discussions, with active participation of
              undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral fellows, focused on future
              developments in computational biology, bioinformatics and molecular engineering
              and science. In addition, students will present the results of their projects
              in a culminating poster session, which will facilitate discussion of both the
              biology and computational approaches.
The summer school will stimulate further
              interdisciplinary research and collaborations among engineers, mathematicians,
              computer scientists, and medical researchers, and will help in identifying new,
              challenging directions in complex biological science and bioengineering
              research. 

