Title       : Many-body Scattering and Symmetric Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0201092

Award Number: 0201092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213915             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras Vasy andras@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Andras Vasy, MIT
DMS-0201092


Abstract:

The object of the proposed
              research is the geometric study of scattering theory. This encompasses such
              apparently distant areas as many-body scattering and the Laplacian on symmetric
              spaces. Powerful geometric techniques recently adapted from the study of
              hyperbolic
equations have already played a major role in the detailed study of
              many-body scattering, which describes how quantum particles interact, e.g. in
              an accelerator. The proposed project will employ these microlocal techniques to
              explore new problems in many-body scattering, and to bring
insights to
              analysis on symmetric spaces. These problems include the detailed study of the
              behavior of particles at threshold energies, which are energy levels where new
              configurations of particles become accessible. For many chemical phenomena
              Planck's constant, h, may be considered small, motivating the study of
              semiclassical many-body phenomena. A particular example is the spectral shift
              function, which has been the subject of an ongoing joint project of the PI with
              Xue Ping Wang. Another area of proposed research, joint with Gunther Uhlmann,
              is finite energy inverse many-body scattering, i.e. whether one can determine
              the interaction between particles from the scattering matrices, which are
              objects describing the outcome of scattering experiments. Perhaps surprisingly,
              there are very algebraic objects which are analogous to many-body problems,
              namely higher rank symmetric spaces. The structure
of so-called flats in these
              spaces is very similar to the structure of the configuration space in many-body
              scattering, with the walls of the Weyl chambers playing the role of collision
              planes. In a joint project, Rafe Mazzeo and the PI plan to use the constructive
              techniques from many-body
scattering to obtain the full asymptotic behavior of
              various analytic objects on these spaces, showing that many of the phenomena
              observed there have their counterparts in much greater generality.

Indeed,
              many people are familiar with the following two descriptions of the propagation
              of light. First, in geometric optics, light propagates in straight lines,
              reflecting from surfaces according to Snell's law. That is, the angles of
              incidence and of reflection are the same, as if light
consisted of little
              billiard balls. Second, light can be described by the wave equation, its
              propagation thus being similar to that of water waves.  There is a close
              relationship between these two viewpoints. Namely, for solutions of the wave
              equation, the propagation of sharp signals (or `singularities' of signals),
              which are the signals used to carry information, is precisely described by the
              simpler geometric optics picture. There is a similar correspondence between
              classical and quantum mechanics in many-particle interactions. Namely, for
              quantum particles the
evolution of wave functions `at infinity' is almost
              described by the classical picture, as was proved previously by the PI. The
              only divergence between the classical and the quantum pictures is the emergence
              of bound states. For example, for a system consisting of two protons and
              two
electrons, one of the protons and one of the electrons can form a hydrogen
              atom -- which may in turn break up if an electron with high energy hits it. In
              this proposal the PI will in part use these results, and related tools, for
              further investigation of many-body phenomena, such as examining the
              quantum-classical correspondence more precisely for small Planck's constant,
              and analyzing whether one can determine the interactions between particles from
              the result of a scattering experiment, and in part to extend such results to
              more geometric settings. These results are thus related to important questions
              in physics and chemistry. 




