Title       : Microlensing Theory: Applications to Stellar and Galactic Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0201266

Award Number: 0201266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Gould gould@astronomy.ohio.state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0201266
Gould

Microlensing observational capabilities are continuing to
              expand rapidly in several directions: for the first time, microlensing is being
              used to look for planets and probe the atmospheres of stars. Microlensing
              surveys toward M31 are returning their first substantial lists of candidate
              events. Within the next decade, microlensing should give us a detailed picture
              of the galactic bulge mass function down to 0.01 solar masses. These
              developments  are presenting both new theoretical challenges and new
              observational opportunities. At the same time, they lay the basis for a strong
              interplay between microlensing and Galactic-structure studies. 

Dr. Andrew
              Gould, at Ohio State University, will build on these developments with two
              specific projects.  1. Characterization and Resolution of Binary and Planetary
              Degeneracies. Microlensing by binary and planetary systems often gives rise to
              dramatic caustic-induced jumps in the light curve, that both signal the
              presence of the binary or planet, and can be exploited to learn about the
              atmosphere of the source star being lensed. However, to fully extract this
              information, an unambiguous reconstruction of the geometry of the lensing
              system is required. Dr. Gould has demonstrated that even with the spectacular
              improvements in microlensing photometry, binary light curves can be subject to
              multiple interpretations. He has already solved the problem of classifying (and
              so understanding how to break) these degeneracies for the larger subclass of
              binary-lensing events. He will now do an analogous study of the smaller, but
              more difficult (and often more valuable) subclass. Similarly, he has already
              solved the problem of classifying the larger subclass of planetary
              degeneracies, and will now tackle the smaller, more difficult subclass.  2.
              Pixel Lensing of M31.   Dr. Gould will continue his ongoing program of
              microlensing observations of M31, and will continue to give the data so
              acquired to competing groups. Good temporal coverage remains the weakest link
              in this subfield, so Dr. Gould's access to the MDM 1.3m and 2.4m telescopes can
              be of critical importance.  Of almost equal importance to the scientific
              results to be obtained, is the training of the graduate students who will do a
              substantial part of the work. Dr. Gould has developed a very intensive and
              interactive mode of training students with extremely successful results, and
              that will continue with this award.
***
 

