Title       : Invariant Characteristics of Networks and Patterns and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0201001

Award Number: 0201001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gemunu H. Gunaratne gemunu@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1287      MATHEMATICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0201001
Gunaratne

Osteoporosis is a major socio-economic problem in western
              societies. Since excessive use of therapeutic agents can have adverse
              consequences, non-invasive diagnostic tools to determine the need for
              intervention are essential for bones from older adults is the inner porous
              region whose structure is reminiscent of disordered cubic networks. The
              strength of a bone depends on several facets of this network, including its
              connectivity, the anisotropy, and the level of bone turnover. It is extremely
              difficult to account for these
factors and complex interactions between them
              in clinical studies or in experiments on ex-vivo bone samples. We have
              introduced a model of porous bone, and propose to use it to develop a more
              comprehensive understanding of mechanical causes underlying bone decay. The
              insights gained from this study can be used to identify novel diagnostic tools
              to determine the need for therapeutic intervention. In particular, such
              properties cannot depend on most details of the porous bone; i.e., they need to
              be invariant characteristics. The model system was used to derive a new
              expression that relates the strength of a bone to its effective density. It
              will be tested using previously published data on human bone. Analysis of the
              model also provided a diagnostic (based on linear response) of the strength of
              networks. Tests will be conducted to determine how accurately it can predict
              the strength of bone samples. We also propose to study effects of factors like
              anisotropy on bone strength, and to develop methods to estimate these factors
              in-vivo.

The second problem proposed is an application of a characteristic
              that quantifies the level of disorder in a pattern. The form of this measure
              was deduced by requiring its invariance under all rigid (i.e., Euclidean)
              motions of the pattern. We propose to use it to estimate the roughness of a
              surface on a nano-meter scale by characterizing the disorder in a speckle
              pattern formed by reflecting a laser beam from the surface. Such a
              characterization is expected find application in (for example) the auto
              industry.


