Title       : Dissertation Improvement Grant: Social Space and Community Interaction in Late
               Holocene Coastal California: Archaeological Perspectives from the Northern
               Channel Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0201668

Award Number: 0201668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Erlandson jerland@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jon Erlandson, MS Torben Rick will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation research, excavating five archaeological sites on
              California's Northern Channel Islands that date within the last 4,000 years.
              Native peoples of the southern California Coast and Channel Islands were among
              the most populous and culturally complex hunter-gatherers in the world. During
              the historic era, Chumash and Tongva peoples in the region lived in large
              villages or towns, some with as many as 1,000 residents, had hierarchical
              sociopolitical organization, and used shell bead money to purchase a variety of
              goods and services. The Northern Channel Islands also contain the earliest
              evidence of maritime peoples in North America and a spectacular record of
              coastal hunter-gatherers that spans the last 12,000 years. This continuous
              archaeological sequence, along with the excellent preservation of Channel
              Islands archaeological sites, provides a unique opportunity to investigate the
              evolution of cultural complexity among hunter-gatherers with great time depth
              and relatively high precision. 
The archaeological sites where research will
              be conducted are extremely well preserved villages that contain dense
              accumulations of shellfish, fish and sea mammal bones, a variety of artifacts,
              and three of the sites also contain circular depressions that are the remains
              of house structures. These sites provide an important laboratory for
              documenting aspects of community and household life among coastal peoples in
              the region. Excavation and mapping of these villages will provide a means to
              assess the evolution of Chumash society, with a specific focus on how
              communities and households structured and maintained hierarchical
              sociopolitical organization. This project will increase our understanding of
              community and household archaeology, maritime adaptations, the evolution of
              complex hunter-gatherers, and the relationships between environmental and
              cultural changes. Ultimately, the data gathered will enhance our understanding
              of the causal mechanisms behind the development of hierarchy, social
              inequality, and other highly significant evolutionary changes in human
              behavior.



