Title       : Spectral Study of Multidimensional Almost-Periodic Schroedinger Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0201383

Award Number: 0201383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77813              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ioulia Karpechina karpeshi@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Karpeschins

The main area of Yu.Karpeshina's research in the
              previous years was the perturbation theory for multidimensional Schroedinger
              operators with   periodic  potentials.  One encounters a small denominator
              problem, considering the perturbation of the Laplacian by a periodic potential
              in the high energy region. It comes from the fact that the Bloch
eigenvalues
              of a multidimensional periodic Schroedinger operator are located very densely
              in the high energy region.
The PI has developed a method of advanced
              perturbation theory to treat this small denominator problem. Yu. Karpeshina 
              showed  that  most of generalized eigenfunctions of the multidimensional
              periodic Schroedinger operator  in the high
energy region are close to the
              unperturbed ones: for every  sufficiently large energy there is an extensive
              set of  solutions of the Schroedinger equation which are close to plane
              waves.



The PI will prove that even in the almost-periodic situation a
              lot of generalized eigenfunctions of the multidimensional  Schroedinger
              operator are close to unperturbed ones in the high energy region: for every
              sufficiently large energy there is an extensive set of  solutions of the
              Schroedinger equation which are close to plane waves. The main difficulty  to
              overcome is the small denominator problem, which is much more intricate in the
              case of almost-periodic potentials then in the periodic case, due to
              particularly complicated nature of wave propagation processes  in solids with
              non-local deviations from regular  structure.  The PI suggests  an effective
              approach to the small denominator problem. The methods developed by the  PI for
              the multidimensional periodic Schroedinger operator will be combined with basic
              ideas of the KAM (Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser) theory in order to produce a new
              technique which works  for almost-periodic potentials.  Schroedinger operators
              with almost-periodic potentials are used in physics to describe solids with
              non-regular inner structure, e.g. alloys, ceramics, glasses, polymers. The
              spectral study of these operators leads to understanding of the mechanism of
              electrical conductivity in such materials. The goal of the project is to
              understand the  phenomenon of the insulator-metal transition.  The 
              insulator-metal transition means that a material behaves as an electrical
              insulator  if it stays below a certain temperature and abruptly starts to act
              as a conductor when  the temperature surpasses a certain value characteristic
              for a given material. The understanding of the phenomenon of insulator-metal
              transition is extremely important for applications, particularly in electronics
              industry.




