Title       : Equations of Monge-Ampere Type and Fully Nonlinear Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0201599

Award Number: 0201599
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60536              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qingbo Huang qhuang@math.wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0201599

Principal Investigator: Qingbo Huang, Wright State
              University

ABSTRACT

This mathematical research focuses on equations of
              Monge-Ampere type and fully nonlinear elliptic equations with geometric or
              physical motivation. The first part of this project
is devoted to several
              equations of Monge-Ampere type. In particular, we propose to study regularity
              of solutions and other quantitative properties such as the large time behavior
              of solutions and characterization of associated nonlinear semigroups for
              several parabolic Monge-Ampere equations arising in the deformation of
              surfaces, to develop regularity theory for
weak solutions of degenerate
              Monge-Ampere equations and study its interaction with Monge-Kantorovich optimal
              mass transfer problem stemming from economics and other areas of science,
and
              to consider an equation arising in geometric optics for the synthesis of
              reflector antennas.
The second part  of the project is concerned with fully
              nonlinear elliptic equations
without concavity condition, regularity theory of
              weak solutions of Hessian equations, and the infinity Laplacian equation as the
              Euler equation of minimizing Lipschitz extension.

This research is in the
              area of nonlinear partial differential equations. These equations play a
              crucial role in the application of mathematics to real world.   Most phenomena
              in nature and society, such as heat transfer, flows in porous media,
              construction of reflectors, optimal disposition of air masses, are described by
              nonlinear partial differential equations.
Study of these equations will
              greatly help understand the nature of these phenomena and develop practical,
              fast, and reliable numerical algorithms. One of the proposed problems is
              related to Monge-Kantorovich optimal mass transfer problem appearing in
              economic, physics, and meteorology. Another problem arises from the engineering
              problem of
construction of reflector antennas. The parabolic Monge-Ampere
              equations are motivated from differential geometry and appear in the model of
              worn stones. The proposed project
has a strong connection with real harmonic
              analysis and differential geometry. We expect that this research will stimulate
              more interplay among these areas.


