Title       : Strengthening of Infill Masonry Walls with Fiber Reinforced Polymer (FRP)
               Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0201815

Award Number: 0201815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131004             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Gustavo Tumialan jaime@umr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Nanni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Rolla
	      1870 Miner Circle, 215 ME Annex
	      Rolla, MO  654091330    573/341-4134

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The worldwide engineering community has identified failures of unreinforced
              masonry (URM) walls as one of the major causes of material damage and loss of
              human life during seismic events.  The development of effective and affordable
              retrofitting techniques for masonry members is an urgent need.  Fiber
              Reinforced Polymer (FRP) composites may provide attractive solutions for the
              strengthening of URM walls subjected to in-plane and out-of-plane loads
              resulting from high winds or earthquakes.   Reinforced concrete (RC) or steel
              frames with infill URM walls are a common construction practice.  Interaction
              of infill walls with the structural frame has often been neglected to simplify
              the design.  Ignoring the contribution of the infill wall does not necessarily
              indicate a conservative design.  Infill walls can greatly stiffen a flexible
              frame and significantly affect the horizontal load distribution to different
              structural members of the building. Strengthening of existing walls must
              account for this behavior.

The proposed project will focus on the study of
              the shear behavior of infill masonry walls strengthened with FRP bars and
              laminates.  The former is a novel technique denominated FRP structural
              repointing.  FRP structural repointing consists of inserting FRP bars into the
              masonry bed joints.  The FRP bars can be embedded either in an epoxy-based
              paste or a cementitious paste.  Preliminary tests on masonry specimens
              strengthened by this technique have shown promising results.  In addition to
              increasing in-plane wall capacity, structural repointing is less intrusive than
              FRP laminates because the masonry aesthetics are preserved.     Two series of
              walls will be tested.  The first series, Series A, will assess the shear
              behavior of URM walls strengthened with FRP composites to determine the most
              efficient strengthening schemes in terms of structural performance.  The walls
              belonging to Series A will be constructed with concrete masonry units (CMU). 
              The specimens will be tested under in-plane cyclic loading.  The test setup
              configuration will ensure the occurrence of shear failure.  The most efficient
              strengthening schemes tested in Series A will be selected for the strengthening
              of the infill walls in Series B.  This series will investigate the shear
              behavior of infill walls and their interaction with the surrounding structural
              RC frame. The infill walls will be surrounded by a RC frame and tested under
              in-plane cyclic loading.  After failure due to in-plane loading, the specimen
              will be moved to a shake table where it will be subjected to out-of-plane
              acceleration to observe the out-of-plane stability of the wall.  Analytical and
              numerical models will be developed to verify and understand the experimental
              findings using both complex and simple idealizations.  The analytical results
              will be used to implement design protocols for the shear strengthening of URM
              infill walls to be used by practitioners.

This project will represent a
              milestone in the development of affordable and effective retrofitting
              techniques for existing infill walls.  Within the constraints of funding and
              time, it will integrate the three phases of experimentation, analysis, and
              design to provide scientists and professionals with a clear snapshot of the
              advantages and characteristics of a highly promising new technology.

