Title       : Shimura Varieties, Galois Modules and the Determinant of Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0201140

Award Number: 0201140
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105943             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georgios Pappas pappas@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator is working on the following two problems: (A) He is attempting
              to describe integral models for Shimura varieties at primes of  non-smooth
              reduction.  In particular, he studies ``local models"for PEL Shimura varieties
              and tries to formulate exact predictions about the non-smooth reduction of a
              general Shimura variety.  The motivation is to obtain information that can be
              used in the calculation of the Hasse-Weil zeta function of these varieties and
              in other arithmetic applications. (B) He is studying the representations that
              appear in the cohomology of arithmetic  varieties with a group action. He will
              continue his work on describing relations between invariants describing such
              representations and L-functions and develop a theory of ``non-abelian" cubic
              structures for the determinant of cohomology of general bundles over
              curves.

This is research in the field of arithmetic algebraic geometry, a
              subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: the geometry of
              figures that can be defined by the simplest equations, namely polynomials, and
              the study of numbers.  This combination has proved
extraordinarily fruitful -
              having recently solved problems that withstood generations (such as ``Fermat's
              last theorem").  The investigator's work  mainly concentrates on the study of
              specific polynomial equations that have many symmetries. The general field has
              connections with physics, the construction of error correcting codes and
              cryptography.

