Title       : RUI: Truncated Multivariable Moment Problems & Applications: An Operator
               Theoretic Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0201430

Award Number: 0201430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87515              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Fialkow fialkowl@newpaltz.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY New Paltz
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      New Paltz, NY  12561    845/257-3282

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Lawrence A. Fialkow, SUNY New Paltz
DMS-0201430

                        
                 Abstract


This research concerns an approach to the multidimensional
              truncated power 
moment problem based on an extension theory for the
              associated moment matrix. 
When this matrix admits an infinite, positive,
              finite rank moment matrix 
extension, this approach yields an explicit formula
              for a finitely atomic 
representing measure supported on the joint spectrum of
              a normal tuple of 
operators corresponding to the extension. The aim of this
              research is to 
determine concrete conditions on the moment data which permit
              the desired 
extension. Much of this research concerns, specifically, the
              multivariable 
truncated K-moment problem, where the support of a representing
              measure is 
required to be contained in a prescribed closed set K. For K an
              algebraic 
variety, this research concerns a new conjecture for solving the
              moment problem 
in terms of concrete algebraic and geometric invariants
              closely related to the 
moment data. For K semi-algebraic, this research seeks
              to apply the abstract 
solution of the truncated K-moment problem due to
              Curto-Fialkow  to specific 
semi-algebraic sets such as the closed unit disk.
              A direct application of this 
study concerns the multidimensional cubature
              problem in Numerical Analysis. By 
applying the moment matrix extension
              technique in the context of cubature, this 
research seeks to construct
              minimal cubature rules for sets such as the disk, 
square, triangle, or
              annulus.

One aspect of this research, the Quadrature Problem, concerns the
              efficient 
measurement of the size of an irregular area, or the measurement of
              the weight 
of a volume whose density is unevenly distributed. We seek to
              identify a small 
number of test points (or nodes) within the body in such a
              way that by measuring 
the density just at these few points, we may closely
              approximate the overall 
size or weight of the body. In the case of a linear
              body, such as a thin rod, 
the quadrature problem was solved with the fewest
              number of test points by the  
mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855),
              using a technique now known as 
Gaussian Quadrature. At the present time,
              surprisingly few minimal-node 
quadrature rules are known for shapes in the
              plane or in 3-dimensional space, 
even for basic sets such as a disk or
              sphere. In order to study the Quadrature 
Problem, we actually study a more
              general problem, the Multidimensional 
Truncated Moment Problem. Many
              real-world systems can be described by a sequence 
of physical attributes
              called moments, such as mass, weight, momentum, etc., 
which relate to the
              physical space underlying the system. The truncated moment 
problem asks
              whether a system is uniquely determined by its sequence of moments, 
and also
              whether the moments of a system can be computed by studying the system 
at
              just a finite number of nodes in the underlying space. In this research, we
              
develop algorithms for recognizing when such a sequence of nodes exists, and
              for 
efficiently computing them. In this way, we may describe a system in
              terms of 
just a finite number of points in the underlying space. 

