Title       : Effective Methods for Hyperelliptic and Cubic Function Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0201337

Award Number: 0201337
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106607             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andreas Stein andreas@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies various effective methods in the theory of elliptic,
              hyperelliptic, and cubic curves and their function fields. Classical problems
              in these areas are computing class numbers, regulators, and discrete
              logarithms, as well as determining cardinalities of Jacobians. The first part
              concerns arithmetical invariants of hyperelliptic and cubic curves. In
              particular, the investigator and his colleagues hope to advance counting points
              methods for these curves over large prime fields. Effective methods make use of
              modular equations, the distribution of the zeroes of the zeta function, the
              Hasse-Witt matrix, approximation of Euler products, optimized algorithms, and
              others. The second part concerns with the Weil descent methodology for elliptic
              curves or other Galois descent methods. The Weil descent methodology is a means
              to reduce the elliptic curve discrete logarithm problem (ECDLP) over composite
              finite fields to the discrete logarithm problem in an abelian variety over a
              proper subfield. This leads to an effective method of reducing any instance of
              the ECDLP over a finite field to an instance of the discrete logarithm problem
              in the Jacobian of a hyperelliptic curve over a subfield. Since
              subexponential-time algorithms for the latter problem are known, this shows how
              important the method is for cracking certain elliptic curve cryptographic
              schemes.  Similar ideas are applicable for curves of genus bigger than
              one.

The proposed research belongs to the interface between number theory
              and algebraic geometry. On the theoretical side, it advances the theory of
              algebraic function fields and curves. At the same time, on the  practical side,
              it advances the connection between the theory of algebraic curves and a highly
              relevant application to cryptography. In recent years, elliptic and
              hyperelliptic curves have become objects of intense investigation because of
              their significance to public-key cryptography. Hereby, tools from algebraic
              geometry, number theory, and the theory of algorithms are central in the
              cryptanalysis of elliptic and hyperelliptic curve cryptosystems. Methods of
              this proposal can be applied to guarantee the security of these curve
              cryptosystems or reveal weaknesses of certain curves. The proposed research
              also advances the number theoretic computations and applies a variety of strong
              recent results to the algorithmic aspects of number theory.

