Title       : Dynamics and Evolution of Emerging Diseases with Applications to Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0201105

Award Number: 0201105
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $915000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. S. Allen lallen@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loren M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott T. McMurry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. San Francisco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The goals of this project are threefold: (1) to contribute to the mathematical
              theory of the evolution of host-pathogen systems, (2) to apply the theory to
              amphibian populations, and (3) to conduct an intensive biological investigation
              of amphibian populations and their associated diseases on the Southern High
              Plains. Deterministic and stochastic structured epidemic models with host and
              pathogen genetics will be developed, analyzed, and numerically simulated.
              Discrete and continuous time structured models are based on difference
              equations, differential equations, Markov chains, and stochastic differential
              equations. The mathematical models will be used to study how disease affects
              persistence, duration, onset of an epidemic, and population size, and how host
              and pathogen coevolve in response to various control strategies and to
              different selection pressures. The models will be applied to specific amphibian
              populations on the Southern High Plains. The proposed research includes a
              three-year experimental investigation (two years of intensive fieldwork) to
              determine amphibian abundance, disease prevalence, and immunological
              characteristics of two common species of amphibians on the Southern High
              Plains, the tiger salamander and the plains spadefoot toad. The study sites
              consist of twelve playa lakes on the Southern High Plains. Mathematical and
              statistical analyses of the data collected from this study address some basic
              biological questions about the relationships among amphibian abundance, immune
              response, disease prevalence, life cycle stage (larvae, juvenile, and adult),
              landuse practices (grassland versus cropland), and climatic conditions. This
              study provides important information for determining critical factors that are
              significant in the transmission and persistence of diseases in amphibians.
              
	The emergence of infectious diseases in humans and wildlife is a major
              threat to public health and to the conservation of global biodiversity.
              Increased population densities, changes in agricultural and livestock
              practices, dam building, deforestation, encroachment into wildlife habitat,
              climate change, environmental pollution, and introduction of pathogens into new
              areas are some of the factors leading to the emergence of infectious diseases.
              Understanding the dynamics of the pathogens responsible for the emergence of
              these diseases and the complex and changing relationship between their host and
              their environment is needed for potential control of these diseases. A variety
              of human and environmental influences have caused many host-pathogen systems to
              evolve and to adapt to these changing influences, making control an even more
              difficult task. Theoretical studies which contribute to our understanding of
              the evolution of host-pathogen systems are urgently needed. It is the purpose
              of this investigation to develop, analyze, and simulate mathematical models
              based on principles from epidemiology, genetics and population dynamics, to
              apply these models to host-pathogen systems, and to conduct an experimental
              investigation on a particular host-pathogen system. The host population models
              developed in the proposed investigation are applied specifically to amphibian
              populations. The global decline in amphibian populations is thought to be one
              of the most pressing and enigmatic environmental problems today. Recent
              evidence indicates that emerging diseases (viral and fungal pathogens) are
              responsible for mass die-offs of frogs, toads, and salamanders. Indeed, recent
              outbreaks of diseases in amphibians should be given serious attention as they
              may signal environmental change on a global scale that may threaten many
              organisms. A major part of the proposed research involves a two-year field and
              three-year laboratory investigation. The purpose of the experimental
              investigation is to assess amphibian abundance, disease prevalence, and
              immunological characteristics of two common species of amphibians on the
              Southern High Plains. This study lays the groundwork for future studies on
              causes of population declines in amphibians. This grant is made under the Joint
              DMS/NIGMS Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical
              Biology. This is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of
              General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.
