Title       : Collaborative Research: Evaluation of 2D vs 3D Multielectrode Resistivity for
               the Characterization of Shallow Karst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0201015

Award Number: 0201015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary J. Roth rothm@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              

CMS-0201015
PI:		Mary Roth
Institution:	Lafayette
              College
Title:	"Collaborative Research: Evaluation of 2D vs 3D Multielectrode
              Resistivity for the Characterization of Shallow Karst"

Sinkholes in areas
              with soluble bedrock (e.g., limestone and dolomite) are a cause of cost
              overruns during construction and of structural failures.  These areas can be
              found in 15% of the United States and estimated costs of failures caused by
              sinkholes in eastern central Pennsylvania since 1975 exceed 30 million dollars.
               The frequency of these problems can be reduced by improving methods for
              locating subsurface voids that cause sinkholes.  Two-dimensional
              earth-resistivity testing has been demonstrated to be useful, but because 2D
              geometry is assumed, this method has limited ability to determine void size and
              orientation.  Features adjacent to the 2D resistivity line and directly below
              the line affect the results.  Three-dimensional resistivity tests are
              time-consuming and do not provide sufficient detail for geotechnical
              investigations unless thousands of electrodes are used.
In this project,
              interpretation of resistivity data is being improved by comparing two field
              methods.  The first method incorporates multiple 2D resistivity lines into
              three-dimensional models.  The second method develops large 3D data sets from
              multiple smaller, overlapping 3D surveys. Both approaches should be able to
              determine void geometry by developing a 3D resistivity model from data
              collected with a practical number of electrodes.  To test the methods, the
              geometry of a natural subsurface cave is being mapped and resistivity results
              over the cave are compared to actual cave geometry.  
The project will result
              in an improved investigation strategy for sites located in sinkhole areas.  Two
              additional features of this project should be noted.  First, the project is
              being conducted at a site that has been used by other researchers.  Further
              characterization of the conditions at the site will encourage additional
              collaboration to test new investigation methods.  Second, the project involves
              collaboration of an undergraduate institution with a graduate institution. 
              Such collaboration will encourage students to obtain post-graduate education.

