Title       : Low Energy Nuclear Physics at Princeton - The Borexino Solar Neutrino Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0201141

Award Number: 0201141
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James J. Whitmore                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2300120            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank P. Calaprice calaprice@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay B. Benziger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Shutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1643      PARTICLE ASTROPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Borexino is a new solar neutrino experiment that will use 300 tons of
high
              purity liquid scintillator to measure the low energy part of the
solar
              neutrino spectrum (E < 1MeV).  More than 30 years of experiments
have shown
              that fewer solar neutrinos are detected than expected from
the nuclear fusion
              reactions that power the sun.  Recent experiments
indicate that the
              discrepancy is due to "neutrino oscillations", a
process in which neutrinos
              produced in the sun as "electron-neutrinos",
oscillate to a
              non-electron-neutrino state.  The oscillation process is
possible if neutrinos
              do indeed have a finite mass, rather than a zero
mass, as is the case in the
              present standard model of elementary
particles.  If oscillations are
              confirmed, and neutrinos have mass, the
result would be a major departure from
              our current understanding of
elementary particle, with important implications
              in physics and
astronomy.
	The latest experimental data of the Sudbury
              Neutrino Observatory,
together with the SuperK experiment, provide the most
              convincing
evidence that neutrinos are oscillating.  The interpretation of
              these
and other data in the Mikheyev-Smirnov-Wolfenstein theoretical
              framework
indicates that oscillation effects for neutrinos below 1 MeV could
              be
dramatic.  One observational possibility is a large day/night asymmetry
in
              count rate for low energy neutrinos.  Borexino is designed to measure
the 0.86
              MeV 7Be neutrinos and is thus well positioned to explore this
unique low
              energy neutrino oscillation effect.
	The Borexino detector is located in the
              Gran Sasso underground
laboratory in Italy.  The low background requirements
              necessary for
detecting 7Be neutrinos pose formidable technical challenges. 
              After
several years of R&D with a prototype detector, and four years
              of
construction, Borexino is expected to become operational in 2002. 
              The
objective of this proposal in the two-year period 2002-2004 is
              to
complete the commissioning and start-up phase of Borexino and begin
taking
              solar neutrino data.  This proposal will support the Princeton
University
              Group in completing and operating the muon detector and the
scintillator
              purification, filling, and containment subsystems of the
detector.  It will
              also support the early stages of data acquisition and
data analysis.


