Title       : Computer Security and Data Assurance Associate Degree Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 10,  2002  
File        : a0201873

Award Number: 0201873
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: R. Corby Hovis                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $688414             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara Huffman de Belon nk_belon@commnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Cantor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marie A. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Norwalk Cmty College
	      188 Richards Avenue
	      Norwalk, CT  06854-165    203/857-7263

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1032,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In response to the national need for information technology workers with
              expertise in information systems security, this project is developing an
              associate degree program in computer security and data assurance at Norwalk
              Community College. The new program leads students either to immediate
              employment or to a related four-year degree at Western Connecticut State
              University.

In developing the curriculum, investigators are examining
              existing computer security curricula and standards in order to adapt and build
              on exemplary resources. The investigators are also introducing a faculty
              externship program, which provides faculty members with relevant workplace
              experiences so they can better prepare their students for careers in the
              computer security field. Although the project's primary audience is two-year
              college faculty and students, the goal is to create a computer security career
              pathway from secondary schools to two-year colleges and on to universities.
              Objectives and activities in the project include:

* adapting computer
              security curricula to create a career pathway from secondary schools to
              two-year colleges and four-year universities;

* implementing an externship
              program for faculty;

* creating practical lab experiences with a Unix/NT
              "anti-hackers" lab and teleconferencing equipment for distance learning;

*
              utilizing a faculty externship and student outreach coordinator to administer
              externship placements and recruit students for the computer security
              program;

* disseminating the computer security materials, curriculum, and
              model throughout Connecticut; and

* hosting an annual cybersecurity
              conference.

The project is guided by an advisory committee of
              representatives from business and industry, professional associations in the
              computer security field, other colleges and universities, and law
              enforcement.

