Title       : Attention and Performance Meeting to be held July 1-7, 2002 in Erice, Sicily
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  2002      
File        : a0201898

Award Number: 0201898
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Parsons                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy Kanwisher ngk@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carlo Umilta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1699      COGNITIVE NEUROSCIENCE INITIAT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1699,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Attention and Performance Meeting
ABSTRACT

With National Science Foundation
              support,  junior researchers will be provided the funds to participate in the
              XXth meeting of the International Association for the Study of Attention and
              Performance (IASAP).  This meeting will be held from July 1-7 in Erice, Sicily,
              and will address the topic of Functional Brain Imaging of Visual Cognition.
              Functional brain imaging may have by now surpassed all other techniques in
              cognitive science in terms of expense, growth rate, and public visibility. But
              how much has this new set of techniques actually contributed to the study of
              human cognition? When if ever has a finding from brain imaging constrained a
              cognitive theory? We are sympathetic to those who have watched from the
              sidelines and felt underwhelmed by the contributions of brain imaging to
              cognitive science. Many of the early imaging studies in fact had little to
              offer researchers interested in cognition. However, we are encouraged by more
              recent results and hopeful that a new era is beginning in which functional
              brain imaging may realize its potential as a powerful tool for the study of
              cognition. It is the goal of this meeting to tackle all of these issues by
              addressing whether, when, and how functional brain imaging can constrain
              theories of human cognition. We have chosen to focus our discussions around the
              specific topic of visual cognition, where much of the best recent imaging work
              has been carried out. We have selected 65 of the top researchers in the world
              who either do imaging work on visual cognition, or who have expertise in a
              closely related field the understanding of which is critical for our
              advancement of brain imaging research (e.g., cognitive psychology, single-unit
              recording, computational modeling). At the meeting, these researchers will
              present the latest results from their labs and discuss the ways in which
              imaging can and cannot provide answers to cognitive questions. The meeting will
              include sessions on modularity, visual object representation, development and
              plasticity, visual attention, and sensorimotor integration. Every effort was
              made to include minorities, women, and researchers at early stages of their
              careers.  We anticipate that several factors will guarantee that this meeting
              will have a broad impact not only on those attending it, but also on the field
              as a whole.  These factors include the prestige of the IASAP, the high
              visibility of many of the meeting participants, and the long tradition of
              publishing from each Attention & Performance meeting an excellent and
              widely-cited volume of articles.

