Title       : Torus Maps and Cocyclic Subshifts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0201600

Award Number: 0201600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71719              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jaroslaw M. Kwapisz jarek@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: Jarek Kwapisz, Montana State University
DMS-0201600
Torus Maps and
              Cocyclic Subshifts

The PI proposes research in two areas: 
 rotation sets
              for maps of tori and symbolic dynamics of cocyclic subshifts.
The first is
              motivated by classical questions about the flow on invariant tori in 

              Hamiltonian systems or systems of coupled relaxation oscillators and
              concentrates
 on maps of a two-torus that are isotopic to the identity.  The
              rotation set is a compact and convex subset of the plane that roughly collects
              all the average winding vectors (frequencies) exhibited by the orbits of the
              system.  The PI's goal is to establish results on a priori degeneracy
 of the
              rotation set to a single point and to understand the extent to which 
 the
              dynamics must then be equivalent to that of the rigid rotation.  The tools
              involved include the number theory of the rotation set, hierarchies of
              dynamical tilings, geometric topology, quasi-conformal estimates, and
              renormalization techniques.  Cocyclic subshifts are a new class of
              algebraically defined dynamical systems obtained as the supports of locally
              constant matrix cocycles on the full shift over a finite alphabet. They
              generalize sofic systems and 
 play a role in the symbolic dynamics based on
              the Conley index similar 
 to the role of subshifts of finite type in the
              context of Markov partitions.
  The PI will study the interplay between the
              algebra of the cocycle and the
 dynamics of its subshift.

 Nonlinear
              oscillatory behavior is typical of many systems encountered in science and

              technology. The examples include plasma particles (in magnetic fields of the
              sun
  or plasma containment devices), electrical currents (in electronics or
              living tissue),
 Belousov-Zhabotinsky type chemical reactions, convection
              currents (in a heated fluid),
 and planets of our solar system. Many realistic
              models are impossible to solve
 analytically and may  be accurately followed
              on a computer only for a limited time. 
 The theory of rotation sets tries to
              remedy this problem by studying the fundamental
 properties of systems of
              coupled oscillators in an abstract setting so that qualitative 
 predictions
              of the long time behavior can be made for broad classes of models.
 Symbolic
              dynamics deals with infinite sequences of zeros and ones 
 and is motivated by
              problems of telecommunication, where  routinely 
 data is encoded by such
              sequences and the volume is huge enough
 to justify the idealization to
              infinite sequences.  Loosely speaking, the main goal is to understand the
              relation between the properties  of the sequences and the design of the
              (mathematical or physical) device generating  them. The cocyclic subshifts
              arise from a new kind of device capable of matrix  multiplication. They
              generalize the so called subshifts of finite type, which are
 generated by
              finite state automata and are a standard tool in coding information
 for
              magnetic recording.  Cocyclic subshifts are also used to detect chaos in
              dynamical systems.
 





