Title       : Automated Telemetry System to Study Animal Interactions in Rainforests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2002      
File        : a0201307

Award Number: 0201307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin C. Wikelski wikelski@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A Multi-user Automated Telemetry System for the study of ecological interactions
              in a tropical rainforest

A grant has been awarded to Dr. Martin Wikelski at
              Princeton University to purchase an automated telemetry system (ATS) that
              allows him to track position, activity and physiological data on up to 200
              rainforest animals consecutively and in real time. His study site is on Barro
              Colorado Island (BCI) Panama, the premier research station of the Smithsonian
              Tropical Research Institute (STRI). Wikelski's tracking system is planned
              around specialized automated receivers that utilize electrically steerable
              antenna arrays. Six of these units will operate above-canopy tower-mounted
              antenna arrays for general coverage of the entire BCI rainforest area
              supplemented with 10 portable units for below-canopy deployment in specific
              areas for special project needs. The tower-deployed units will communicate data
              through radio-transmission to a central laboratory and processing center. The
              maintenance and expansion of the ATS equipment will be financed by modest user
              fees. The ATS system is currently being constructed on BCI, with first field
              tests projected for June 2002. The PI envisions a future expansion of the
              system to include state of the art monitoring techniques (digitally encoded
              physiological or locomotor transmissions, GPS).
 
The ATS will allow
              researchers from all over the world to pursue basic ecological,
              eco-physiological, applied management, and conservation questions that are
              currently beyond scientific reach. ATS research will start with the following
              exemplary projects: In basic ecology researchers will address the importance of
              species interactions for the maintenance of rainforest diversity. In
              particular, 'keystone' predators like ocelots may control population sizes of
              rodents, which in turn are thought to be major seed dispersers and predators
              for trees. ATS enables researchers to study the interactions among animals as
              well as between animals and seeds - a prerequisite for the understanding of
              these basic ecological principles. In eco-physiology, research projects will
              address why many tropical birds live longer than their temperate zone
              counterparts, using heart rate telemetry to quantify energy expenditure in the
              wild. Other research groups will study the neuro-endocrinology of year-round
              territoriality vs. commuter territoriality. Such territorial and associated
              aggression systems are currently largely elusive. Conservation projects include
              the reintroduction of Harpy Eagles and other locally extinct birds on BCI and a
              study of the influence of habitat fragmentation on species persistence and
              diversity.

Tropical biodiversity, conservation, and management of tropical
              rainforests are key components of modern biology. Automated telemetry allows
              biologists to address key ecological and conservation questions that are
              presently beyond reach because of methodological inadequacies. The ATS will
              also enable field ecologists to conduct large-scale, controlled experiments.
              The ATS will be constructed at one of the world's premier rainforest study
              sites allowing researchers to build upon, and incorporate new data into the
              largest existing framework of botanical, zoological and conservation knowledge
              of a single tropical site. Researchers and students from >30 nations will have
              access to ATS. Such a pioneering effort is expected to be emulated by research
              groups on different continents to supplement existing rainforest research
              networks such as the rainforest canopy network.

