Title       : Development of a Rockbolt Support Element for Discontinuous Deformation Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0201577

Award Number: 0201577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary MacLaughlin mmaclaughlin@mtech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MT Tech of the U of Montan
	      1300 W. Park Street
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/496-4101

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0201577
PI:		Mary MacLaughlin
Institution:	Montana
              Tech
Title:		"Development of a Rockbolt Support Element for Discontinuous
              Deformation Analysis"

Astract:
The primary objective of this research
              project is to develop a rockbolt support element that is capable of modeling
              actual rockbolt behavior, particularly nonlinear movement between the bolt and
              the rock which is critical for numerical modeling.  Discontinuous Deformation
              Analysis, DDA, has several unique features that make it a perfect candidate for
              development of a bolt element that has the ability to characterize rockbolt
              behavior to a much higher degree of realism and accuracy than has previously
              been possible.  DDA is an implicit discrete element method that already has the
              capacity to model "blocks" of any irregular shape, and the contact routines are
              specifically designed to efficiently capture contact between blocks with both
              convex and concave vertex angles.  The method accounts for frictional,
              cohesive, and tensional forces which are present at the contacts, and allows
              blocks to slide, separate, and impact without penetrating.  A rockbolt element
              will be implemented as a "block" with a particular geometry and special
              material properties consistent with those of a typical rockbolt.  The
              support-rock interaction mechanics will then be incorporated into the model as
              manifested by displacement between the bolt element and the surrounding rock
              blocks.  This capability to model bolt behavior, especially pull-out failure,
              will make the DDA rockbolt element a more accurate modeling tool than other
              previously developed numerical rockbolt support elements.  Mark (2000) states
              that "the reinforcement mode is actually dictated to the bolts by the ground,
              rather than the reverse."  One of the real strengths of the DDA approach is
              that this outcome is a natural result of the analysis.  The behavior and
              failure mode do not have to be specified before or during the analysis - they
              are part of the calculated results.
The NIOSH Spokane Research Laboratory,
              which was a branch of the US Bureau of Mines until 1995 and is now part of the
              National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, has invested significant
              resources into the development, installation and testing of instrumented
              rockbolts since the mid-1980's.  Analysis of the data collected using the
              instrumented rockbolts has contributed a great deal to the general
              understanding of the behavior of rockbolt supports, and collaboration with
              NIOSH personnel is an important component of this project.
The development of
              the bolt element will involve bolt type selection, theoretical development,
              algorithm development and implementation.  The PI and Ms. Kathryn Clapp, the
              Montana Tech graduate student involved in this project, will jointly work on
              all of these aspects, with assistance from Mr. Steve Signer of NIOSH.  One
              fairly unique aspect of this project is that once the theoretical development
              is finished and the rockbolt algorithms have been implemented into the
              software, validation will be performed using the large archive of NIOSH
              instrumented rockbolt data which has already been collected.  This is a
              tremendous advantage and will allow the project to be completed in a relatively
              short period of time, with a modest budget.  Ms. Clapp will perform the bulk of
              the validation activities, which will entail constructing DDA models
              corresponding to each of the different laboratory test configurations used, and
              performing analyses with model conditions specified to represent the lab tests
              as closely as possible.  The DDA calculations of the head displacement and load
              values at points along the bolt will be recorded and compared to actual bolt
              behavior as observed during the tests.

Reference:  Mark, C. (2000).  "Design
              of Roof Bolt Systems."  In C. Mark, D.R. Dolinar, and R. Tuchman, eds. New
              Technology for Coal Mine Roof Support, Proceedings of the NIOSH Open Industry
              Briefing, NIOSH IC 9453, pp. 111-132.

