Title       : Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2002      
File        : a0201848

Award Number: 0201848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $966600             (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. Lineberger wcl@jila.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project funded by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division, Lineberger will conduct research in negative ion
              photoelectron spectroscopy, time resolved photodissociation spectroscopy, and
              time resolved photoelectron spectroscopy. Systems to be studied include
              biradical and triradical (e.g., 1,3,5-dehydrobenzene anion) species; complex
              biradical and clustered radical species; and anion complexes for the
              investigations of transition state spectroscopies and time resolved
              spectroscopy. A Negative Ion-Neutral-Positive Ion (NeNePo) technique will be
              developed to investigate the evolving structure of complexes along a reaction
              coordinate. Ongoing studies of energy flow and caging dynamics in size-selected
              anionic clusters will be continued, with extensions to include asymmetric
              chromophores, triatomic chromophores, and mixed solvents, in order to provide
              deep new insights into their dynamics.  Studies of time resolved dynamics in
              cluster ions will be extended from diatomic chromophores to triatomic species.
              This work will include work on prereactive complexes where photoexcitation can
              stimulate chemical reaction. Here the emphasis will be on photoexcitation that
              results in significant charge redistribution in the cluster complex, affording
              a direct look at solvent reorganization processes.

This research deals with
              fundamental problems of reaction chemistry. The goal is to obtain new insights
              into the structure and reactive processes of chemical intermediates and
              solvated ions. The research will be conducted with internal and external
              collaborators as well as with  postdoctoral research associates and graduate
              students. The postdocs and students gain valuable experience in one of the
              forefront areas of physical chemistry in preparation for advanced studies or
              employment in industry, academia, or government laboratories. An active
              outreach program is conducted for the recruitment of the next generation of
              scientists and to bring the excitement of chemistry to high school and college
              students as a contribution to the development of a scientifically educated
              citizenry.

