Title       : Mathematical Problems from Geometric/Topological Quantum Field Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0201683

Award Number: 0201683
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109932             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ambar N. Sengupta sengupta@math.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               ABSTRACT for DMS 0201683


This project concerns problems at the juncture of
              geometry, topology, and
physics. The mathematical challenge   we address is
              :(i) to provide a
rigorous framework for    functional integrals in
              geometrical  quantum
field theories, and (ii) to use the rigorous framework to
              prove results
which may be conjectured in the heuristic/informal  setting
              suggested by
physics. Specifically, we will be concerned with : (a) quantum
              Yang-Mills
gauge theory over surfaces, (b) a three dimensional   Chern-Simons
              gauge
theory, and (c) other functional integrals arising
              from
geometrical/topological quantum  theories. The goal will be to
              give
rigorous foundations to   the mathematical expressions and objects
              which
arise in these theories and then to use them to further
              develop
mathematical ideas and solve specific problems. The mathematics
              involved
includes   geometry and topology connected with  fiber bundles and
              Lie
groups, as well as stochastic analysis and
              infinite-dimensional
integration. Stochastic analysis has  often been applied
              in the study of
the geometry of manifolds. The present proposal addresses  
              situations
which promise deeper applications of stochastic analysis in
              settings
enriched  by   geometry and topology.

This research program will
              bring together geometry  and topology  with
stochastic analysis to provide
              solid mathematical foundations for certain
computations done in physics, solve
               certain specific  problems and develop
new mathematical ideas arising from
              quantum physics. The physics is quantum
field theory, which describes the
              quantum behavior of forces that govern
the interaction between elementary
              particles  in nature such as those which
make up protons and neutrons. This
              project   is concerned with development
of fundamental mathematics  connected
              with   an area of physics. There may
be potential applications to surface
              physics and other phenomena involving
geometry and stochastics, but this
              project itself is devoted primarily to
foundations rather than application.  
              History shows that mathematics
arising through an investigation of fundamental
              notions associated to one
particular context later finds application in areas
              far removed from the
original context, this being an essential aspect of the
              centrality of
mathematics to applied sciences.



