Title       : Zeta-Functions, L-Functions, and Random Matrix Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0201457

Award Number: 0201457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William M. Snyder, Jr.                  
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Gonek gonek@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0201457   Steve Gonek

Abstract

The investigator and his colleagues are
              studying problems in analytic
number theory centered mainly on the
              Riemann-zeta function and L-functions,
and relations between their zeros and
              the primes. Two projects focus on the
remarkable, recently discovered 
              applications of random matrix theory to
the zeta-function. Keating and
              Snaith's characteristic polynomial model of
the zeta-function is providing
              heuristic answers to many previously
intractable problems in analytic number
              theory. However, a serious drawback
of the model is that it does not contain
              the primes. Instead, they have to
be inserted in an ad hoc manner with each
              new application. The investigator
and his colleagues have a new model that
              explicitly integrates the primes
and zeros in a most natural way. They are
              applying it to a variety of
problems, such as moment and order estimates for
              the zeta-function, and
they expect it to give them new insights into the
              connections between the
zeros and the primes. A related project explores the
              relations between the
Gaussian Unitary Ensemble Conjecture on the zeros, the
              distribution of
primes and almost-primes, and mean-value theorems involving
              the Riemann
zeta-function. They also study geometrical aspects of the
              zeta-function,
such as its curvature near the critical line, and the size of
              gaps between
zeros. Two final problems lie in an altogether different area of
              number
theory. These concern additive patterns of elements in the
              multiplicative
group of a finite field and the related question of the value
              distribution
of incomplete exponential sums containing multiplicative
              characters.

This is a project in the area of mathematics known as number
              theory.  The fundamental questions of interest in number theory have to do with
              the structure of numbers, and in particular the prime numbers, as these are the
              fundamental building blocks of arithmetic and, therefore, of much of
              mathematics.  Many of the most important questions in this area are so
              intractable that it is impossible even to guess correct answers to them.
              Recently, a remarkable partnership has developed between theoretical physicists
              and analytic number theorists, which is succeeding in answering some of these
              questions. At the center of this collaboration is a model of something called
              the Riemann zeta-function, which is a special mathematical function known for
              over a century to encode within its properties a great deal of information
              about prime numbers.  This model is based on the theory of random matrices,
              objects previously used to model complicated physical systems such as heavy
              nuclei.  Although the model has been quite successful, it has the serious
              drawback of not containing the prime numbers which, after all, are the
              principal objects of interest. The investigator and his colleagues have now
              developed a model that does integrate the primes and zeros in a most natural
              way, and a main goal of this project is to explore further applications of our
              new model. A related project concerns arithmetic and analytic consequences of a
              widely believed conjecture about the zeros of the zeta-function.  Using recent
              developments in the field, we also investigate geometrical aspects of the
              zeta-function such as its curvature, and gap sizes between its zeros. Two
              problems in a different area of number theory concern the structure of finite
              fields, objects with important applications to coding theory and
              cryptography.



