Title       : Biological Fluid Dynamics in Morphogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  2002     
File        : a0201094

Award Number: 0201094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $821273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon R. Lubkin lubkin@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zhilin Li  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,4075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will develop models of the mechanical aspects of shape change in
              (1) cylindrical fiber-reinforced hydrostats, (2) pattern formation by traction
              forces in mesenchymal tissues during development and remodeling, and (3)
              glandular branching morphogenesis. In this Stokesian multiphase area of
              biological fluid dynamics, there is no inertia, but there are forces across
              interfaces and transfers of forces between the fluids and fibers embedded in
              the fluids. In some applications, the models have multiple viscous fluids
              separated by active interfaces, and in others, the models have a single fluid
              whose motion and material properties are coupled with the motion of contractile
              fibers. The models will be used to gain a better understanding of the
              anisotropic behavior of cylindrical hydrostats (trunks, tentacles, and
              tongues). They will be used to increase understanding of the mechanical
              instabilities and pattern formation which can emerge when cells modify their
              extracellular matrix by moving through it or pulling on it. They will also be
              used to help define the developmental implications of mechanical hypotheses
              about how branched tubular structures (like lungs) form in the body. Some
              results will generate interpretations of theories, some will suggest
              experiments to test the implications of theories, and some will suggest
              industrial applications of biomechanical principles. The project will also
              develop the finite difference numerical methods necessary to solve the partial
              differential equations arising from modeling the physical forces in these
              tissues. The development of robust three-dimensional algorithms for the
              solution of biological fluid dynamics problems will be key to the effective
              modeling of dozens of problems in the mechanics of cell motion and tissue
              remodeling.

This project involves several biomedical problems in the
              dynamics of tissues. At all stages of an organism's existence there are
              mechanical forces at work. How does a completely round egg get to be a very
              complicated-looking human being, with limbs and eyes and ducts and glands and a
              wrinkled brain? There are genes that switch on and off, but that is not the
              whole story. An airplane has switches too, but to understand how it really
              works, we need to study fluid mechanics - the physical forces that lift,
              stabilize, and occasionally disturb the craft. Fluid dynamics is equally
              relevant to biology. As an organism - or part of it - is growing, it creates
              physical forces, and is shaped by physical forces. The science of Tissue
              Dynamics is relatively new, and requires expertise in many areas. A biological
              modeler, a numerical analyst, a developmental biologist, and an industrial
              researcher have teamed up to study the biomechanics of tissues which are
              changing their shape, size, strength, orientation, and function. Results of the
              work should increase our understanding of processes in developmental biology,
              wound healing, cancer, vascular health and disease, and many other areas of
              biomedicine involving tissues. This grant is made under the Joint DMS/NIGMS
              Initiative to Support Research Grants in the Area of Mathematical Biology. This
              is a joint competition sponsored by the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS)
              at the National Science Foundation and the National Institute of General
              Medical Sciences (NIGMS) at the National Institutes of Health.

