Title       : Birational Geometry and Rational Connectedness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a0201423

Award Number: 0201423
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61069              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aise J. deJong dejong@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jason P. Starr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project concerns birational geometry of complex varieties 
and the study
              of rationally connected varieties.  The main 
objective is to study spaces of
              rational curves on rationally 
connected varieties, with the goal of
              constructing new birational 
invariants of these varieties and determining the
              relationship 
between these varieties and unirational varieties.  The
              secondary 
objective is to develop further some of the techniques and tools
              
of algebraic geometry: to develop techniques for determining when 
moduli
              stacks are rationally connected, to construct and study 
new compactifications
              of the space of smooth rational curves in 
projective space, and to refine the
              Behrend-Manin stratification 
of the Kontsevich moduli stack so that it
              detects mutliple covers.

Systems of polynomial equations in some collection
              of variables 
arise in every branch of mathematics, science and engineering. 
              
Determining the solutions of these systems of equations is of 
paramount
              importance. "Unirational varieties" precisely correspond 
to those systems of
              equations where the set of solutions is most 
easily described -- the set of
              solutions is the set of all outputs 
of some sequence of polynomials with
              arbitrary inputs.  So it is 
very important to recognize which systems of
              equations correspond 
to unirational varieties.  From the point of view of
              geometry, a 
closely related notion is "rational connectedness".  This notion
              
is far simpler to recognize in practice.  Potentially both notions
are
              equivalent.  If one could prove that both notions are
equivalent, this would
              give a simpler way to recognize which 
systems of equations correspond to
              unirational varieties.  The 
investigator intends to continue his research of
              this problem.

