Title       : Applications of Semigroups to Algebraic Geometry Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  2002 
File        : a0201286

Award Number: 0201286
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew D. Pollington                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104872             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen L. Matthews gmatthe@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator studies applications of algebraic geometry to 
coding theory. 
              In this proposal, the investigator focuses on 
problems relating semigroups
              and algebraic geometry codes.  This 
involves exploring connections between
              Weierstrass semigroups of 
m-tuples of points on a curve and algebraic
              geometry codes formed 
using these m points.  The first aim of this project is
              to better 
understand the structure of Weierstrass semigroups of m-tuples of
              
points on certain curves over finite fields.  The second goal is 
to apply
              this knowledge to improve bounds on the minimum distances 
of codes
              constructed using these curves as well as arbitrary 
curves over finite
              fields.  This builds on the investigator's 
previous work showing that
              Weierstrass semigroups of pairs of 
points can be used to construct algebraic
              geometry codes with 
parameters exceeding the usual lower bounds.   These
              codes, 
constructed using two points on a curve, have better parameters 
than
              any comparable code constructed using a single point on the 
same curve. 
              Thus, in the third component of this project, the 
investigator compares codes
              constructed using m points on a curve 
to those constructed using fewer than m
              points.  In addition to 
these topics, this project includes a focus on
              semigroups used in 
decoding algorithms for algebraic geometry codes.  
              

Error-correcting codes are used to ensure reliable transfer of
              
information across noisy communication channels by detecting 
and correcting
              errors.  Such codes are found in a wide range of 
devices, from computing
              equipment to cellular telephones to 
compact disc players.  For practical
              applications, codes should 
be efficient and correct as many errors as
              possible.  While there 
are many ways to construct codes, one of the most
              promising uses 
tools from algebraic geometry.  In particular, curves over
              finite 
fields are used to define error-correcting codes, called algebraic
              
geometry codes.  One can gain information about these codes by 
studying the
              curves used to define them.  In this proposal, the 
investigator examines
              curves commonly used to define algebraic 
geometry codes by studying
              semigroups associated with the curves.  
This knowledge is then applied to
              obtain better estimates of the 
efficiency and error-correcting capabilities
              of the corresponding 
codes.  In addition, the investigator pursues
              applications of 
semigroups to the process of decoding algebraic geometry
              codes.     


