Title       : Sensitivity and Elasticity in Population Models, in Markov Chains, and in Graphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0201333

Award Number: 0201333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Neumann neumann@math.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Problems are posed in  three areas of application  of linear algebra in
which
              the theories and methods of nonnegative matrices and of generalized
inverses
              of matrices play  very significant roles. The areas are  (i)
population models
              in mathematical biology, (ii) the algebraic measurement of the
connectivity of
              graphs, and  (iii) finite homogeneous Markov chains in probability and
              statistics. In all these areas nonnegative matrices and/or their
              associated
M--matrices are used to represent the basic model according to
              weights or probabilities connecting between states  or vertices. The
              sensitivities and elasticities of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors, as well as
              other properties,  of such matrices  are used to analyze and understand the
              behavior of the models and their response to  changes in the input data.
              Generalized inverses are needed because they enter into expressions for the
              derivatives, when they exist,  of the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of matrices
              as functions of the  entries and thus generalized inverses help in measuring
              the effects of various types of perturbation on the models.

Many physical
              phenomena can be modeled by mathematics, and mathematics is a primary tool for
              understanding and predicting the behavior of the phenomena. Take the
              simple-looking problem of a population, be it of humans or of animals or of
              germs, that is divided according to age.  At each age the females may have a
              different birth rate and at each age members of the population may have a
              different probability of survival to the next age group.  If one knows the
              initial distribution of the population into the different age groups, then can
              one predict the short and long term evolution trends of the population?!  Could
              it be that the population can reach in time a situation that is called an
              equilibrium?  This is a situation in which the sizes of each age group may
              continue to change, but the relative size of each age group to the other age
              groups does not change.  There are many problems of this sort which the fields
              of mathematics called Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory can help model and
              solve.  In this project matrix methods are applied to investigate the behavior
              of three models, one from population growth, one from a networking problem, and
              one from physical systems that is governed by probability rather than by
              surety.
