Title       : Real and Apparent Complexity in Polydnavirus Genomes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  1999    
File        : a9603504

Award Number: 9603504
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda E. Hyman                          
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Webb  9603504  Polydnavirus genomes and life cycles are complex. Campoletis
              somnorensis (PDV) has at least 28 DNA segments with genome size estimates in
              excess of 250 kb, of which the most abundantly expressed are nested. There is
              little understanding of the evolutionary pressures that have driven or allowed
              segmentation of the viral genome. PDVs are obligate symbionts of some parasitic
              hymenoptera and replicate asymptotically from integrated proviral DNA only in
              specialized calyx cells of the female reproductive tract. When the wasp
              paristizes the lepidopteran host, the virus genome invades the host, ceases
              replicating and viral genes are rapidly expressed at a constant level producing
              infection. Such viral gene expression is required for successful development of
              the endoparasitic wasp. The hypothesis that PDV genome segmentation has
              resulted from selective pressure for high level gene expression in parasitized
              insects will be tested by cloning and mapping genes on nested viral DNA
              segments, by evaluating a number of viral structural proteins and by
              manipulating the level of viral gene expression in host insects.     The
              results of these studies will produce the first comprehensive characterization
              of a polydnavirus genome allowing critical evaluation of the linkage between
              segment nesting and levels of gene expression and may produce fundamental
              insights into the evolutionary forces that have shaped the genomes of
              polydnaviruses, the only group of segmented DNA viruses.
