Title       : Mechanical Influences on Mammalian Limb Joint Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1997       
File        : a9603808

Award Number: 9603808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Hamrick mhamrick@kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hamrick  9603808    Modeling refers to the process of cartilage and bone
              formation  and resorption during growth. Theoretical models predict that 
              mechanical factors such as joint movement and loading guide the  modeling of
              mammalian limb joints. This study seeks to test these  theoretical predictions
              directly by investigating the influence  of changing body size, muscle
              morphology, and locomotor behavior  on marsupial limb joint shape during growth
              and development.  These empirical data are called for to address the following 
              outstanding questions concerning limb joint structure and  function. For
              example, how is limb joint design modified in  relation to increasing
              organismal size? What changes in joint  morphology are evident following the
              onset of independent  locomotor behavior? How do joint surfaces adapt to
              morphological  changes in the muscles acting on them during growth? Finally,
              are  certain aspects of joint shape more labile and others more  invariant
              during the modeling process? The proposed study will  provide a much needed
              developmental perspective on limb joint  structure and function by identifying
              those aspects of joint  morphology which are highly canalized during growth and
              those  which are instead more variable under different mechanical  conditions.
              These data have clinical relevance for understanding  the developmental basis
              of joint malformations in humans, and  more general biological significance for
              understanding the  factors underlying both within- and between-species
              variation in  mammalian limb joint form.
