Title       : Evolution of a Genetic Island of Catabolic Diversity in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9603980

Award Number: 9603980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: L.Nicholas Ornston nicholas.ornston@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ornston  9603980  We shall expand knowledge of an Acinetobacter chromosomal
              segment that allows growth of the bacteria with many different chemicals from
              the environment. Presently sequenced and open to genetic investigation is the
              pca-qui-pob cluster containing genes associated with catabolism of quinate
              (qui), shikimate (qui) and 4-hydroxybenzoate (pob) through protocatechuate
              (pca). Downstream from pobA are genes provisionally designated caf and required
              for catabolism of chemically analogous plant products (caffeate, coumarate and
              ferulate) through metabolic reactions that give rise to protocatechuate. After
              this DNA has been cloned and sequenced, it will be subjected to genetic
              analysis by a simple procedure that allows selection of strains in which caf
              genes are defective. The results will expand knowledge of both the evolutionary
              source and the biochemical mechanisms of enzymes that catabolize caffeate,
              coumarate and ferulate. The enzymes are likely to share ancestry with enzymes
              associated with the (-oxidation of fatty acids. Thus the combination of
              evolutionary and genetic investigations is designed to elucidate how genes for
              a classical metabolic sequence have been adapted to novel metabolic challenges.
               Variations upon the metabolic theme of ( oxidation are represented in catIJF
              and pcaIJF, nearly   identical chromosomal segments that exchange sequence
              information by gene conversion. The potential contribution of this
              intracellular horizontal sequence transfer to concerted divergence of catIJF
              and pcaIJF in divergent Acinetobacter cell lines will be compared with the
              rates of divergence of caf genes with analogous biochemical functions. 
              Knowledge emerging from the foregoing studies will define further a chromosomal
              island of catabolic diversity, the pca-qui-pob-caf gene cluster containing
              genetic information allowing growth of Acinetobacter with a wide range of
              compounds in the environment. The nutrients support the growth of many but not
              all representatives of the genus Acinetobacte r. We shall characterize genetic
              variants of the pca-qui-pob-caf gene cluster from different Acinetobacter cell
              lines. Particular attention will be directed to strains exhibiting phenotypes
              indicating that portions of the cluster are absent. We shall determine the
              extent to which the missing phenotypic properties reflect the absence of DNA
              required for their maintenance. This evidence will indicate if the known
              phenotypic variations are the consequence of abrupt genetic discontinuities
              that may help to distinguish members of different genomospecies within the
              complex genus Acinetobacter. If genetic variations in the pca-qui-pob-caf
              cluster are concordant with biological separation of Acinetobacter
              genomospecies by other criteria, it may be possible to infer how evolution of
              different cell lines within the genus was influenced by different sets of
              nutritional opportunities within the environment.    This project will expand
              knowledge of evolutionary mechanisms that led to the extraordinary ability of
              bacteria to remove chemicals from the environment.  Application of such
              knowledge may improve the biological cleanup of environmental chemicals and
              also may assist in development of processes for bacterial conversion of natural
              resources to chemicals with improved value for society.
