Title       : Molecular Genetic Analysis of Protein Phosphatase 2A Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a9603733

Award Number: 9603733
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $314500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Hallberg hallberg@syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hallberg  9603733  While a large number of serine/threonine protein kinases have
              been described, the number of serine/threonine protein phosphatases that have
              been characterized is, by contrast, far smaller. It is probably unlikely that
              the removal of phosphates from particular proteins is not as highly regulated
              as their addition, so this apparent inequality in modifying and "de-modifying"
              enzymes is an interesting problem. With regard to the 2A subset of protein
              phosphatases (PP2A), an enzyme whose activity has been causally linked to the
              regulation of DNA replication, RNA transcription, signal transduction, and
              intermediary metabolism, it has recently been recognized that: 1) the active
              enzyme is a heterotrimer composed of a catalytic (C), structural (A), and
              regulatory (B) subunit, and 2) the regulatory (B) subunit can be one of several
              totally different proteins. It is now known that the kind of B subunit
              assembled into the trimer can affect both the localization of the enzyme within
              the cell as well as changing its substrate specificity. Thus, apparently by
              regulating the "quality" of its PP2A trimers, the cell can endow PP2A catalytic
              subunits with a variety of much narrower substrate targets. In order to better
              understand how this enzyme regulates particular cellular processes, we need to
              understand the "population dynamics" of the different cellular forms of PP2A
              and to define their in vivo targets. A combined molecular genetic and
              biochemical approach to identifying PP2A functional and structural dynamics is
              readily pursuable using the baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The genes
              encoding two, and possibly three, C subunits, two B subunits, and an A subunit
              from S. cerevisiae have been cloned and characterized. Specific phenotypes of
              strains expressing mutant alleles of a number of these different genes have
              shown that PP2A function is required for the control of specific steps in the
              cell cycle, bud site selection and bud growth, and regulation of expression of
              the general stres s response. This laboratory has begun developing yeast
              strains unable to correctly express one or more components of PP2A or to
              express altered forms of such components and then examining the phenotypic
              consequences of such alterations and also assess the state of assembly of PP2A
              trimers in the cell. Immunoprecipitation procedures and non-denaturing
              polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis combined with western analyses will make it
              possible to follow the dynamics of assembly and disassembly of virtually all
              the now known PP2A components during different growth and cell cycle stages. In
              addition, by immunofluorescence microscopy, it will be possible to localize
              within the cell where specific forms of PP2A may accumulate.  As different
              forms of PP2A have now been shown to be critical in the regulation of cell
              division, the studies described should add to our understanding of the
              mechanisms by which a cell controls the timing of when or when not to divide, a
              critical capacity that differentiates normal from uncontrolled growth .
