Title       : Power Output and Efficiency of Asynchronous Muscle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2000       
File        : a9603187

Award Number: 9603187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Josephson rkjoseph@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9603187  Josephson    Muscles which are capable of high-frequency operation use
              one of two fundamentally different modes for controlling connection.  Muscles
              of the two modes are termed synchronous or asynchronous, depending on whether
              there is or is not a 1:1 correspondence between muscle electrical activity and
              muscle contraction.  In synchronous muscles brief contraction, and therefore
              the potential for high frequency operation, is achieved through the elaboration
              of the components within muscle fibers (the T-tubules and sarcoplasmic
              reticulum) which are involved in contractile activation through calcium release
              and rebinding.  The asynchronous approach to high-frequency operation is built
              on shortening deactivation and sketch activation, features which are found in
              many muscles but which are particularly elaborated in high-frequency muscles of
              some insects.  If one of these muscles is tetanically stimulated and subjected
              to cyclic shortening and lengthening at an appropriate frequency, the force at
              any given length during shortening is greater than the force at that length
              during reextension, a consequence of shortening deactivation.  Thus more work
              is done during shortening than is required to relengthen the muscle, and there
              is net work output, work which allows the muscle to contract repetitively at
              high frequency when it is attached to an appropriate resonant load.    It has
              been proposed that asynchronous muscles should have higher mass-specific power
              output and be more efficient than synchronous counterparts.   They are expected
              to have greater power output because less space need be devoted to control
              components (sarcoplasmic reticulum and T-tubules) in asynchronous muscles than
              in synchronous ones; more efficient because calcium cycling costs are
              substantially less in the asynchronous muscles.  Unfortunately, available
              information on power output and efficiency of asynchronous muscle is
              insufficient to know if the hypotheses are correct.  These hypotheses will be
              tested by directly m easuring power output and efficiency of an asynchronous
              muscle.  The muscle to be used are beetle flight muscles, chosen for being of
              convenient size and shape for mechanical studies.  Power output will be
              determined using the work loop approach, in which a repetitive length change is
              imposed on the muscle and work output per cycle is measured as the area of the
              figure formed when muscle force is plotted against muscle length.  Measurements
              will be made at a contraction frequency and muscle temperature characteristic
              of those during normal flight.  Power measurements will be combined with
              measurements of energy expenditure, judged by oxygen consumption or carbon
              dioxide production, to determine the efficiency of the muscle in converting
              metabolic to mechanical energy.  ***
