Title       : Regulation of Ecdysteroid Hormone Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9603547

Award Number: 9603547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene Spaziani eugnee-spaziani@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603547  Spaziani    Growth, molting and regeneration of lost limbs in
              crustaceans is controlled by steroid hormones (ecdysteroids) from a pair of
              glands (Y-organs).  The Y-organs, in turn, are regulated by a protein hormone
              (MIH) from the animals' brain.  This system is comparable to human glands
              (testes, ovaries, adrenals) that secrete steroid hormones (testosterone,
              estrogen, cortisone) and that are controlled by protein hormones from the brain
              and pituitary gland.  The PI has found that crustaceans, like humans, make
              steroid hormones from cholesterol and that the cholesterol in blood is bound up
              in lipoprotein (HDL).  Accordingly, crustacean glands are being used as a
              simplified model to study how cholesterol enters cells, how those cells
              converted it to hormones, and how the process is controlled by the brain
              hormone.  The project focuses on how inflation is transferred from the cell
              surface, which contains receptors that "recognize" MIH and HDL, to the
              interior, ultimately to genes that code for enzymes responsible for hormone
              synthesis.  In particular, the hypothesis will be tested that informational
              signals are specialized lipids which cause (a) the activation of membrane
              enzymes, and (b) the release of intracellular calcium, both in turn responsible
              for activation of key enzymes in the path toward hormone synthesis.  A subset
              of questions centers on the probability that increased hormone synthesis can be
              triggered by rises of calcium in the circulation as well as by calcium already
              resident in the cell.  Methods include use of radioactive calcium as tracer and
              fluorescence indicators that detect release of intracellular calcium.  The
              research results will help to solve related mysteries in vertebrate glands. 
              Generally, this research contributes to knowledge of the biology of crustaceans
              and their insect relatives, economically important animal groups, and embraces
              the fields of neurobiology, endocrinology and development in addressing basic
              questions on neuroendocrine coordination and  control of steroid hormone
              secretion.  ***
