Title       : Vacuolar Sequestration of Anthocyanin in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2000     
File        : a9603927

Award Number: 9603927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Virginia Walbot walbot@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603927  Walbot  Flowering plants synthesize an incredible diversity of "toxic"
              natural products.  The PIs use many of these compounds in medicine, for
              example, the anti-cancer drugs taxol and colchicine, the heart medicine
              digitalis, and even the widely used pain relievers of aspirin and quinine are
              based on plant natural products.  Within the plant, theses compounds and many
              additional pigments and secondary metabolites deter herbivores and pathogens,
              and are thus part of the plant's ability to survive in the natural world. 
              Surprisingly little is known, however, about how plants can synthesize "toxic"
              molecules and yet avoid damaging their own cells.  Biosynthesis occurs in the
              plant cell cytoplasm, but the toxic metabolites are stored in the plant
              vacuole.  The biochemistry and molecular biology of anthocyanin pigment
              biosynthesis is the best understood secondary metabolite pathway in higher
              plants.  Anthocyanins are the red-blue-purple pigments found in most flowers
              and many fruits, and their color makes them a useful "marker" for elucidating
              the mechanisms of vacuolar sequestration.  In maize, the Bronze2 gene encodes
              that last genetically defined step in anthocyanin biosynthesis.  This enzyme is
              a glutathione S-transferase (GST) that adds a chemical "tag" to cytoplasmic
              anthocyanin that facilitates entry into the plant vacuole.  This is the first
              established mechanism by which plants can transport large secondary metabolites
              into the vacuole.  In the proposed work, the investigators will define the
              distribution of the Bronze2 enzyme, determine if it complexes with other GSTs,
              and determine if this enzyme has additional in vivo substrates besides
              anthocyanin.  Mutants in Bz2 and other maize GSTs will be used to define which
              enzymes perform unique roles and which have overlapping roles.  Structural
              studies of the transiently glutathionationated anthocyanin pigment will define
              the site(s) of  glutathione tagging and determine if subsequent anthocyanin
              modification in the vacuole occurs at th e same sites tagged with glutathione
              in the cytoplasm.  Understanding the key steps of anthocyanin transfer from
              cytoplasm to vacuole will provide new insights into the capacity of plants to
              synthesize and store a wide range of toxic but very useful metabolites.
