Title       : Evaluating the Role of Resource Heterogeneity in Restoring Grasslands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9603118

Award Number: 9603118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188196             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. Knapp aknapp@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9285,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9603118  Knapp    Attempts  to  restore ecosystems to a more or less  "natural 
              state" following agricultural use have usually fallen  short  of   their 
              goals.   Although  some  attributes  of  natural  ecosystems  can  be restored
              quickly, often  times  critical  differences  in  the structure or function  of
               natural  and  restored  ecosystems persist for long periods.  For example, 
              native  plant  species  richness and diversity  in  restored  ecosystems   is 
              usually  much  lower  than  in   comparable  undisturbed  ecosystems, and may
              take decades or  longer  to  approach undisturbed ecosystem levels.  This is
              particularly  true    for    tallgrass   prairie   ecosystem.     Although 
              establishment  of the dominant grasses in tallgrass  prairie  restoration
              efforts usually has been successful, it has been  more  difficult to restore
              the less common grasses and forbs  that  provide much of the species richness
              and diversity  in  these  grasslands.  Our research focuses on  the  role  that
               heterogeneity  of  soil  resources  may  play  in  grassland  restoration 
              efforts.   Most grassland  restoration  efforts  occur  on  former agricultural
              fields, where soil  resources  have   been   homogenized.    In  contrast,  
              most   natural  communities  are characterized by a high degree  of  spatial 
              heterogeneity  in  resources, which is  assumed  to  enhance  plant species
              diversity.  We contend that the problem of low  plant species diversity that
              plagues most restoration effort  is  due to the slow conversion of an ecosystem
              from a  state  of  relatively uniform  resource availability to one with  a 
              more    spatially   heterogeneous   pattern   of    resource  availability.  
              Our research will test the  hypotheses  that  recovery  of plant species
              richness, diversity and community  heterogeneity will occur more rapidly during
              the restoration  process if greater resource heterogeneity is impose  on  the 
              system from the beginning.
