Title       : Signaling by Ethylene Receptors of Arabidopsis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9603679

Award Number: 9603679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $302419             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Schaller egs@hopper.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              MCB-9603679  Schaller    Technical    The simple gas ethylene functions as an
              endogenous growth  regulator in plants, and affects seed germination, seedling 
              growth, abscission, senescence, fruit ripening, and pathogen  responses.  The
              initial steps by which plants perceive and  transduce the ethylene signal have
              begun to be elucidated by  studies in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana.  From
              this work  it has been demonstrated that a family of ethylene receptors  exist
              in plants that are related to bacterial histidine  kinases.  Additional
              evidence indicates that downstream of  the ethylene receptors lies a MAP kinase
              pathway.  Thus,  signal transduction elements characteristic of both 
              prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems have been combined in a  single pathway. The
              proposed research is designed to  determine how the ethylene signal is
              transduced through the  receptor and passed to downstream elements in the
              signaling  pathway.       Ethylene receptors will be characterized in reference
               to their bacterial counterparts.  The membrane location of  the ethylene
              receptors in plants will be determined by  biochemical fractionation methods. 
              The postulated kinase  activity of the receptors will be examined following 
              transgenic expression and purification of the protein from  bacteria and yeast.
              Purification of full-length ethylene  receptors from transgenic yeast will
              allow analysis as to  how binding of ethylene regulates kinase activity.  In 
              addition, the mechanism of action of the ethylene receptors  will be examined
              in detail by transforming mutant versions  back into Arabidopsis and
              determining how ethylene signal  transduction is affected.  Ethylene receptors
              are  hypothesized to function through a response regulator  protein that feeds
              into the MAP kinase pathway, and  potential response regulators have been
              identified in  Arabidopsis.  Their role in ethylene signal transduction  will
              be characterized by knock-out mutations and the ability  to interact with known
              elements in the pathway.  This wo rk  will clarify the early steps in ethylene
              signal transduction  and provide a framework for engineering modifications into
               these steps.  Modifications of ethylene sensitivity will  enhance our ability
              to regulate such processes as abscission  and fruit-ripening in crops of
              agronomic importance.  In a  broader context, these studies will also help
              elucidate how  the bacterial histidine kinases have been adapted to  function
              in a eukaryotic system.    Nontechnical    The gas ethylene is a plant hormone
              that both signals and  induces a variety of responses including ripening and 
              senescence. The efflux of ethylene from some cells  stimulates the response of
              adjacent cells and plants.  Ethylene is widely used to induce ripening of some
              fruit  such as tomato and the interruption of ethylene production  has been
              shown to extend the shelf life of transgenic  tomatoes that are now
              commercially available. This project  will investigate the fundamental
              mechanism of how ethylene  is perceived by targeted cells. Ethylene is detected
              by a  protein on the surface of plant cells and signals the cell  to undertake
              the stimulation of a number of genes that  mediate the ripening and senesence
              response. This project  will elucidate the mechanism of signaling that occurs
              as a  consequence of ethylene detection. The elucidation of the  signaling
              mechanism for ethylene will be an important  advance in the understanding of
              the fundamental biology of  plants and it will present the prospect of
              producing new and  useful changes in food and floral crops to permit controlled
               ripening and longer-lived produce and flowers.
