Title       : "Development of the Immune System: Are Neonatal T Cells Deficient in Numbers or
               Function In Vivo?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9603951

Award Number: 9603951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca D. Adkins radkins@mednet.med.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch of Med
	      Research Administration, RMSB
	      Miami, FL  33136    305/243-6232

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9603951  Adkins   Newborn animals mount poor immune responses, a
              condition referred to as neonatal immunodeficiency.  For decades it was widely
              believed that this conditions was at least partially due to the developmentally
              immature state of newborn T cells.  The generally accepted hypothesis was that
              neonatal T cells were qualitatively different from adult T cells, resulting in
              deficient T cell mediated responses.  However, several recent studies indicate
              that reduced T cell mediated responses may be caused solely by reduced numbers
              of T cells in the neonatal animal.  This interpretation is difficult to
              reconcile with the wealth of data showing phenotypic and functional immaturity
              among the neonatal T cell population.  Resolution of the relative importance of
              neonatal T cell numbers vs function is pivotal for our understanding of the
              developmental biology of the immune system.  This investigator is proposing
              experiments to determine whether the deficient T cell mediated responses of
              neonates are due to qualitative or quantitative differences, or both, between
              newborn and adult T cells. First the relative capacities of newborn and adult T
              cells to provide help for B cell antibody responses in vivo will be measured. 
              Then the types and amounts of cytokines produced by lymph node T cells in
              neonates and in adults in response to a primary stimulation will be compared. 
              In neonates, these responses will also be measured when adult antigen
              presenting cells are provided.  These studies will provide a definitive test of
              the functional capacities of newborn T cells in situ.   Although it has been
              known for a long time that newborn animals have poor immune responses, the
              reason for this has not been determined.   A number of recent experiments do
              not conform to the accepted hypothesis that this may due to reduced numbers of
              T cells,  The experiments in this proposal  will determine the functional
              capacities of newborn T cells in the immune response and provide a basis for
              understanding neonatal  immunodeficiency.  ***
