Title       : Single-Strand DNA-Binding Proteins and Deoxyribonucleotide Enzyme Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1998   
File        : a9603684

Award Number: 9603684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Mathews mathewsc@ucs.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603684  Mathews  This project tests a model of DNA replication in which the
              deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate precursors to DNA are synthesized by enzyme
              complexes linked to the replication machinery, allowing thereby the efficient
              delivery of building materials to DNA replication sites.  In T4
              bacteriophage-infected Escherichia coli, the enzymes of dNTP biosynthesis form
              a complex, called dNTP synthetase, which contains at least eight virus-coded
              enzymes and two enzymes of host cell origin.  In vitro, the complex displays
              kinetic coupling, i.e., the ability to catalyze multi-step reaction pathways
              efficiently and with little accumulation of intermediates.  Thus, the complex
              behaves in vitro as it must behave in vivo if it is to serve as a DNA substrate
              shuttle, synthesizing dNTPs in the immediate vicinity of replication sites. 
              Purified recombinant enzymes from the T4 dNTP synthetase complex have been
              shown to associate, directly or indirectly, with the T4 single-strand
              DNA-binding protein(SSB) encoded by gene 32.  This suggests a model for DNA
              replication in which multiple dNTP synthetase complexes are drawn to
              replication forks by their attraction for T4 SSB.  This project will test that
              model by physical and enzyme kinetic analysis of association among proteins in
              the complex and the T4 gene 32 protein; investigations of the role of gene 32
              protein in drawing dNTP synthesizing enzymes to replication sites;
              investigation of the role the acidic C-terminus of gene 32 protein upon
              interactions with dNTP-synthesizing enzymes; and attempted  reconstitution of
              parts of the dNTP synthetase complex.  If resources permit, this investigation
              will be extended to vaccinia virus, which also encodes an SSB that interacts
              with enzymes of DNA precursor synthesis.    Many cellular metabolic processes
              are being found to involve organized protein assemblies, which increase the
              efficiency of cellular function by preventing diffusion of intermediates away
              from sites of utilization.  Because DNA replication occurs  at a limited number
              of sites (as  few as two replication forks per chromosome in bacteria), there
              is a special need for organization of enzymes of dNTP synthesis, to deliver
              precursors to those few sites rapidly enough to support observed high rates of
              DNA replication and to maintain high accuracy in the transfer of genetic
              information.  Moreover, because dNTPs have no known metabolic roles other than
              their use as DNA precursors, the synthesis of those precursors must be closely
              coordinated with DNA replication.  Understanding that coordination may lead to
              a greater understanding of the intracellular organization of a fundamental
              biological process.
