Title       : Protein Engineering of Citric Acid Cycle Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a9603656

Award Number: 9603656
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard J. Banaszak len_b@dcmir.med.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603656  Banaszak  As the link between protein structure and function
              strengthens, the number of fundamental questions which can be answered through
              combined use of x-ray crystallography and recombinant DNA methods increases. 
              The specific objectives proposed by the PI fall into three diverse areas,
              having the unifying theme of understanding the molecular mechanisms by which
              cells produce metabolic energy, and the principles they use to assemble and
              control these pathways.  First, the PI and his students will complete the x-ray
              crystallographic studies of fumarase from E. coli.  This structural data will
              be critical for any attempts to build the true substrates into the current
              crystallographic model.  Sidechains affecting the biding and electrostatics of
              a catalytic water molecule will be studied by mutagenesis.  Closely linked to
              the x-ray crystallographic studies of fumarase from E. coli are parallel
              analyses of the enzyme from yeast.  The objectives in this case are not related
              to active site stereochemistry but rather toward the gathering of information
              on organelle targeting.  In this second endeavor, the PI has set the goal of
              determining the molecular structure of one or more of the precursor proteins
              targeting them to mitochondria.  The final objective is related to mechanisms
              for serine control of an enzyme called phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase.  Using
              recombinant technology, structural and biochemical studies of the regulatory
              domain will be done with and without serine.    Modern biotechnology centers on
              the use of enzymes as chemical reagents.  New developments in this area will
              depend on changing several properties commonly found in these protein
              catalysts.  These include stability, control and specificity.  The PI for this
              grant has used two major techniques in his laboratory to study and alter the
              properties of enzymes of the citric acid cycle.  One involves studies of
              molecular structure using x-ray crystallography; the other employs cloning
              techniques to change the molecule sli ghtly and test the resulting products. 
              The citric acid cycle is a sequence of enzymatic reactions that is the
              principle source of energy for nearly every living organism.  The PI and
              students supported by this NSF grant will attempt to engineer changes in one or
              more of these enzymes in order to understand their catalytic mechanism and
              specificity.  In another phase of the studies, the PI will prepare quantities
              of the precursor form of fumarase and examine its molecular structure by x-ray
              crystallography to study how the targeting process works.
