Title       : Predator-prey Interactions Among White Sharks and Northern Elephant Seals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9603633

Award Number: 9603633
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109661             (Estimated)
Investigator: Burney J. Le Boeuf leboeuf@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI: Le Boeuf  9603633    The aim of this project is to elucidate the  foraging
              strategy of white sharks (Carcharodon  carcharias) on their preferred prey,
              northern  elephant seals (Mirounga angustirostris), and  reciprocally, to
              determine the evasive tactics  of elephant seals in the high risk zone of shark
               attack.  White sharks will be tagged with  acoustic beacons when they surface
              to feed on  tethered decoys or seal carcasses in the waters  around Ano Nuevo
              Island in central California.  Ultrasonic tags and diving instruments will be 
              attached to elephant seals on the rookery before  they depart on biannual
              migrations and recovered  on their return.  We will tag sharks externally  with
              location transmitters and internally with  depth and temperature sensing
              transmitters,  placed in bait, to obtain records of three  dimensional
              movements, diving pattern, and  feeding behavior (inferred from a rise in 
              stomach temperature).  Movements of predators  and prey, as well as
              fluctuations in the diving  depth and stomach temperature of the sharks,  will
              be determined for up to 10 tagged animals  (sharks or seals) simultaneously to
              distances of  1.2 to 3.2 km drom the rookery by an array of  three
              radio-acoustic positioning buoys that  receive and relay the data to a land
              base  station on the mainland 250 m away.  We will  determine the presence or
              absence of tagged  sharks near the rookery, the length of time  individuals
              remain in the vicinity, evidence for  territorial defense, fluctuations in
              abundance  with time of the year, movements within area,  preferred stations
              where sharks concentrate to  capture seals, and the temporal pattern feeding 
              and behavior between kills.  Concomitantly, we  will determine the corridors of
              egress and  ingress near the rookery taken by migrating and  translocated seals
              and their diving behavior in  the high risk zone of shark attack.  This study 
              will provide fundamental information on white  shark life history and foraging
              tactics and will  elucidate the evasive s trategies of northern  elephant seals
              to its principal predator.  This  information is vital for understanding this
              apex  predator and its relationship to prey and humans  in nearshore waters in
              this area.  A better  understanding of the hunting strategy of white  sharks
              will elucidate the importance of predator  pressure on elephant seal life
              history, juvenile  survivorship and colony growth, and diving  behavior and
              pattern of rookery us.  This will  provide a deeper understanding of the
              predator-  prey relationship between white sharks and  elephants seals than
              exists for any other large  vertebrate in marine environment.
