Title       : Structure Function Analysis of Bacterial DNA Methyltransferase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1999       
File        : a9603567

Award Number: 9603567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norbert O. Reich reich@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9603567  Reich  Part 1-Technical  The proposed work focuses on the bacterial DNA
              methyltransferases, M.EcoRI and M.BamHI, which methylate the underlined N6 and
              N4 cytosine in GAATTC and GGATCC, respectively. M.EcoRI was recently shown to
              bend DNA by 50 degrees and to flip out the adenine prior to methylation. 
              Base-flipping was detected by a novel, dynamic assay which uses the fluorescent
              base analog, 2-aminopurine.  The first goal uses M.EcoRI and various methods to
              investigate base-flipping and DNA bending processes.  Presteady state
              fluorescence experiments will be used to determine if base-flipping is
              enzyme-assisted or if the enzyme simple stabilizes the extrahelical base. 
              Time-resolved fluorescence measurements will be used to determine the
              orientation and mobility of the extrahelical base  within the enzyme-DNA
              complex.  The combined DNA fluorescence measurements will be compared to
              similar changes in protein (tryptophan) fluorescence so that a complete kinetic
              description of early steps in the catalytic cycle should be provided.  This
              analysis will provide detailed kinetic information about the enzyme-mediated
              deformation  of DNA conformation.  Amino acid residues implicated in catalysis 
              and adenine stabilization by structural homology to the related M. TaqI enzyme
              will investigated to assess their functional role (s).    The second goal is to
              determine the structures of M.EcoRI and M. BamHI using X-ray diffraction
              methods.  Small crystals of an M.EcoRI-DNA complex and crystals of M.BamHI
              which diffract to 2.7 angstrom have been obtained.  Further crystallization
              trials are proposed.  Crystallization trials of various M.EcoRI mutants are
              proposed.    Part 2-Non technical  Many enzymes which alter the ahemical
              structure of DNA, do so by stabilizing large scale conformational changes
              within the DNA molecule.  These include significant DNA "bends" of up to 100
              degrees and movement of individual bases outside of the normal double-helix of
              DNA.  How these enzyme-mediated changes in DNA conf ormation contribute to the
              enzyme's function is not understood.  This proposal will measure changes in DNA
              structure involving bending and "base flipping" using the bacterial DNA
              methyltransferase, M.EcoRI.  This enzyme transfers a methyl group to the second
              adenine in GAATTC.  We have developed a novel fluorescence-based assay to
              measure  base-flipping  in this enzyme, and propose to extend these experiments
              to measure how this occurs over time.  Related experiments will be done to
              measure how the enzyme changes the flexibility and orientation of the base once
              it is removed from the double helix.  The proposal also seeks to identify which
              amino acids within the protein are responsible for these conformational
              changes.  A second long term goal of the proposal is to determine the
              three-dimensional structure of  the enzyme using X-ray crystallographic
              methods.
