Title       : U.S.-Sri Lanka Cooperative Research: Mathematical Modellingof Fertilizer
               Pollution of Ground/Surface Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9603139

Award Number: 9603139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Valipuram S. Manoranjan ziya@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              0313040   Water Pollution                         
              21        Mathematics                             
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 5989,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description:  This project supports a collaborative research project by V.S.
              Manoranjan with two scientists from Sri Lanka, Dr. K. Tennakone, Department of
              Physical and Chemical Sciences, and Dr. E.I.L. Silva, Department of
              Environmental Studies, at The Institute of Fundamental Studies in Kandy, Sri
              Lanka.  They plan to conduct an exploratory study of the problem of groundwater
              and surface water contamination, especially with nitrate and phosphorus
              pollution, from chemical fertilizers.  The study will employ mathematical
              models in conjunction with laboratory measurements and field observations.  The
              models will be constructed to describe the movement of contaminants in soil and
              water bodies, and will be validated using laboratory and field experimental
              data that will be obtained in Sri Lanka.  These models will be employed in
              predicting phosphate/nitrate leaching, especially where measurements are
              difficult to conduct.  Scope:  This project supports collaboration of a U.S.
              applied mathematician with physical and environmental scientists  in Sri Lanka,
              to develop and test a model for an environmental problem that impacts many of
              the developing countries as well as the United States.  The pollution of ground
              water by leaching of fertilizers affects many of the water supply sources and
              leads to serious environmental deterioration as well as to human health
              problems.  The collaboration helps scientists in the United States by having
              access to data collected in field studies in foreign countries by the foreign
              scientists, and helps the Sri Lankan scientists by having access to advanced
              analytical modeling techniques and to high computing facilities in the United
              States.  It is being funded jointly by INT and the Division of Mathematical
              Sciences.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
