Title       : Thyroxine and Seasonality in American Tree Sparrows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1998  
File        : a9603555

Award Number: 9603555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred E. Wilson fewilson@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603555  Wilson    Most species of animals breed seasonally, thus
              discontinuously.  Seasonal reproduction is an adaptation to a seasonal
              environment and is timed to occur when environmental conditions are optimal for
              raising young.  This project explores the physiological mechanisms that turn
              seasonal breeding on and off in American tree sparrows, a species whose
              reproductive cycle (1) is driven by the annual cycle in daylength, and (2) can
              be simulated in the laboratory simply by manipulating the daily ration of light
              and darkness.  Long daylengths (as during spring) induce gonadal growth and,
              several weeks later, gonadal regression and postnuptial molt.  Short daylengths
              (as during winter) restore sensitivity to long days, thereby permitting gonadal
              growth to begin anew once daylength exceeds a critical duration.    Recent work
              on seasonally breeding birds and mammals has established that the transition
              from the breeding state to the nonbreeding state is thyroid dependent.  In
              American tree sparrows, the thyroid is not only required for that transition,
              but plays an even more pervasive role in seasonality, influencing the
              initiation of breeding and the onset of molt as well.  Indeed, as shown
              earlier, long days and thyroid hormones interact to program male tree sparrows
              for seasonal reproduction and molt.  Conceptualization of "seasonality" as the
              expression of a suite of long day--thyroid hormone-dependent processes is a
              novel contribution to reproductive endocrinology.    The proposed research
              seeks to validate the PI's conceptual model of seasonality by rigorously
              challenging it.  If male tree sparrows are, in fact, programmed for seasonal
              reproduction and molt only when exposed simultaneously to long days and thyroid
              hormones, then withdrawing one or both of the programming stimuli (that is,
              withdrawing long days and/or thyroid hormones) after they have been programmed
              should not compromise later expression of programmed responses.  In previous
              experiments, the PI tested this corollary by  withdrawing thyroid hormones. 
              Now the PI will test it by withdrawing, in separate experiments, long days and
              both long days and thyroid hormones.  In an attempt to generalize the model's
              applicability, the PI will test it on photostimulated female tree sparrows. 
              The goal is to ascertain whether seasonal reproduction and molt are programmed
              and thyroid dependent, as in males.  The proposed research also seeks to
              identify the thyroid hormone that is instrumental in programming seasonality,
              and to show whether its actions are consistent with a genomic model or with a
              nongenomic model.    Understanding the mechanisms that turn seasonal
              reproduction on and off may enhance humankind's ability to preserve endangered
              species (for example, in zoos), manage game and pest species, manipulate
              domestic species for economic gain, and minimize the effects of environmental
              toxins that mimic thyroid hormones.  ***
