Title       : Regulation of Mu Activity in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1997     
File        : a9603119

Award Number: 9603119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Freeling freeling@nature.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603119  Freeling  Technical section  A typical Mutator (Mu) line of maize
              carries about 100 Mu transposons and about five autonomous Mu transposons
              called MuDR. A minimal line that carries a single MuDR has been characterized.
              All phenotypes induced by transposition, excision, demethylation, and
              suppression of Mu-induced alleles, are specified by this element. Deletion
              analysis of MuDR-1 will be continued in order to ascribe specific functions to
              regions of MuDR DNA structure and domains of the encoded proteins A and B.
              Antibody to A will be prepared and with the already available antibody to B,
              immunolocalization and nuclear protein coprecipitation experiments will be
              done. The mechanism of Mu suppression will be studied using a quantitative
              assay, and reverse genetics will be used to target small deletions to
              particular regions of MuDR-1 (p1). The observed phenomenon whereby Mu becomes
              less active during development and following inbreeding even though intact MuDR
              elements exist in the genome called "dominant negative regulation", will be
              investigated. Promoter diversity will be studied using a  Mu excision event
              which resulted in a series of mis-repair events affecting a region of about 400
              bp. A single  MuDR element has been introduced into oat via a sexual cross and
              its behavior in a non-native species of grass will be analyzed.   
              Non-technical abstract    A transposable element native to corn, Mu, will be
              studied. A strain which contains only one  master element, in contrast to the
              many usually present in the corn genome, will be used to study the structure
              and the function of the element. A phenomenon, dominant negative regulation,
              which results in a cession of activity by the Mu element during development and
              following inbreeding even though many structurally intact elements are present
              in the genome, will be investigated. The availability of this strain and its
              progeny also makes it possible to study the effects of variation in promoter
              sequence and the behavior of the transposon when  it is transferred to a
              foreign host.
