Title       : Transport and Chemoreception of Aromatic Compounds by Pseudomonas putida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9603551

Award Number: 9603551
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caroline S. Harwood   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Harwood  9603551       Aromatic compounds are abundant in the environment as
              major constituents of the woody tissues of green plants.  Large quantities of
              aromatic pollutants have also been released into the environment as industrial
              waste products.  Many of these compounds can be broken down by bacteria, and a
              reasonable amount is known about the enzymology of aromatic compound
              biodegradation.  By contrast, little is known about how bacteria seek and
              acquire aromatic substrates from the environment; processes that are governed
              by chemotaxis and transport.  This project will examine these poorly understood
              aspects of biodegradation by the bacterium Pseudomonas putida.  Studies will
              focus on PcaK, a protein that appears to have dual functions as a
              4-hydroxybenzoate chemoreceptor and permease.  The pcaK gene is coordinately
              regulated with genes for the biodegradation of 4-hydroxybenzoate.  PcaK
              accumulates 4-hydroxybenzoate against a concentration gradient and is the first
              example of a transport protein for aromatic acids.  The PcaK protein also
              appears to function as a chemoreceptor because P. putida pcaK  mutants are not
              attracted to 4-hydroxybenzoate or related compounds in chemotaxis assays.  PcaK
              is not homologous to known bacterial chemoreceptors, and thus appears to
              represent a new kind of chemoreceptor.  Research will explore the hypothesis
              that PcaK can initiate sensory signaling required for chemotactic responses to
              aromatic compounds by a mechanism distinct from known bacterial chemotaxis
              systems.  Studies will be carried out to define proteins that interact with
              PcaK to effect transmission of sensory information to the flagella of P. putida
              to cause chemotactic responses.       The goal of the project is to understand
              how bacteria sense and respond to the presence of environmental pollutants in
              their environment.  This could aid in elucidating the role of chemotaxis in
              recruiting swimming bacteria to particular environmental sites, including those
              contaminated with pollutants.  The res earch should lead to an increased
              understanding of the role of bacterial behavioral responses in the
              biodegradation of human industrial wastes.
