Title       : Successfully Transferring New Technology to School Systems Key Individual,
               Organizational, and Contextual Factors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9603458

Award Number: 9603458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118182             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Holahan pholahan@stevens-tech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward A. Friedman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stevens Inst of Technology
	      Castle Point on Hudson
	      Hoboken, NJ  07030    201/216-5000

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9603458  Holahan    The Center for Improved Engineering and Science Education
              (CIESE) at Stevens Institute of Technology is leading the New Jersey Networking
              Infrastructure in Education Project (NJNIE). NJNIE is an  NSF funded testbed
              project to reform K-12 science education. SIESE is in the second yar of this
              three-year, $219 million dollar program that is being implemented in
              collaboration with the New Jersey Statewide Systemic Initiative (NJSSI).
              CIESE's experience to date indicates that in some cases these technology
              transfer efforts have met with tremendous success, while in other cases little
              or no change has occurred despite equal access to resources, training,
              individualized assistance, etc.    A deeper understanding of the individual,
              organizational, and contextual factors associated with successful technology
              transfer will allow us to increase our effectiveness as change agents by
              designing interventions which are specific to the school or school district;s
              needs. Moreover, deeper understanding of the factors necessary for success will
              enable us to achieve a better return on investment by more wisely allocating
              scarce resources.    The first objective of this project is to develop a model
              of the individual, organizational and contextual factors that are important
              determinants of successful technology transfer. In this case successful
              technology transfer means successful integpation of telecommunications
              technology into the science curriculum and the use of the Internet in teaching
              K-12 science. The second goal of this project is to validate this model on a
              random sample of schools participating in the NJNIE project.    The model to be
              developed will investigate three clusters of categories of predictors:  (1) 
              characteristics of the school's administrators and teachers (individual level
              factors),   (2)  characteristics of the school itself (organizational factors),
              and  (3)  characteristics of the context in which the school operates (district
              level factors).    The literature suggests  that all three classes of variables
              play a role in successfully transferring new technology. However, there is
              little in the way of evidence to suggest (a)  which variables within each of
              these three classes of  variables are most important to successful transfer,
              and (b) which of the three classes of variables overall is most important.
              Therefore, a third goal of the project will be to determine the relative
              importance of the variables in explaining successful technology transfer.
              Understanding the relative immportance of the various predictor variables
              should allow us to design interventions and allocate resources in ways that
              will have the greatest impact on desired outcomes.
