Title       : Regulation of CNS Ion Channels By Lipid Signaling Molecules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  1998  
File        : a9603837

Award Number: 9603837
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald D. Denson ddenson@emory.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Eaton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603837  Denson    Electrical activity in the central nervous system (CNS) 
              results from the transmembrane movement of charged ions  through special
              openings in the neuron membrane called ion  channels. One important ion channel
              within the CNS is a  special type of potassium channel (called big potassium or
               BK-channels) which allows potassium ions to move from the  inside to the
              outside of the cell . This movement is  essential to maintain normal rhythmic
              activity of  repetitively firing brain cells such as those involved in 
              regulation of the heart rate and rhythm and sleep.  Because  of the importance
              of these channels, the mechanisms  responsible for controlling their activity
              are interesting.  Although some regulation of these channels depends upon 
              changes in intracellular ions, regulation of  these channels  also involves
              chemicals which are normally produced in the  cell membrane. Most of these
              chemicals are derived via the  breakdown of fatty molecules called
              phospholipids.    One  major chemical reaction involves the production of a 
              chemical called arachidonic acid from these phospholipids.  Arachidonic acid
              has been shown to activate this special  type of potassium channel  either
              directly or by the  regulation of other intracellular chemicals.  To understand
               this regulation  requires an examination of the both  arachidonic acid  and
              the other chemicals which may be  affected by arachidonic acid.  Since
              arachidonic acid is  such an important regulatory chemical in terms of
              producing  electrophysiologic responses, the experiments in this  proposal will
              focus on the several possible pathways which  govern arachidonic acid
              production.  The objectives of the  proposal are: (1) determine the 
              characteristics of arachidonic acid activation of BK  channels; (2) determine
              if arachidonic acid production is  regulated by other chemicals to control the
              normal activity  of BK channels, and; (3)  determine whether the activity of
              these BK-channels is  influenced by other chemicals produced norma lly by
              chemical  reactions in the cell membrane.  The results of this  research will
              increase the understanding of BK-channel  regulation, in particular, but also
              central nervous system  ion channels, in general.  In addition, the work could 
              provide a new description of the interaction between product  molecules
              resulting from membrane-associated chemical  reactions which could be important
              in regulating rhythmic  electrical activity in the central nervous system.
