Title       : Investigation of the Transport of Nitric Oxide by Myoglobin Using Sol-Gel Glass
               Encapsulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1997   
File        : a9603899

Award Number: 9603899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Fukuto   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kwang E. Chung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603899  Fukuto   In spite of the intensive studies on the physiology of nitric
              oxide(NO), some basic and fundamental questions regarding the lifetime and
              delivery of NO in biological systems remain unknown. This study is designed to
              test the hypothesis that myoglobin(Mb) facilitates diffusion of NO in the
              direction of smooth muscle cells, and a sol-gel encapsulation methodology can
              be developed for its detection. This is based on new findings by the P.I. on
              the unique characteristics of O2 transport by Mb, and its associated
              physiological conditions. The objective is to determine whether Mb transports
              NO under selected conditions similar to physiological ones, with focus on the
              transport of NO by deoxymyoglobin (deoxyMb) via nitrosylmyoglobin formation,
              but not the interaction of NO with oxymyoglobin. The proposed role of deoxyMb
              in facilitating transport involves the spatial movement of NO from one location
              to another in the presence of deoxyMb at a rapid rate, as is O2 transport.
              Unlike the binding and dissociation, the investigation of the transport of NO
              requires the examination of spatial movement of NO by deoxyMb molecules. As
              demonstrated with the O2 transport, the sol-gel encapsulation methodology not
              only provides a simple and effective means for determining spatial movement,
              but also its experimental conditions can be readily adjusted to physiological.
              This work may define another fundamental and vital role for Mb (and possibly
              other hemoproteins) in controlling and directing the biological effects
              associated with NO, fundamentally changing the way in which NO physiology is
              viewed, i.e. directed instead of random. Because of the importance of NO
              chemistry in numerous biological processes, evidence for Mb to play a major
              role in NO transport will have an immediate, profound, and broad impact.   
              Nitric oxide (NO) has recently been found to be an endogenously generated
              molecule with a diverse array of biological activities, such as in the
              cardiovascular, the brain and the immune systems . As a non-polar, small
              diatomic species, NO can freely diffuse from its site of biosynthesis. Since
              the biological targets for NO (for example, the enzyme guanylate cyclase) are
              located in distinct and defined locations relative to NO biosynthesis, if NO
              were allowed to freely diffuse, only a small amount of the biosynthesized NO
              would ever reach it's target or receptor, resulting in an incredible waste of
              biosynthetic effort (NO biosynthesis is a multi-step process which requires the
              use of NADPH). This apparent inconsistency with the parsimony of Nature
              suggests that NO diffusion is unlikely to be free, but rather is facilitated
              towards the direction of its targets. This proposal aims to address the
              mechanism of facilitated diffusion for NO by the hemeprotein myoglobin by a new
              detection method, using sol-gel encapsulation. The results derived from this
              study may lead to a greater understanding of the role of myoglobin and of
              biological transport.  ***             9604680  Fane  The proper assembly of
              viral proteins and nucleic acids into a biologically active virion involves
              numerous and diverse macromolecular interactions.  The main objectives are to
              elucidate these critical interactions and to define the structural domains of
              the responsible macromolecules.  A combination of genetic, biochemical and
              structural approaches (X-ray crystallography) will be employed to accomplish
              the objectives. Like molecular chaperones, scaffolding proteins direct other
              proteins in achieving their proper three-dimensional conformations.  Within the
              context of this analogy, the atomic structure of a procapsid offers a depiction
              of a chaperone-like protein complexed with its substrate.  Prior results
              suggest that the Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many
              properties with molecular chaperones.  Prior results also indicate that the
              internal scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact
              with their substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces. 
              Determining th e atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign
              scaffolding proteins, will directly address this question.  The present (X174
              procapsid structure does not contain the internal scaffolding protein which is
              lost during purification.  During the first year of support, alternate genetic
              and purification strategies will be explored to stabilize this protein.  The
              current protocols will still be employed to gather additional data to refine
              the external scaffolding protein structure.  Also within the first year, the
              genetic and purification strategies needed to generate alpha procapsids will be
              developed.  Continuation of the structural work, done in collaboration with Dr.
              M. G. Rossmann, will proceed throughout the support period.    The recently
              solved atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein, gpD, suggests that
              it also shares many features with molecular chaperones.  Thus gpD, like a
              molecular chaperone, can bind to other proteins in many different ways.  While
              some domains make contact with the coat protein in varied manners, one of these
              domains may determine the protein's substrate specificity for a particular
              viral coat protein.  the plasmid-based cross complementation system has been
              extended to this gene.  Unlike the internal scaffolding proteins which exhibit
              a great deal of divergence in primary structure, the external scaffolding
              proteins share 75% sequence identity.  The (X174 protein, however, is unable to
              productively direct the assembly of other Microviridae virions.  A comparison
              of the primary structure reveals that the divergent residues are localized to
              the NH2 -termini of the proteins which forms a large (-helix in the (X174
              atomic structure.  These observations suggest a model in which the
              scaffolding's specificity for a particular viral coat protein resides in this
              region.  This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric polypeptides.  During the
              first year of support, restriction sites needed to construct chimeric external
              scaffolding proteins will be intro duced.  The (X174 gene will be recloned and
              clones of other Microviridae D genes will be generated.  Characterization of
              the chimeric genes and gene products will commence in the second year.  The
              results of these analyses may also provide insights into the design of
              recombinant proteins.    All viruses must assemble themselves by means of
              multiple protein interactions.  viral assembly is often dependent on proteins
              known as scaffolding proteins.  Analogous to scaffoldings used in the
              construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are found in virus assembly
              intermediates but not in the mature viruses.  Two different scaffolding
              proteins, external and internal, are required for the assembly of the
              Microviridae family of viruses.  With These viruses we are able to purify viral
              intermediates which still include the external scaffolding protein.  By
              examining the atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein and
              performing genetic analyses with both the internal and external proteins, we
              have determined that different regions of the scaffolding proteins may have
              specific and identifiable functions.  Refining the atomic structure of these
              proteins and testing our hypotheses regarding their various functions by
              constructing hybrid Microviridae scaffolding proteins are the main objectives
              of the proposed work.  The results of these analyses will provide further
              insights into virus assembly and the design of recombinant proteins.
