Title       : San Francisco Electronic Library
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1998       
File        : a9603344

Award Number: 9603344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254438             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sybil L. Boutilier sybilb@sfpl.lib.ca.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth E. Dowlin  (Principal Investigator former)
              Sam Dederian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Toni Bernardi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco Public Libra
	      
	      San Francisco, CA  94102    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9603344  Dowlin     San Francisco has just completed building a new
              state-of-the-art Main library. The San Francisco Public Library will be a front
              line proving ground for how to implement new science and technology in a modern
              library and then expand it to branch libraries for systemic reform. The
              Electronic Library project will explore how to integrate important
              technological advances into librarians' normal routines, inform and involve the
              local education community, and educate the public, expanding, but not
              abandoning the societal role libraries have traditionally filled.   The
              Electronic Library Project will focus on the challenges inherent in
              implementing new computing systems, networking and communications technology to
              access local multimedia and remote sources of digital materials and explore new
              ways to create, store, organize, and catalog unique materials and develop user
              friendly interfaces for searching, retrieval, and dissemination of the
              information available now and in the future. Within this comprehensive program
              of transformation and implementation, the Electronic Library project provides
              and opportunity to focus on and research the unique issues involved in
              providing electronic resources to children and youth. The project will
              introduce children to the expanding world of information technology and
              resources, and provide free and equal access to knowledge materials for use in
              fulfilling school assignments and independent inquiry. The Library's Electronic
              Discovery Center, with it's multimedia computers and extensive digital
              collection has created a place which will provide a collaborative environment
              for using technology, to enable development of a new kind of creative potential
              for children, promote the development of electronic literacy, extend access to
              remote resources, and provide positive mentoring experiences between older  
              and younger children.   The project will explore professional development
              opportunities for librarians and teachers, and involve parents and familie s.
              The Library will seek appropriate strategies for cataloging, searching
              evaluating and adding age appropriate electronic materials to the collection.
              Also, librarians will be helped in learning how to integrate electronic
              materials with traditional print materials in their reference strategies. An
              easy to use interface will be developed and provided that enables easy access
              to electronic materials and on-line resources for pre-schoolers as well as
              teenagers. Support and instruction in the use of digital materials will be
              provided for the young users, along with opportunities to explore the maximum
              capabilities of the computing and communication technologies at their
              fingertips. Teen volunteers and college interns will help with hands-on
              training and on-going support for younger patrons. School librarians will
              participate in professional development presentations and workshops. To educate
              teachers about available resources and methods to integrate electronic
              materials into standard curriculum, every elementary classroom in San Francisco
              will visit the new Main Library and have a demonstration of the new media
              resources, and special seminars and training opportunities will be developed
              for teachers.   Pre-schoolers will enter school already familiar with
              technology and high-schoolers will learn skills that can carry them into high
              growth careers. Special programming for school librarians, teachers and parents
              will help the community to learn to use and integrate the resources of an
              Electronic Library as a regular part of a self-sustaining independent learning
              infrastructure. This should result in better preschool preparation and
              increased student achievement. Professional development will enable teachers
              and librarians to become comfortable with utilizing technology based
              information as a regular resource. San Francisco Public Library's Electronic
              Library activities will promote educational innovation and systemic reform for
              librarians and teachers, and a new resource for the community and will  create
              a replaceable model of an Electronic Library.  ***
