Title       : Proteolytic Targeting Signals in S-adenosylmethionine Decarboxylase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1999      
File        : a9603740

Award Number: 9603740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Stanley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603740  Stanley  Selective protein degradation is an important cellular process
              contributing to abnormal protein removal, cell-cycle progression, stress
              responses, and normal growth regulation, yet little is known about the
              molecular determinants of such selectivity, particularly differences in protein
              structure or proteolytic systems that might account for the many-fold range of
              protein half-lives in cells. Approaches using in vitro degradation systems or
              in vivo destabilization of mutated versions of normally stable proteins may not
              represent physiological degradation pathways or targeting signals. This project
              will use the polyamine biosynthetic enzyme S-adenosylmethionine decarboxylase
              (SAMDC), a cytosolic enzyme which is normally rapidly degraded, as a model for
              the subclass of proteins which are rapidly turned over in the cytosol, and
              examine its degradation in cell culture under a variety of conditions designed
              to determine the intracellular effectors of this degradation, the proteolytic
              system(s) which degrade SAMDC, and the targeting signal(s) in the SAMDC
              structure which cause its rapid degradation. Using specific inhibitors of the
              other enzymes of the polyamine biosynthetic pathway, as well as inhibitors of
              the production of the SAMDC substrate S-adenosylmethionine, the investigator
              will determine which of these substrate products serve as endogenous effectors
              of SAMDC degradation. An additional goal of the research will be to determine
              the cellular proteolytic systems which normally degrade SAMDC, using specific
              inhibitors of the various known intracellular proteolytic activities to look
              for SAMDC-stabilizing effects in vivo. Finally, potential targeting signals in
              the SAMDC structure will be examined by creating deletions and site-specific
              mutations, expressing these mutant SAMDCs in mammalian cells, and measuring the
              resulting half-lives. Candidate regions/residues will be chosen in several
              ways, including a comparison of the half lives (in mammalian cells) of
              expressed SAMDCs fro m other species (which have regions of similarity as well
              as dissimilarity with the mammalian enzyme), computer predictions of
              surface-accessible regions and experimental determination of surface accessible
              acidic and basic residues.    Selective protein degradation has become
              recognized as a critical process which contributes to the regulation of the
              amount of specific proteins present in cells at any time, but very little is
              known about how this selectivity occurs. Unstable proteins as a class include
              many proteins known to be involved in cell growth, so understanding the
              processes involved in this selection for instability is quite important. The
              present research focuses on a particular unstable, growth-related protein,
              SAMDC, with a goal of defining what actually rapidly degrades SAMDC in cells,
              as well as what biochemical aspect of the SAMDC structure makes it a target for
              this rapid degradation. The information gained from these studies will help to
              elucidate the basis of targeting proteins for degradation, and will lay the
              groundwork for future studies of how this degradation process is controlled.
