Title       : X-Ray Determination of Proteins and Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1998  
File        : a9603571

Award Number: 9603571
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $418160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael G. Rossmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603571  Rossmann  X-ray diffraction, using crystallized viruses, will be the 
              primary tool to analyze the assembly and uncoating  intermediates of various
              viruses.  Frequently, however, it  is not possible to crystallize transient
              intermediates on  account of their short-lived, unstable properties.  In these 
              cases, the X-ray crystallography will be augmented by cryo  electron
              microscopy.  The major emphasis will be on the  study of bacterial viruses,
              such as single-stranded X174 and  the far more complex double-stranded T4.  The
              far more  complex and far larger dsDNA T4 phage has over 40 structural 
              proteins.  While it is unlikely that it will ever be  possible to study the
              whole virus by X-ray diffraction, it  is possible to study the atomic structure
              of individual  proteins. Combination of X-ray diffraction and cryo-EM is to  be
              used to determine the interactions of components.  Part  of the work will be to
              develop suitable techniques for  interfacing cryoelectron microscopy with X-ray
              diffraction  techniques and also to examine particles that lack perfect 
              icosahedral symmetry.  The objectives will be to determine  not only the
              structures, but also the molecular mechanisms  by which the assembly
              intermediates are stabilized and  triggered into the subsequent steps of
              morphogenesis.  Similarly, the structural intermediates of viral disassembly 
              during cellular infection are to be examined.  Comparision  of different viral
              systems should lead to the identification  of common strategies and
              evolutionary relationships.    The goal of the research is to elucidate the
              mechanisms by  which infectious virus particles are assembled from their 
              component parts.  Although the work is devoted to the study  of bacterial
              viruses, the viral mechanisms are also likely  to be utilized by plant and
              animal viruses.  The different  process of disassembly during viral entry into
              a host will  also be studied.  Viral assembly often requires scaffolding 
              proteins which help guide protein folding.  Hence, the  stud ies will be among
              the first to observe the structures of  these chaperone-like proteins complexed
              with their  substrates.  The study of their transient intermediates will 
              require the development of  techniques to combine X-ray  crystallography (which
              can resolve features near atomic  resolution) and cryo-electron microscopy
              (which has poorer  resolution but lacks the requirement of making crystals) 
              Combination of these techniques is likely to be critical in  the future
              development of  structural biology.
