Title       : Molecular Mechanisms and Functional Diversity of the Hemocyanin Gene Family in
               Cancer magister
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1999       
File        : a9603521

Award Number: 9603521
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora B. Terwilliger nterwill@oimb.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603521  Terwilliger    Molecular mechanisms and functional diversity of the
              hemocyanin gene family.  The purpose of this grant is to study the
              relationships between three members of one gene family.  Hemocyanins are giant
              copper-containing protein molecules found freely dissolved in the hemolymph or
              blood of arthropods and molluscs.  Like hemoglobin, hemocyanin transports
              oxygen.  The PI has found that hemocyanin of a crab, Cancer magister, undergoes
              changes in structure and oxygen binding properties during development of the
              crab from megalopa to adult.  The PI seeks to explore how expression of
              hemocyanin subunits during development is influenced by internal, physiological
              factors including hormones and external, environmental factors such as
              temperature and food availability.  The crab also contains another hemolymph
              protein, cryptocyanin, that is similar to hemocyanin in size and shape but does
              not combine with oxygen.  A third related protein is present in the crab's
              nervous system.  The presence of three potential members of the hemocyanin gene
              family in one organism offers a unique opportunity to compare the expression of
              their genes and their physiological functions.  The PI will prepare specific
              molecular probes to study the site of synthesis of each protein and assess the
              effects of hormones, temperature and food levels on protein synthesis.  The PI
              will use techniques such as polymerase chain reaction, Northern blots, in situ
              hybridization, and antibody recognition.  The PI will also examine the role of
              cryptocyanin in molting and in forming the crab's new exoskeleton.  Comparisons
              of the amino acid sequences of the proteins will be used to help us understand
              the evolutionary relationships between these proteins and similar proteins
              found in insect hemolymph.    Results of this study will significantly increase
              our understanding about the structure, function and development of hemocyanin
              and related proteins. The studies may lead to a better knowledge of how giant,
              multisubunit prote in molecules are synthesized and assembled.  Basic knowledge
              about the effects of factors like hormones and nutrition on development,
              molting and growth of these economically important crustaceans will be
              beneficial to maintaining a healthy fishery as well.  ***
