Title       : Neuronal Regulation of Gene Expression in Oligodendrocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9603750

Award Number: 9603750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela Knapp peknapp@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9603750  Knapp    These studies are concerned with 2 different types of
              cells  found in the brain:  nerves and oligodenrocytes.  During the  time that
              the brain is developing, oligodendrocytes make  connections with nerves and
              eventually wrap a fatty coating  called myelin around the long extensions of
              the nerve cells.  This fatty coating is very important since it functions to 
              insulate the nerve cells as in an electrical wire, allowing  them to send
              signals with speed and accuracy.  When myelin  does not form properly or when
              it is destroyed by injury or  disease, the nerves do not function properly and
              this  results in problems with movement, vision and many other  body systems. 
              Since this myelin coating is so important for  the function of nerves, it is
              critical that we understand  how nerves and oligodendrocytes recognize each
              other in the  developing brain and how they interact.  Some evidence  presented
              by the principal investigator suggests that there  are signals which are sent
              from nerves to regulate  oligodendrocyte development and behavior.  The basic
              goal of  these studies is to determine what these signals are and how 
              oligodendrocytes recognize and respond to them.  The  investigators propose to
              address 3 related questions about  the relationship between nerves causes
              oligodendrocytes to  synthesize particular proteins and then distribute them to
               the correct place within the cell.  (Sometimes in order for  a protein to
              function properly it must not only be made in  sufficient amounts, but must
              also be put in the right  place.)  Based on our earlier findings, the
              investigators  have chosen to work with proteins which control the ion 
              distribution and electrical activity within cells.  The  second question is
              whether contact with nerves regulates the  distribution of the precursor to
              those proteins (this is  called mRNA).  The final question is whether the 
              investigators can identify specific chemicals on the  surfaces of either
              oligodendroctyes or nerves which serve as  signa ls to control protein mRNA
              production and distribution  in oligodendrocytes.  These studies will help us
              to  understand how nerves control oligodendrocyte development  and the
              formulation of myelin.
