Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Meeting on the Cell and Molecular Biology of
               Aplysia and Related Invertebrates, April 16 - 20, 1997, Cold Spring Harbor, New
               York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1997  
File        : a9603636

Award Number: 9603636
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11017              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603636  Grodzicker    The mollusc Aplysia, and a number of other 
              invertebrates, have proven extremely useful in  studies of basic cellular
              neurobiology and the  cellular basis of behavior and learning.  This  utility
              is due, at least in part, to the  extraordinarily large size of its nervous 
              system cells (some of which are almost a  millimeter in diameter) and the
              ability to  recognize these cells as unique individuals.  This tremendous
              experimental advantage has  allowed the investigation of individual cells, 
              their patterns of interconnections, modulation  of the strength of connections
              between cells,  and the relationship between these cellular  phenomena and
              behavior, learning and  development.  In 1988, Cold Spring Harbor  sponsored
              the first meeting devoted to work on  Aplysia.  Because of the success of this 
              meeting, we decided to convene at two to three-  year intervals at the Cold
              Spring Harbor  Laboratory and alternate there with the highly  successful
              Meeting on the Drosophila.  The  fifth meeting in April, 1995, drew over ninety
               participants, and again was highly successful.  The proposed 1997 meeting will
              continue to  provide a format for discussing new methods and  findings that
              have emerged in the cell and  molecular biology of Aplysia.  The Meeting will 
              be concerned with different levels of analysis:  synaptic transmission; ion
              channels and channel  modulation; peptides and small molecule  transmitters;
              cell imaging; circadian rhythms;  neuronal circuitry and behavior, and
              learning.  A trend that was begun in the last meeting was  to include a variety
              of other model  invertebrate systems, which can provide  information
              complementary to that obtained with  Aplysia.  This very wellreceived change
              will be  implemented further in the next meeting, by the  inclusion, in each
              session of a number of  speakers who work with model systems such as  crayfish,
              leech, squid, Drosophila, Manduca and  C. elegans.  In addition, particular
              attention  will be given to the inclusion of junior   scientists and women
              scientists.  About 150  participants from approximately 60 laboratories 
              throughout the world are expected to attend.
