Title       : RUI: Chloroperoxidase as a Mechanistic Model for Heme EnzymeReactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1998       
File        : a9603874

Award Number: 9603874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175347             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. D. Libby rdlibby@cs.moravian.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Moravian College
	      Main Street & Elizabeth Avenue
	      Bethlehem, PA  18018    215/861-1300

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9603874  Libby  Part 1-Technical  The prevailing model for heme enzyme catalysis
              ascribes variations in mechanism entirely to characteristics of the protein and
              ignores effects of  variation in substrate reactivity.  The specific research
              plan proposed investigates the effects of substrate structure on the pathway by
              which it is consumed by chloroperoxidase, a versatile heme enzyme.  First,
              reactions will be characterized as to products and their distributions. 
              Second, the kinetics  of each process will be probed to determine (1.) effects
              of one substrate type on another and (2.) inhibitory effects of trapping agents
              for reactive species (e.g. molecular halogens or free radicals).  Finally, the
              redox potentials of substrates will be determined.  The focus of the analyses
              will be on independent determination of substrate steric and electronic effects
              on the extent of involvement of reactive non-enzymic intermediates in
              chloroperoxidase reactions.    A number of trapping agents for enzyme generated
              intermediates will be identified and characterized.  These agents should be
              generally useful for detecting significant involvement of enzyme generated
              oxidative species.  Thus, our results should help elucidate mechanisms of
              chloroperoxidase catalyzed reactions, and also provide a series of new
              inhibitors for probing reaction mechanisms of  many other oxidative enzymes.   
              Part 2-Non Technical  Hemoproteins have a diverse variety of functions in
              living organisms, including carrying of molecular oxygen, oxidation. 
              Chloroperoxidase (CPO) is a heme containing enzyme that has chlorination,
              peroxidation and catalase activities.  Strategies are described to elucidate
              the factors responsible for partitioning among the various reaction mechanisms
              in the reactions catalyzed by CPO.  CPO has been studied for over twenty years,
              yet little is known about how each type of activity relates to the others. 
              This research will play a significant role in our understanding of CPO and
              oxidative catalysis of heme enzymes  in general.
