Title       : Internet Database Access: Scaleability of projects through shared database
               creation and use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9603336

Award Number: 9603336
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263212             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cecilia Lenk lenk@lenkassociates.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara W. Mihalas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lenk & Associates, LLC
	      One Brook Street, 2nd Floor
	      Watertown, MA  021720313    617/926-8438

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9603336  Lenk    The rapidly expanding use of the Internet coupled with an
              explosive growth of diverse, quality resources available on the Internet, can
              provide learners with hitherto unparalleled access to current scientific data
              and information. In fact, the ability of K-12 students and teachers to
              participate in the creation and use of scientific databases is a core
              educational application of the Internet, and central to a number of NSF-funded
              projects in K-12 science education. The openness of these Internet resources
              means that large numbers of learners in schools, homes, or other out-of-school
              settings with Internet access have the potential to participate in these
              database projects. However, most funded projects have the financial and human
              resources to involve only a relatively small number of participants. If such
              Internet database projects are to have the widest possible dissemination,
              finding ways to broaden participation and scale-up these resources to reach a
              diverse and large group of users is essential.    The Internet Database Access
              project will develop, evaluate, and disseminate database models and strategies
              that promote the scaling up of Internet science education database resources so
              that they are widely accessible to K-12 classrooms, as well as, to a diverse
              group of children and adults in homes and other out-of -school settings. The
              project builds on three database projects currently being developed for K-12
              science education and funded by NSF and other federal agencies: WhaleNet (whale
              observation data), EnviroNet (environmental monitoring data), and Hands-On
              Universe (astronomical images). In designing new database models and
              approaches, this project will take advantage of both the capabilities of the
              web and new database tools for web-based applications. Concurrently the project
              will disseminate the ongoing results of its work through web-based mechanisms.
              The proposed project will undertake activities in three major areas:    *
              Design, develop, and evaluate new web-ba sed database prototypes that
              facilitate the scaling-up of these science education databases to increase
              participation by K-12 students and teachers who are currently not involved in
              these NSF-funded projects.  * Concurrently, design and assess strategies that
              increase participation and collaboration in these database resources by a broad
              range of participants, including children and adult learners in homes and other
              out-of -school settings.  * Disseminate information about our database models
              and scaleability strategies through the Internet and other media to assist
              other web-based educational projects in designing, implementing, and scaling-up
              their resources.  * ***
