Title       : Structural Studies of Pectate Degrading Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1997  
File        : a9603805

Award Number: 9603805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marilyn D. Yoder yoderm@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603805  Yoder  The project will study the structural properties of plant
              virulence factors secreted from bacterial plant pathogens.  Two proteins will
              be studied, polygalacturonase and pectate lyase.  The main method to be
              employed in obtaining structural information will be x-ray diffraction
              analysis.  The proteins chosen for the study include two polygalacturonases and
              two pectate lyases.  The polygalacturonases are Pg1A, from Pseudomonas
              solanacearum, and Peh1, from Erwinia carotovora.  The pectate lyases are PelA
              from E. chrysanthemi and Pe1153 from E. carotovora.  Each protein will be
              crystallized, and three-dimensional structure determined by x-ray substrate
              analog will be sought as a means of elucidating amino acids involved in
              catalysis.  Polygalacturonase and pectate lyase both cleave the same saccharide
              substrate, but by different enzymatic mechanism.  Structural comparisons of the
              two classes of pectinases will be analyzed.  The major aims of the proposed
              four year project are:  1)  Purify and crystallize the two polygalacturonases
              and two pectate lyases.  2) Determine the three-dimensional structure of the
              pectolytic proteins.  It is anticipated that the polygalacturonase structures
              will be solved using standard multiple isomorphous replacement techniques.  The
              pectate lyase proteins may be amenable to structure determination by molecular
              replacement techniques. 3) Determine the three-dimensional structure of
              polygalacturonase bound to inhibitors.  Several naturally occurring compounds
              have been identified as potential inhibitors. 4) Analyze structural differences
              between polygalacturonases and pectate lyases.  Structural components
              attributing to enzymatic differences will be emphasized.    The general
              question behind the experimental approach for this project is:  What are the
              structural features of two different enzymes--polygalacturonase and pectate
              lyase--that bind and cleave the same substrate, polygalacturonate, but by
              different enzymatic mechanisms?  The amino acid sequence  similarity between
              these two protein families is very small.  Polygalacturonate is the primary
              component in pectate, an acidic saccharide polymer found in the middle lamella
              and cell wall of higher plants.  The saccharide is important in both cellular
              adhesion and cell wall integrity.  Polygalacturonase cleaves pectate by a
              hydrolytic mechanism, while pectate lyase cleaves the saccharide by a (
              elimination mechanism, requiring calcium for activity.  Pectate lyases are
              structurally unique proteins.  Pectate lyase C and E from E. chrysanthemi were
              the first proteins solved that were composed of a core structure of parallel (
              sheets, the folding motif is referred to as a parallel ( helix.  The functional
              implications of this unusual protein fold is unclear.  it is unknown if
              polygalacturonase will adopt the same protein fold as the pectate lyases.  The
              proposed studies will help clarify these questions.  The two polygalacturonase
              proteins will provide a means of comparing the structures of two enzymes with
              the same enzymatic mechanism, but with different catalytic properties in
              respect to final endproducts and endproduct inhibition.  The structure of PelA
              will aid in further characterizing the requirements for catalysis and substrate
              binding with direct comparison to two other known pectate lyase structures from
              E. chrysanthemi, PelC and PelE.  PelA has significantly less enzymatic activity
              than either PelC or PelE.  Pell53 is a pectate lyase that is inefficiently
              secreted and predominantly localized in the periplasm.  A comparison of the
              structure of Pe1153 to the other Erwinia PL's may be informative in
              characterizing the targeting signals for secretion.
