Title       : Alpha and Beta Parvalbumins: Functional Consequences of Divergent Tertiary
               Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2001   
File        : a9603877

Award Number: 9603877
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Henzl henzlm@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603877  Henzl  Despite their general similarity, parvalbumin (PV) isoforms 
              exhibit substantial physical and functional diversity.  This  project will
              examine three potential mechanisms for  achieving isoform-dependent variation. 
              The importance of  tertiary interactions between the C-terminus and residues
              26-  36 will be examined in select site-specific PV variants --  employing
              differential scanning calorimetry, Ca2+-binding  measurements, titration
              calorimetry, and 15N NMR relaxation  measurements.  To assess the impact of
              overall electrostatic  free energy on metal ionbinding behavior, the
              consequences  of the S55D and G98D mutations on Ca2+- and Mg2+- binding 
              affinity will be examined in PV isoforms differing widely in  their isoelectric
              points.  Finally, the minimal sequence  requirements for the metal
              ion-facilitated association of  CPV3, an avian -PV, will be examined.  The
              energetics of  complexation will be investigated by analytical 
              ultracentrifugation and scanning calorimetry.  Low-  resolution structural
              information on the trimer will be  obtained by antibody reactivity and chemical
              crosslinking  studies.  Detailed structural data will be obtained via x-  ray
              crystallography and/or NMR.    Contemporary protein research seeks to identify
              the physical  principles that dictate protein structure and function.  The 
              parvalbumins offer an attractive system for examining these  issues.  The
              vertebrate-specific family of small Ca2+  binding proteins illustrates the
              application of the same  basic protein architecture to the solution of distinct
               biological problems -PVs play a rather passive role in  maintaining cytosolic
              Ca2+ levels below the toxic threshold.  By contrast, in higher vertebrates,
              -PVs are utilized for  highly specialized signaling roles.  This functional 
              variation is accompanied by corresponding variation in  physical properties. 
              For example, -PVs display greater  structural rigidity than -PVs.  Thus, one
              objective of this  project is to investigate the molecular basis  for this 
              difference.  Additionally, whereas all -PVs  bind Ca2+ very  tightly, the -PVs
              display highly variable affinity for the  ion.  Therefore, a second objective
              of this project is to  assess the impact of the overall charge on metal
              ion-binding  properties.  Lastly, although parvalbumins are widely viewed  as
              non-associating monomeric proteins, the avian -PV CPV3  forms a trimeric
              complex in the presence of Ca2+ or Mg2+.  Thus, a third goal of this project is
              to identify the  structural idiosyncrasies responsible for this self- 
              complementarity. This work will illuminate demonstrably  successful strategies
              for tailoring the physical stability  and ligand-binding properties of
              macromolecules through  subtle sequence alterations.  The knowledge gained from
               these studies may assist in achieving the long-term goal of  manipulating
              existing biological activities and designing  new ones.
