Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Virtual Collaborative World Simulator for
               Underwater Robots using Multi-Dimensional, Synthetic Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2001      
File        : a9603043

Award Number: 9603043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine Galtizine                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57025              (Estimated)
Investigator: Junku Yuh yuh@wiliki.eng.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Song K. Choi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9603043  Yuh    This award supports a three year collaborative research  project
              between Professor Junku Yuh of the University of  Hawaii in Manoa and Professor
              Tamaki Ura of the University  of Tokyo in Japan.  This project undertakes a
              study of a  virtual collaborative world simulator for underwater robots  using
              a multi-dimensional, synthetic environment.  The major  objective is to develop
              a virtual 3-dimensional, hybrid  environment platform with a high-level control
              and  information architecture.  The major goals of the project  are to  l)
              enable remote sharing of underwater robotic  resources;  2) enhance the remote
              monitoring and control of  the robots from globally remote locations; and  3)
              enhance  and stimulate the development of other areas such as  underwater
              communication, sonar and acoustic sensors and  underwater visualization. 
              Successful planning of the robot  operation requires integrated simulation of
              the actual robot  with environmental data and operating conditions.    The
              project brings together the efforts of two laboratories  working on different
              aspects of autonomous under water  vechicles:  the American's have experience
              in developing a  virtual reality platform and an underwater vehicle and the 
              Japanese have developed the graphic platform, underwater  vehicles and shallow
              water testing.  Research and  development of underwater robotic systems will be
              a low-cost  key to better understanding marine and other environmental  issues;
              to protect the earth's resources from pollution; and  to efficiently utilize
              the vehicles for human welfare.  The  data gathered from the research project
              will provide  information on the performance, effectiveness,  interactiveness,
              and safety of an underwater vehicle and its  environment.  Through the exchange
              of ideas and technology,  this project will broaden our base of basic knowledge
              and  promote international understanding and cooperation.  ***
