Title       : Purification of a Germ Cell pH Regulator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9603778

Award Number: 9603778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey M. Florman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Florman  96-03778      Intracellular pH (pHi) is an important regulator of
              cellular activity, including the response to growth factors, hormones, and
              other external signals. An understanding of the mechanisms of pHi regulation
              has been advanced by the molecular and biochemical characterization of several
              transport proteins. However, the Na+-dependent Cl-/HC03- exchange is a major
              and widely distributed pHi regulator that has not been identified. The key
              experimental difficulties in purifying the protein components of this transport
              system include: (i) the lack of specific antagonists that differentiate this
              pathway from other anion transport mechanisms; and (ii) the inability to
              identify sources that are enriched in this transport activity.  Dr. Florman's
              laboratory has focused on the activation of mammalian sperm ion transport
              pathways by contact with the egg's extracellular matrix, or zona pellucida,
              during fertilization. The Na+dependent Cl-/HC03- exchange pathway is the major
              pHi regulator that is stimulated during sperm capacitation and zona pellucida
              contact. This transport activity is readily detectable in sperm membrane
              vesicles and can be distinguished from other anion transport mechanisms.  The
              objective of this study is to purify the Na+-dependent Cl-/HC03- exchange
              protein from mouse sperm. This transport activity will be isolated from
              detergent extracts of sperm membrane proteins by affinity chromatography and by
              conventional gel filtration and ion exchange chromatography. Purification will
              be monitored in functional assays by reconstituting sperm protein into
              liposomes and by determining the specific activity of anion transport activity.
               The identification of a sperm pH regulatory protein that mediates an essential
              step of gamete interaction will advance our knowledge of the fertilization
              process in mammals. In addition, these studies form an essential first step in
              the identification and characterization of related proteins in somatic tissues.
