Title       : Regulatory Nucleotide Binding Site on Eukaryotic Flagella
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1998   
File        : a9603690

Award Number: 9603690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263449             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte K. Omoto omoto@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603690  Omoto  Technical   Eukaryotic cilia and flagella are found widely in
              algae, lower plants, animals, and protozoa.  Their basic 9+2 microtubular
              structure, the axoneme, is common among these wide variety of organisms. 
              Dynein ATPases power ciliary and flagellar movement, yet it is not understood
              how the forces produced by dynein ATPases are regulated to produce oscillatory
              motion of cilia and flagella.  Previous results from this laboratory suggest
              that specific nucleotide binding may play a role in such regulation.  The aim
              of this project is to identify and characterize nucleotide binding sites in the
              axoneme involved in regulation.  By combining the classic genetic tools
              available in the model organism Chlamydomonas with biochemical, motility, and
              molecular genetic analyses, the investigator proposes to identify the
              nucleotide binding site(s) important for regulation of motion.  Two of the
              outer arm dynein heavy chains may contain regulatory nucleotide binding sites. 
              Biochemical evidence will be sought to confirm or refute the presence of
              multiple nucleotide binding sites on the outer arm dyneins.  Simultaneously,
              mutants with potential defects in regulatory nucleotide binding sites will be
              selected.  There are good reasons to believe that at least some of these
              mutants will be dominant; therefore, dominant motility mutants will be
              selected, focusing on dominant paralyzed mutants.  Mutants whose biochemical
              and motility phenotypes suggest that they are likely to have a defect in
              regulatory nucleotide binding site(s) will be characterized at the molecular
              level.      Non Technical  Many eukaryotic cell types use flagella or cilia
              either to swim through a fluid medium or to move the fluid medium around the
              cell.  Examples of the former include the swimming of sperm and protozoa such
              as Paramecium; examples of the latter include bronchial epithelial cells, which
              use their cilia to move mucus upward and out of the lungs.  The free-swimming
              single-celled alga, Chlamydomonas, has long been  used as a model system for
              studying how flagella work.  As a result of these studies, much is already
              known about the machinery of flagella, including the 9+2 (cylinder + core)
              arrangement of microtubules and their associated motor proteins, the flagellar
              dyneins.  The dyneins are mechanochemical transducing enzymes, which convert
              energy obtained by the hydrolysis of ATP into the sliding movement of one set
              of microtubules relative to another.  However, it is clear that there are still
              important gaps in our understanding of how the flagella work, particularly with
              regard to how these sliding movements are regulated to produce the oscillatory
              (back and forth wave-like) motion characteristic of the flagella.  There is
              reason to believe, from previous work by Dr. Omoto, that some of this
              regulation involves the binding of ATP or other nucleotides at sites in the
              flagella  (probably on some dynein molecules) that are not involved in the
              powering of the sliding motion.  Chlamydomonas mutants that are defective in
              flagellar regulation would be expected to be paralyzed in a genetically
              dominant manner.  Therefore, Dr. Omoto will select for and characterize
              dominant paralyzed mutants in order to determine where these specific
              regulatory nucleotide binding sites are in the flagella.    ***
