Title       : RUI: Dynamics, Structure and Formation of Polyene Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1997  
File        : a9603582

Award Number: 9603582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Hartsel hartsesc@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9603582  Hartsel  Amphotericin B is one of the classic model compounds to study
              membrane ion channel formation and properties, but the molecular structure of
              the channel is still controversial.  The goal is to use fluorescence,
              absorbance and circular dichroism techniques to liposomal membrane vesicles
              treated with the polyene natural product Amphotericin B to uncover the
              molecular structure and kinetics of this membrane channel-forming compound. 
              Many polyenes may form ion permeable pores in cellular lipid membranes by
              organizing molecules with the polar polyalcohol region in the middle.  However,
              the size and nature of the channels seem to vary depending upon which sterol,
              ergosterol or cholesterol, is present in the phospholipid membrane and under
              conditions of osmotic stress (swelling).  The condition of osmotic stress in
              simple membranes will be used in an attempt to "trap" the exclusive active
              channel structure(s) with a minimum of complications.    Biological membrane
              channels or pores are ultimately the key to regulating fundamental processes
              from neurotransmission all the way to basic uptake of and elimination of
              nutrients and wastes in every cell.  This reach should advance our knowledge of
              polyene channels and membrane channels in general.  In addition, the proposed
              work will heavily involve undergraduate students in carrying out every aspect
              of the work, from experimental design and collection of data through polishing
              and presenting the data at scientific conferences and ultimately publication in
              peer-reviewed journals.  The P.I. has had extensive experience and success in
              using undergraduate research as a pedagogical tool for training of science
              students.
