Title       : U.S.-Latin America Dissertation Enhancement: The Impact of Global Environmental
               Agreements on Biodiversity Policy in Bolivia and Costa Rica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9603023

Award Number: 9603023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel M. Press dpress@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              80        Social Sciences                         
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9603023  Press    This Americas Program award will fund a dissertation 
              enhancement project for Paul Steinberg,  University of  California, Santa Cruz,
              under the supervision of Dr. Daniel  Press. They will be working with Dr.
              Carlos Quesada-Mateo,  Director of the Center for Research on Sustainable 
              Development, University of Costa Rica, and in Bolivia with  Professor Kathy
              Mihotek, Universidad Autonoma Moreno, Santa  Cruz.   The research project will
              analyze the trajectory of  species preservation efforts in Bolivia and Costa
              Rica over  the past twenty-five years, to explore to what extent  international
              conservation agreements have influenced  national policies, and by what means. 
               Specifically, they  will test two hypotheses.  First, to see if international 
              agreements have catalyzed changes in cultural values  regarding species
              preservation in Costa Rica and Bolivia,  and, secondly, find out if the
              international agreements have  precipitated concurrent changes in national
              conservation  policies.    While there exists a large and growing literature on
               international environmental treaty making, little scholarly  attention has
              been devoted to the impact of treaties and  their associated organizations on
              national policies in  developing countries.  Successful conclusion of this 
              research will shed light on how conservation regimes can  work more
              intentionally to foster cultural value shifts  toward regime goals, and how
              international regimes can use  networks of domestic advocacy-oriented experts
              to facilitate  regime goals.   The results should make a substantial 
              contribution to the progress of the current research program  in the
              effectiveness of international environmental regimes  on state and substate
              behavior.  The work has the potential  to make a major advance in our capacity
              for studying how  networks of policy experts and the negotiators of 
              international treaties can affect conditions on the ground  in places removed
              from their direct sovereignty.  ***
