Title       : Procedures for Analytical Ultracentrifugation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2000   
File        : a9603153

Award Number: 9603153
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555679             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Yphantis david@spin6.mcb.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,9216,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  Procedures for Analytical Ultracentrifugation        The ultracentrifuge
              provides direct and reliable information about the  molecular weights and the
              interactions of macromolecules as they exist  in solution. Sedimentation
              equilibrium approaches are based on  equilibrium thermodynamics and thus can
              provide reliable estimates of  the parameters of molecules in solution.
              Interferometric observations  of concentration distributions provide a high
              degree of precision for  such estimations. The recent commercial introduction
              of automated  interferometry in a modern ultracentrifuge provides a powerful
              tool  with a high "signal to noise ratio" for studying macromolecular 
              distributions. The proposed research will examine ways to improve the 
              precision of such measurements. This should lead to the ability to  carry out
              experiments under a wider range of conditions and to better  distinguish
              amongst alternative explanations (models) of the systems  investigated both for
              equilibrium and velocity experiments.         Software and new approaches to
              equilibrium sedimentation experiments,  if successful, will make experiments
              easier to carry out, and either  faster or more precise and thus able to
              provide more meaningful  information. These improvements would, for example,
              facilitate  determinations of levels of impurities in protein preparations or 
              estimations of the strength of interactions between molecules. The  programs to
              be developed should make it easier (and sometimes possible)  to obtain
              information from difficult interacting systems, such as the  complexes formed
              between cytokines and their receptors. These systems  often exhibit a sequence
              of complex formations where it is difficult to  determine stoichiometries.     
                 These various approaches will be applied to problems of topical  interest,
              largely, but not completely, from biotechnology enterprises  to try to answer
              interesting questions.
