Title       : Molecular Genetics of Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a9603821

Award Number: 9603821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1648800            (Estimated)
Investigator: Elliot M. Meyerowitz meyerow@caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603821  Meyerowitz  Technical  This research is directed toward revealing the
              genetic and molecular mechanisms by which Arabidopsis flowers develop.  The
              experiments are divided into two areas.  The first area is to understand the
              regulation and function of the floral organ identity genes APETALA3 and
              PISTILLATA.   The genes code for MADS-box DNA-binding proteins, and the
              proteins bind DNA as a heterodimer.  The research is:  to find the genes that
              specify the initial expression pattern of the two genes, which will be done by
              mutagenesis of transgenic lines that will give novel phenotypes if either
              MADS-box gene is ectopically activated; and to find the downstream genes
              activated or repressed by the AP3/PI heterodimer by use of differential
              display-RT-PCR methods.  The second area is to derive a general model for the
              control of pattern of cell division in shoot and floral meristems.  This will
              be done by the molecular cloning of the CLAVATA1, CLAVATA3 and WIGGUM genes.   
              Non-technical  An unanswered question in the genetic analysis of development is
              that of pattern formation:  How does a collection of equivalent cells such as a
              plant flower primordium or a vertebrate limb bud become spatially organized, so
              that it develops into a highly patterned collection of different cell types? 
              At least two processes are involved: patterned cellular differentiation, to
              give the final pattern of cell types, and patterned cell division, to give the
              appropriate size and shape to the mature structure.  Flowers provide a
              particularly good example of these aspects of pattern formation; flowers
              usually have a stereotyped pattern of organ types: sepals, petals, stamens, and
              central carpels.   Many flowers also have defined numbers of each of these
              organ types.  The flower of Arabidopsis thaliana plants, for example, has four
              sepals spaced evenly around the floral periphery, four petals interior to and
              alternate with the sepals, six stamens, and a compound ovary of two carpels. 
              The experiments described here will  reveal some of the cellular mechanisms by
              which cells are directed to divide in appropriate patterns in developing
              flowers, and by which they are instructed to differentiate into appropriate
              cell types for their positions.  If they succeed, the research will result in
              new genetic and molecular models for the spatial control of organ identity, and
              for the spatial patterning of cell divisions in plant pattern formation.  These
              models will, in turn, reveal the genetic principles of plant development, and
              will, in the future,      enable experimental control of plant development.
