Title       : Membrane Lipid Biosynthesis in Chlamydomonas Reinhardtii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9603626

Award Number: 9603626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas S. Moore btmoor@unix1.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603626  Moore  Cell division in some form is central to reproduction of all
              organisms, and also  to growth and reproduction of more complex forms of life. 
              Regulation of this division is crucial, and loss of regulation has dire
              consequences for all forms of life.  Because of this, extensive studies of the
              division process have been conducted and many aspects are increasingly well
              understood.  One component of the process which has not been sufficiently
              studied is the control over membrane production.  Membranes surround both the
              periphery and the cellular components, organelles, which specialize in specific
              metabolic functions of the cell.  Production of too much, too little, or the
              wrong components of the membranes, or at the wrong time, would lead to
              aberrations in the daughter cells.  The research would be devoted to measuring
              the changes in membrane composition which takes place during a cell division
              cycle and the biosynthetic/catabolic processes which accompany these changes. 
              The photosynthetic organism, Chlamydomonas reinhardtti, will be utilized and
              the work will concentrate primarily on its major extraplastid membrane lipids,
              phosphatidylethanolamine and diacylglyceroltrimethylhomoserine.  Since  the
              pathways of synthesis of these two lipids are not defined for C. reinhardtti,
              determination of the pathways and intracellular locations of synthesis of these
              two lipids will receive initial priority.    This project is concerned with
              regulation of synthesis of membranes, particularly   their lipid components, in
              relation to cell division and the cell cycle.  If membrane synthesis is not
              properly coordinated with cell division, serious problems could result.  A
              simple alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, that can be manipulated genetically
              will be studied.  The pathway for synthesis of two major lipids will be
              analyzed and studied.  This project will provide new information about how
              plants control their growth and reproduction and may have a long-term impact on
              crop production.
