Title       : Anion Exchange Mechanisms in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9603997

Award Number: 9603997
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Maloney   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603997  Maloney  This project concerns Oxlt, a novel transport protein found in
              the Gram-negative anaerobe, Oxalobacter formigenes.  OxlT catalyzed the
              exchange of external divalent oxalate for internal monovalent formate.  This
              electrogenic exchange, along with proton consumption during intracellular
              decarboxylation, constitutes an   "indirect proton pump" that generates a
              proton-motive force allowing O. formigenes to extract energy from oxalate.  It
              is now thought such protonmotive metabolic cycles are widely spread in
              microbiology, and to understand these events at a molecular level this project
              concentrates on studies on OxlT, the antiport protein at the center of this
              process in O. formigenes.  Antibodies against the OxlT N-terminus are
              available, the gene is cloned, and functional protein is purified after
              expression in Escherichia coli.  Therefore, tools are available to study
              structure-function relationships in four areas of progressively increasing
              resolution:  (1)  Initial studies will focus on studies of OxlT topology, using
              peptidespecific antibodies, gene fusions and SH-directed probes, guided by
              predictions derived from hydropathy analysis of the amino acid sequence. (2)
              Site-directed mutagenesis will then be used to generate a panel of
              single-cysteine derivatives to be probed with impermeant SH-active reagents in
              order to localize the OxlT translocation pathway. (3) Mutagenesis will also be
              used to identify functionally important residues, with emphasis on K355, which
              may be the lone charged residue in the OxlT hydrophobic core; K355 may form
              part of an anion binding center.  (4) Concurrently, capitalizing on the
              stability of the OxlT/substrate complex and on recent success in protein
              purification, trials of 2-dimensional crystallization will be conducted. 
              Together, this work will extend an understanding of OxlT from  the level of
              cell physiology to that of molecular biology and biophysics.    This project is
              about OxlT, a novel transport protein found in the soil bacterium,  Ox
              alobacter formigenes.  OxlT catalyzes the transmembrane exchange of two anions
              that differ in net charge, so that a membrane potential arises as one (divalent
              oxalate) moves inward while the other (monovalent formate) moves outward. 
              Similarly, when inside the cell, oxalate is transformed into formate in a
              reaction that consumes a single proton.  Overall, then, the metabolism of
              oxalate generates electrical and chemical (ph) gradients that comprise a
              "protonmotive force" which O. formigenes uses to power other
              membrane-associated events.  Such proton-motive metabolic cycles appear to be
              widely spread in microorganisms.  To understand these events at a molecular
              level this project concentrates on studies of OxlT, the antiport protein at the
              center of the process in  O.  formigenes.  Initial studies will focus on the
              overall organization of OxlT in the cell membrane, using biochemical, genetic
              and immunological tools.  Mutagenesis will then be used to change the molecule
              into one suitable for probing with reagents that may localize the substrate
              transport pathway and identify functionally important residues.  Finally,
              trials of 2-dimensional crystallization will be conducted to capitalize on the
              stability of the OxlT-substrate complex.  Together, such experiments should
              experiments should extend an understanding of OxlT from the level of cell
              physiology to that of molecular biology and biophysics.
