Title       : Pollination in Lilium Longiflorum and Arabidopsis Thaliana: The Role of Adhesion
               Molecules in Tube Cell Movement in the Style
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1998  
File        : a9603826

Award Number: 9603826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Lord LORD@UCRAC1.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lord  9603826    The aim in this study of plant reproduction is to describe the
              interaction between the pollen tube and the style during compatible
              pollination, to characterize the styler and tube cell components involved in
              this interaction and to understand their role in tube cell movement in the
              style. The goal is to isolate the adhesive molecules involved in guiding the
              tube cell to the ovule and to describe the mechanism of tube cell movement that
              accompanies this guidance. There is structural and biochemical evidence from
              lily that tube cells moving in the transmitting tract of the style differ in
              behavior, morphology, protein composition, mRNA profiles and cytoskeletal
              features from pollen tubes grown in culture. Differences in the structure of in
              vivo- and in vitro-grown pollen tubes, including the extracellular matrix
              (ECM)-plasma membrane-cytoskeletal complex in the tube cell in lily and
              Arabidopsis, will be described. Stylar exudates extracted from lily have been
              used to develop an in vitro artificial styler matrix that exhibits adhesive
              qualities. Pollen tubes adhere to this matrix in vitro and grow as in vivo.
              Characterization of the adhesive components of this exudate is in progress. The
              suggestion is that the adhesion event between the tube cell and the
              styler-transmitting tract ECM triggers gene expression in the tube cell,
              resulting in efficient transfer of the sperm cells H carries to the ovule.
              There is evidence that pollen tube cell genes and their products are induced or
              unregulated by contact with the style. Results from 2-D protein profiles and
              mRNA differential display show that both gene expr ession and protein synthesis
              in in vivo pollen tubes differ significantly from that in in vitro-grown pollen
              tubes in lily. The adhesion assay can now be used to establish the role of
              adhesion in these differences. Years have been spent trying to perfect an in
              vitro system for pollen tubes in many species, but no defined medium yet allows
              for the tube growth rates, morphology, or be havior of the in vivo system. The
              missing element is proposed to be the ECM of the styler transmitting tract,
              which is a matrix of bound substances that must be isolated for proper in vitro
              behavior of pollen tube cells. Dr. Lord has developed such an artificial ECM
              for pollen tube growth in vitro and wants to modify it further for use as an
              adhesion assay to properly study lily pollen tube  growth in vitro.
