Title       : Factors Regulating Programmed Cell Death in the Nervous System of an Insect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9603851

Award Number: 9603851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence F. Kromer                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29959              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald Booker rb28@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT    9603851  BOOKER      During development of an organism, more cells
              are formed than are needed for the final body plan.  This excess cell formation
              is particularly noteworthy in the nervous system, where individual cells have
              unique roles.  Programmed cell death (PCD) plays a central role in the
              elimination of excess cells and in sculpting developing systems.  The
              biochemical regulation of PCD is complex, involving a number of different
              biochemical pathways.  One such pathway, ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis, is
              believed to play a key role in the final phases of at least some PCD in most
              organisms.  Ubiquitin is probably present in all cells of all or most organisms
              and is thought to be responsible for the degradation of many cellular proteins.
               Consistent with this hypothesis, some but not all cells undergoing PCD show a
              large increase in the expression of ubiquitin and other proteins associated
              with the ubiquitin proteolytic pathway.    One of the best characterized
              examples of PCD is the death of both neurons and muscles during metamorphosis
              of the moth Manduca sexta.  In the moth there is a dramatic increase in the
              expression of ubiquitin following the onset of PCD.  This project involves a
              series of experiments designed to better define the role that ubiquitin
              proteolysis plays in PCD.  Preliminary experiments have shown that inhibitors
              of ubiquitin proteolysis can selectively block some PCD in the developing moth.
               These results will be exploited in an attempt to determine whether the
              ubiquitin proteolytic pathway is involved solely in the rapid removal of dying
              cells, or if this pathway is also important in the regulation of the PCD
              process.  In the moth, the pattern of gene expression in cells undergoing PCD
              is altered in a characteristic manner.  If ubiquitin proteolysis is involved in
              the regulation of PCD, then disrupting this pathway should alter the normal
              pattern of gene expression observed during PCD.  The investigators will address
              this question by determining whether  the pattern of gene expression is altered
              following application of the inhibitors.   The near universal distribution of
              ubiquitin suggests that it could play a role in the PCD observed in other
              organisms, including humans.  For example, increases in the expression of
              ubiquitin are also seen in the PCD associated with many developing systems,
              including the spinal motor neurons of chicks and the developing eye of flies. 
              These studies in the moth have the potential to lead to a better understanding
              of the cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying PCD in a wide variety of
              organisms
