Title       : Contractile Ring Formation in Drosophila Cytokinesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9603696

Award Number: 9603696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melanie H. Cobb   (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Wasserman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603696  Wasserman                 Technical Abstract:  During the terminal
              phase of mitosis or meiosis, an animal cell must carry out cytokinesis, the
              division of a cell into two progeny cells, in spatial and temporal coordination
              with the nuclear division cycle.  Cleavage is initiated by an actin-rich
              contractile ring.  The long term goal of our research is to understand how
              contractile ring formation is initiated, how cytoskeletal components are
              recruited to the site of ring assembly, and how these components come together
              to form a functional contractile ring.  Genetic and molecular studies in
              Drosophila have identified two contractile ring proteins, Diaphanous and
              Peanut, that are specifically required for cytokinesis.  Loss-of-function
              mutations in the gene for either protein block cytokinesis, but have no
              apparent effect on chromosome segregation or on cellular functions during
              interphase.  The hypothesis underlying this project is that a subset of
              cytokinesis factors that includes these two proteins provides the molecular
              framework for the organization of broadly functioning cytoskeletal proteins,
              such as actin and profilin, into the contractile apparatus.  We therefore
              propose to use Diaphanous and Peanut as the starting point for defining the
              network of interactions necessary to build a contractile ring.  A
              characterization of ring assembly and component recruitment in both wild-type
              cells and cells defective for ring formation will allow us to order these
              interactions into an assembly pathway.  A two-step approach will be used to
              identify contractile ring proteins that interact with Diaphanous or Peanut. 
              First, the yeast two-hybrid system will be used to screen libraries generated
              from tissues rich in dividing cells for clones that interact with Diaphanous or
              Peanut fusion proteins. Second, epitope tagged forms of the two-hybrid clones
              will be expressed in cultured Drosophila cells, allowing identification of the
              subset of positive clones that encode proteins colocalizing with Diapha nous
              and Peanut during cell division.  With the aid of a PCR based strategy for
              clone characterization and a modular set of cloning and expression vectors,
              interactions of physiological relevance can thereby be rapidly and efficiently
              identified.  Full length cDNAs will be isolated for clones identified in the
              two-hybrid and localization screens and sequences will be compared to the
              nucleic acid and protein databases.  Novel genes will be localized on the
              physical map by in situ hybridization to polytene chromosomes.  Bacterially
              expressed fusion proteins will be used to raise antisera.  Polyclonal
              antibodies will be used to characterize the distribution of cytokinesis factors
              in both dividing wild-type cells and cells defective for cytokinesis.  An array
              of markers for subcellular structures will be employed in colocalization
              studies focusing on the cleavage furrow and contractile ring in spermatocytes,
              the ring canals in developing egg chambers, and the membrane front in embryos
              undergoing cellularization.    The existence of counterparts to Diaphanous and
              Peanut in a range of organisms (e.g., mice, fungi) indicates that these studies
              are likely to provide insights of broad and fundamental applicability into the
              molecular and biochemical mechanisms for cytokinesis.        Lay language
              abstract:  cell division is one of the most fundamental behaviors of animal
              cells.  It is already known that the cleavage of one cell into two daughter
              cells involves a highly organized array of actin microfilaments, polymerized
              myosin, and other actin-associated proteins in a ring-like arrangement just
              beneath the cell membrane at the site of division, and that cleavage proceeds
              by the contraction of this ring to create an ever-deepening cleavage furrow, or
              constriction, at the division site.  However, there is very little known about
              the identity of the other proteins in the ring or their role in the process,
              and nothing is known about how the ring components are recruited to the right
              place at the right time.   It is anticipated that this project, by combining
              the power of genetic analysis and molecular biological techniques with more
              traditional approaches (morphology, immunolocalization, and biochemical
              techniques), will rapidly advance our knowledge and understanding of this
              critically fundamental aspect of cell biology.   ***
