Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Pattern Formation and Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9603035

Award Number: 9603035
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41500              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Glazier james.a.glazier.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9603035  Glazier    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor James Glazier of the University od  Notre Dame and
              Professor Masaki Sano of the Tohoku  University in Sendai, Japan.  This project
              provides for  research in the area of pattern formation and complex  systems. 
              The researchers will be studying cell sorting and  turbulence.  They will study
              the physical and biological  mechanisms of cell sorting during embryonic
              development,  both theoretically and experimentally.  This should  establish
              detailed quantitative agreement between  experiments and the Potts model
              simulations and explain  several morphogenic processes.  Their next goal is to
              study  turbulence in Rayleigh-Benard convection in Hg.   They will  accomplish
              this by characterizing the velocity histograms  and spectra of hard turbulence
              using new velocity probes.  They will then determine velocity histograms for
              the  ultrahard turbulence regime which they expect to differ from  hard
              turbulence.    The proposal brings together the efforts of two laboratories 
              which both work on living and non-living materials and both  combine
              experimental and theoretical studies of physical and  biological pattern
              formation.  Their equipment and expertise  is also complementary.  The results
              of the research will  provide realistic parameters in their computer models
              that  would allow for full quantitative simulations.  Through the  exchange of
              ideas and technology, this project will broaden  our base of basic knowledge
              and promote international  ulderstanding and cooperation.
