Title       : The Genetic Basis of Homology Recognition in Coprinus cinereus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1998   
File        : a9603792

Award Number: 9603792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. Pukkila pukkila@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Pukkila  9603792  The source of specificity for meiotic chromosome pairing is
              not known.  We have shown that prior to meiosis, a genome-wide homology search
              occurs in haploid nuclei of Coprinus cinereus which results in the methylation
              of duplicated sequences, a process termed MIP (methylation induced
              premeiotically).  We have also shown that a mutation with defects in meiotic
              synapsis, (bad27) is deficient in MIP.  Thus it appears that either prior MIP
              is essential for synapsis, or that MIP and meiotic pairing are genetically
              related.  We are utilizing MIP to analyze the genetic basis of homologue
              recognition.  We have isolated four mutants which arrest in meiotic prophase
              following nuclear fusion (karyogamy) with decondensed chromosomes that exhibit
              very limited axial core formation (class I synaptic defect).  We have also
              isolated six mutants which arrest with condensed univalents (class II synaptic
              defect).  We have shown that one of the class II mutants (bad27) is deficient
              in MIP.  We will ask if the class I mutants and the other class II mutants can
              carry out MIP.  We will use serial sectioning and 3-dimensional reconstruction
              to learn if homologue alignment occurs normally in the class II mutants.  We
              will determine epistatic relationships among the class I and class II mutants. 
              By ordering these genes in a genetic pathway, we should begin to establish
              cause and effect relationships among them.  Finally, we will utilize
              DNA-mediated transformation to obtain a cloned DNA sequence that can complement
              the defects in MIP and synapsis conferred by the bad27 mutation.  These studies
              should provide unique insights into the underlying mechanisms of homologue
              recognition.      This research will help us understand how a process that is
              almost universal in plants and animals occurs.  This process is called meiosis,
              and involves the pairing of chromosomes inherited from both parents so that
              reproductive cells can be formed (such as sperm and eggs).  Dr. Pukkila is
              studying a fungus which she has s hown provides special advantages for
              uncovering the steps that occur in this process.
