Title       : Control of Cell Proliferation in Estrogen-Target Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9603779

Award Number: 9603779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ana M. Soto   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603779  Soto    The mechanisms that control cell proliferation in multicellular
              organisms are poorly understood; little is known about the signals mediating
              these events, except for certain hormones.  Among them, sex steroids control
              the cell number and proliferative activity of their target organs.  Animal
              studies revealed that administration of estrogens to ovariectomized mammals
              results in 1) inhibition of cell death, 2) a swift but transient proliferative
              response and later 3) inhibition of cell proliferation.  The mechanisms
              underlying these phenomena have yet to be elucidated.  The establishment of
              estrogen-sensitive cell lines from several mammalian species during the last
              two decades provide models whereby the proliferative effect of estrogens may be
              studied.  Three working hypotheses have been proposed to explain estrogen (E)
              induction of cell proliferation.  The first proposes that E acts directly; in
              the second E acts through the induction of growth factors, and the third
              proposes that E neutralizes the action of an inhibitor.  The third hypothesis
              is based on the following evidence: 1) estrogen-sensitive cell lines
              proliferate maximally in serumless medium regardless of the presence of
              estrogens. 2) Homologous serum from ovariectomized donors, or serum from intact
              donors rendered estrogenless by charcoaldextran stripping results in a
              dose-dependent inhibition of cell proliferation. 3) Estrogens induce cell
              proliferation by neutralizing the inhibitory effect of serum.  The nature of
              this inhibitor was unclear until recently (the inhibitor is either serum
              albumin, or a protein of native molecular weight and pI similar to that of
              albumin); this laboratory explored both hypotheses, and concluded that the
              inhibitor (estrocolyone-I, EK-I) function is coded within the albumin molecule.
               Serum albumins purified from hamster, bovine rat and human serum have EK-I
              activity; this activity is intrinsic to the albumin molecule, since it is
              present in recombinant human serum albumin and certain re combinant truncated
              albumin peptides.  In order to facilitate the understanding of the
              serum-mediated inhibition, serum-resistant variants of estrogen-sensitive cells
              were developed.    The objectives of this research are i) to test whether the
              findings summarized above, obtained using established cell lines, apply to
              normal target cells in organ explants and primary cultures, ii) to determine
              whether the EK-I activity in analbuminemic rat and human serum is due to
              truncated albumin peptides, iii) to assess whether EK-I interacts with target
              cells via membrane receptors, and iv) to assess the role of estrogens, growth
              factors and EK-I on the control of proliferation of estrogen-target cells. 
              Methods to be used include: FPLC/HPLC, affinity chromatography, ID and 2D
              electrophoresis, receptor binding assays, cell and tissue culture.    The
              fulfillment of these objectives will provide mechanistic understanding of the
              control of cell proliferation of estrogen-target cells.  This evidence will
              finally validate the physiological relevance of the important finding that
              serum albumin is the long-sought after EK-I.  ***
