Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Efficient and Applicable Geometric Alogrithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9603605

Award Number: 9603605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pankaj K. Agarwal pankaj@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9603605  Agarwal  This award provides funds to permit Dr. Pankaj K. Agarwal,
              Department of Computer Science, Duke University, to pursue with Dr. Otfried
              Schwarzkopf, Pohang.  University of Science and Technology, (POSTECH), Pohang,
              Korea for 36 months, a program of cooperative research on efficient geometric
              algorithms and their applications.  These collaborators will study the
              following areas in computational geometry: randomized algorithms, approximation
              algorithms, arrangements of curves and surfaces, multidimensional searching,
              robot motion planning and collision detection, and proximity problems. 
              Computational geometry concerns itself with the design, analysis, and
              implementation of geometric algorithms. Problems in several applied areas
              including graphics, computer vision, pattern recognition, image processing,
              medical imaging, robotics, data mining, and geographical data processing have
              motivated the study of a number of  geometric problems from a computational
              point of view, and their efficient solutions often require sophisticated
              techniques from computer science and various mathematical disciplines. The PI
              and his collaborator in Korea have made significant contributions to many basic
              and applied problems in the area, including motion planning, computer graphics,
              randomized algorithms, the study of arrangements of curves and algebraic
              surfaces and data structures for multidimensional searching. The purpose of the
              present project is to continue such research and to initiate new collaboration
              in computational geometry.  The emphasis will be on developing simple and
              practical algorithms, on cross-fertilization between basic research and the
              various applications, on understanding higher dimensional problems, and on
              handling curved objects. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
              U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program, which seeks to increase the level of
              cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
              exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, an d techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.  This project provides an
              international research experience for an U.S. graduate student Korean
              participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation
              (KOSEF).  ***
