Title       : RNA Modification and Splicing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9603550

Award Number: 9603550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim E. Creek   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey R. Patton  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603550  Patton  It is becoming increasingly clear that modified nucleotides in
              RNA have important functional roles.  Of the 93 different modified nucleotides
              currently known to occur in RNA molecules, pseudouridine is the most abundant. 
              Pseudouridine is important in tRNA function and is thought to participate in
              the peptidyl transfer reaction of rRNA.  Pseudouridine also occurs in highly
              conserved positions in snRNAs (small nuclear RNAs), essential co-factors in
              pre-mRNA splicing.  Splicing is accomplished by the splicosome, an assembly of
              co-factors which includes snRNPs (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles)
              composed of snRNAs and proteins.  Conserved nucleotide modifications in
              splicosomal snRNAs are concentrated near the catalytic center of the splicosome
              and nearly all are found where snRNAs interact with the pre-mRNA or other
              snRNAs. Pseudouridines occur in regions of U2 snRNA sequence know to be
              essential for its function as a spicing co-factor.  This research will test the
              hypothesis that pseudouridine modification of U2 snRNA is required for the
              assembly and/or function of the U2 snRNP. U2 snRNPs will be assembled in vitro
              using either U2 RNA synthesized in vitro or fully modified U2 snRNA isolated
              from HeLa cells.  Post-transcriptional inhibitors of pseudouridine formation
              which do not prevent other U2 RNA modifications such as methylation will be
              used to control the presence or absence the pseudouridine in the U2 RNA
              synthesized in vitro.  U2 snRNPs reconstituted in vitro will be used in a
              complementation assay of pre-mRNA splicing to determine if pseudouridine
              modification of U2 snRNA affects splicosome function.    It is becoming
              increasingly clear that modified nucleotides in RNA have important functional
              roles.  Of the 93 different modified nucleotides currently known to occur in
              RNA molecules, pseudouridine is the most abundant and has been implicated in
              both tRNA and rRNA function.  Pseudouridine also occurs in snRNAs (small
              nuclear RNAs), essential co-factors for the "sp licing" of pre-mRNAs into
              functional mRNAs in the cell nucleus.  Splicing is accomplished by the
              splicosome, an assembly of snRNPs (small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles)
              composed of snRNAs and proteins.  Conserved nucleotide modifications in
              splicosomal snRNAs are concentrated near the catalytic center of the splicosome
              and nearly all are found where snRNAs interact with the pre-mRNA or other
              snRNAs.  Pseudouridines occur in regions of U2 snRNA sequence known to be
              essential for its function as a spicing co-factor.  This research will test the
              hypothesis that pseudouridine modification of U2 snRNA is required for the
              assembly and/or function of the U2 snRNP.
