Title       : Task Allocation in Social Animal Colonies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9603639

Award Number: 9603639
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah M. Gordon gordon@ants.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Gordon  9603639         Like a brain or an embryo, a social insect colony 
              functions without central or hierarchical control. Simple  decisions by
              individual units, the workers, lead to the  complex behavior of the colony,
              though no individual directs  the behavior of others. Colonies perform a
              variety of tasks  outside the nest, including foraging, nest maintenance work, 
              and patrolling. As conditions change, the numbers of ants  required for each
              task also change. Task allocation is the  process that results in the right
              numbers of ants performing  the right tasks for the current situation. How do
              colonies  accomplish this without central control? Individuals make  decisions
              based on local information. These decisions  determine whether an individual
              will switch tasks, an  whether it will pursue a task actively or instead remain
               inactive inside the nest. The proposed work will investigate  what cues ants
              use in making task decisions.       The proposed research explores the
              possibility that the  rate or number of interactions among nestmates is one of
              the  cues involved in tasks allocation decisions. The work will  use laboratory
              colonies of marked individuals, in which all  behavior inside the nest is
              visible, and computer  simulations based on a mathematical model of task 
              allocation. Because the rate of encounter among ants depends  on how they move
              around, an image analysis system will be  employed to track the paths of ants
              as they move around the  laboratory nest and arena. How ants respond to the
              rate of  brief interactions with other ants, will be examined in  undisturbed
              colonies and in experiments that manipulate  worker density, and thus encounter
              rate. Chemical analysis  of the hydrocarbons on the surface of an ant s body
              will  test whether ants engaged in a particular task might carry  an odour
              specific to that task, which other ants could use  to distinguish the task of
              the ants they meet.       This research should provide new insight into the
              ways  that fairly simple individ ual behavior can generate the  complex
              behavior of social systems.
