Title       : The Strain Dependence of the Kinetic Constants of the Elementary Steps of the
               Cross-Bridge Cycle in Mammalian Skeletal Muscle Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9603858

Award Number: 9603858
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Masataka Kawai   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603858  Kawai      The long range goal of this research is to document the
              molecular mechanisms of contraction in skeletal muscle cells.  The specific aim
              of this proposal is to determine the intermediate metabolic products and
              characterize the kinetic constants of the chemical reactions between the
              metabolic  products.  Skinned muscle fibers, in which the cell membrane has
              been removed by chemical treatment, are used so that ions and molecules of
              experimental interest can be placed into the muscle cells.  A step length
              change is applied to muscle fibers during maximal activation, which, in turn,
              induces a change in tension.  From the time course of tension, three time
              constants are obtained and these are studies as functions of ATP (the energy
              source), ADP (a product), and phosphate (another product) concentrations.  Dr.
              Kawai is also able to observe the ATP hydrolysis rate, which characterizes the
              slowest chemical reaction.  From these data the ten kinetic constants which
              characterize the chemical steps between individual metabolic products are
              deduced.  These procedures will allow for the rigorous testing of many
              hypotheses including step-length dependence of the chemical reactions.  The
              proposed studies will yield answers to questions that cannot be obtained from
              studies of purified muscle proteins.
