Title       : Regulation of a MAPK Signaling Pathway in Yeast by Two Protein Tyrosine
               Phosphatases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1999    
File        : a9603871

Award Number: 9603871
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Ota Irene.Ota@Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9603871  Ota    MAP kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways regulate growth
              and  development in vertebrates, Caenorhabditis elegans, Drosophila  and the
              yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Mechanism regulating  MAPK pathways are the
              subject of intensive research, however the  inactivation of these pathways is
              poorly understood.  Protein  tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are negative
              regulators of these  pathways.  By genetic techniques this investigator has
              isolated 2  PTPs that inactivate a stress response MAPK pathway in the yeast 
              S. Cerevesiae.  This pathway, known as HOG for high osmolarity  glycerol,
              regulates the response to osmotic stress.  One of the  aims of this research is
              to establish the specificity of action  of these enzymes for Hog 1.   This is
              important because the  identity of protein phosphatases that inactivate MAPKs
              remains  unclear.  Another goal of these studies is to identify the  mechanisms
              by which specificity of the phosphatases for MAPKs is  achieved. Since multiple
              MAPK cascades operate in yeast and  mammalian cells, mechanisms to ensure
              signaling specificity must  exist.  The genes encoding these enzymes will be
              systematically  mutagenized and the effects of these mutants examined in vivo
              and  in vitro.  The regulation of these genes will also be studied.  These
              studies will provide a greater understanding of the roles  of PTPs in
              regulating MAPK signaling, and thereby the  regulation  of growth and
              development in yeast and mammals.      The research of this grant is to study
              the enzymes that  inactivate one of the major signaling pathways in eukaryotic 
              cells. This signaling path involves a series of protein kinases,  and these are
              inactivated by protein phosphatases, the subject of  this grant.  These studies
              will provide a better understanding of  the regulation of these signaling
              pathways which are important in  growth, development and many other cellular
              processes.        ***
