Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Research and Development of Space Qualified
               Change-Coupled Devices (CCDs) for X-ray Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2001     
File        : a9603347

Award Number: 9603347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19500              (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Ricker grr@space.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Doty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marshall W. Bautz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9603347  Ricker    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Professor George Ricker, Center for Space  Research,
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and  Professor Katsuji  Koyama of the
              Department of Physics at  Kyoto University in Japan.  The joint research
              project  focuses on scientific preparations for the Astro-E mission,  a
              Japan/USA orbiting observatory scheduled for launch by the  Institute of Space
              and Astronautical Science (ISAS) in Japan  during February, 2000.  The project
              will provide  powerful X-  ray spectroscopic capability through both a
              narrow-field  high spectral resolution microcalorimeter instrument (the X-  ray
              Spectrometer, XRS) and a wide-field, moderate  resolution, imaging spectrometer
              (the X-ray Imaging  Spectrometer, or XIS).  This project places emphasis on 
              development of the XIS.  The scientific objectives of the  XIS are two-fold: 
              (1) it will provide wide field imaging  and spatially resolved spectroscopy in
              support of  observations with the microcalorimeter-based XRS, which is  limited
              in lifetime by its cryogenics, and (2) it will  expand upon the broad range of
              moderate resolution  spectroscopic observations initiated by the Solid-State 
              Imaging Spectrometer (SIS) successfully flown on the Astro-D  mission.    This
              award supports the non-hardware tasks associated with  the experiment, which
              will be carried out with scientists in  Kyoto, Osaka and Tokyo.  These tasks
              include XIS instrument  calibration and testing efforts.  As a result of the
              greater  telescope area and improved angular telescope resolution for  Astro-E,
              greatly improved sensitivity for the XIS is  expected.  Thus spectroscopic
              observations of fainter  objects, or exploration of more members of a given
              class can  be expected.  The power of the XIS, as a unique  observational tool,
              will be widely available to the entire  US and Japanese astronomical community.
               Graduate students  and young postdoctoral scientists will participate in all 
              phases of the scientifi c and technical enterprise. It is  anticipated that a
              number of publications will result from  the collaboration.  Through the
              exchange of ideas and  technology, this project will broaden our base of
              knowledge  and promote international understanding and cooperation.  ***
