Title       : Chemo-Mechanical Energy Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1998   
File        : a9603670

Award Number: 9603670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel F. Morales   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathleen Ue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hugo M. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Morales  9603670    Technical  This study examines the interface between actin
              and myosin S1 that lead to chemomechanical transduction of energy during muscle
              contraction. Thus site-directed mutagenesis is used to specify regions
              responsible for the hydrophobic and coulombic interactions, and to deduce the
              involvement of myosin ATPase. Specific questions are:  1  Why do the actin
              affinities for the "no ligand" and the  MgATP" intermediates differ by a
              thousand fold?  2  Is it possible that only NMR methods can explain this
              conformational change, if this affinity difference is not due to charge, but to
              a myosin conformational change? and  3  How is the transition rate of the
              "MgADP" intermediate to the "no ligand" intermediate influenced by interaction
              with actin? Site-directed mutations and simulations with energy minimizations
              are used to elucidate the structural basis of the strong "no ligand" affinity.
              A structure of the "MgADP" intermediate with suitable attributes is simulated.
              The NMR chemical shift findings of Shriver/Sykes (At high T there is one, and
              at low T there are two coexisting conformers of myosin, detectable by 31-P and
              19-F probes) will be followed to guide studies on a variety of intramolecular
              myosin crosslinks which trap these "MgADP" intermediary conformers, so that
              whether coexistence includes structures "missed" by current myosin
              crystallography can be determined. Furthermore, as an effort to understand
              actin activation of myosin ATPase, attempts are made to perturb structures that
              appear to affect the MgADP "leaving rate". The sites of interest are E99 and
              E100 for actin, K572, K574, D463 and Y135 for myosin, and a putative EDC
              crosslink site including D471; the activating effect of a bulky constituent
              (e.g. IATR) at C707 is energy-minimized. "Coexisting conformers  such as the
              transitions between "ATP" and "ADP.Pi" are also examined.  The significance of
              this study may lie in its molecularly defining the use of catalysis principles
              in energy-transduction in an important  biological contratile system.   
              Non-Technical  The aim of this research is to understand the features and
              mechanisms that allow a biological entity to function as a  machine  - that
              takes in a  fuel , transforms some of which into useful work, and generates
              others as  waste , while the machine itself suffers no net change in this
              operational cycle.  The paradigm being studied here is the biological machine
              used to contract muscle, particularly the involvement of the protein myosin
              which absorbs the fuel as well as ejects the waste.  Static pictures in atomic
              detail of the structural states and flexibility of myosin are examined with
              physical methods such as nuclear magnetic resonance, comparing artificially
              altered and the natural  wild  versions.  The effect of these alterations on
              operation is analyzed. Anchorage of the movement of the machine at each step by
              another protein,  actin , is also studied. Although the central purpose of this
              research is to figure out how the muscle machine works, it is expected that the
              knowledge so gained will be used by researchers to understand, construct and
              repair biological machines in general, or to copy the extraordinary attributes
              of natural machines into man-made entities.
