Title       : Adaptive Significance of Circadian Timing Systems in Wild, Free-Living Chipmunks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1999       
File        : a9603878

Award Number: 9603878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia J. DeCoursey decoursey@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9603878  DeCoursey  Circadian pacemakers are presumed to be highly adaptive for
              survival and for genetic fitness of organisms since they play a role in diverse
              daily physiological and behavioral functions of nearly all animals.  No direct
              test has been made, however, to assess the survival value of circadian
              pacemakers in wild species, primarily due to the technical difficulties
              involved.  The object of this project is to use a favorable rodent circadian
              model to test the importance of the primary mammalian circadian pacemaker, the
              suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN).  The rationale of the research is to surgically
              create clockless, arrhythmic cohorts of a wild population by SCN lesioning,
              then compare and control and clockless groups.    The study system will be the
              chipmunks of a southern Appalachian wilderness population at Mountain Lake
              Biological Research Station, Pembroke, Virginia.  A year-long pilot study has
              demonstrated the feasibility of lesioning the SCN of wild-caught individuals,
              reintroducing them back into their burrows, and then documenting selected
              measures of fitness by periodic trapping censuses, daily visual observations,
              and tracking of radiotransmitter-collared animals.  In the proposed study, all
              chipmunks of a 4-hectare grid will be marked by permanent ear tags and colored
              bead necklaces for visual observation.  Twenty SCN-lesioned, 20 sham-lesioned,
              and 24 intact control animals will then be radiocollared and followed intensely
              for a two-year period; measures of fitness will include daily activity
              patterns, mortality, feeding success as evidenced by body weight, den and core
              territory defense, reproductive success, and hibernation behavior.  In parallel
              with these free-living individuals, 5 control chipmunks and 5 SCN-lesioned
              chipmunkds will be monitored by radiotelemetry during the winter months from
              November to April in an outdoor Hibernaculum facility to obtain additional
              information on hibernation during the time that wild chipmunks are largely
              inactive underground and di fficult to monitor.
