Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Biochemical Control of Larval Settlement and
               Recruitment of an Abundant Reef- Building Coral in Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1997        
File        : a9603022

Award Number: 9603022
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aileen Morse a_morse@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel E. Morse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603022  Morse    This award supports a three year collaborative research 
              project between Dr. Aileen Morse of the Marine Science  Institute at the
              University of California at Santa Barbara  and Dr. Makomoto Omori of the
              Akajima Marine Science  Laboratory in Okinawa, Japan.  The project will
              investigate  biochemical control of larval settlement and recruitment of  an
              abundant reef-building coral.  The major goals of this  research are:  1) to
              determine the extent to which molecular  signals and mechanisms similar to
              those that control larval  settlement, metamorphosis and recruitment of
              Caribbean  agariciid corals regulate these centrally important  processes in
              Acropora nasuta, one of the most abundant and  widely distributed ecologically
              important reef-building  corals in the Indo-Pacific; and   2) to develop and 
              investigate the potential usefulness of an acroporid-  specific "larval
              flypaper", as a unique tool for field  experiments.  Their long-term goals are
              to understand the  mechanisms by which chemical signals in the ocean control 
              reproduction, larval dispersal, settlement, metamorphosis,  recruitment, gene
              expression, and the interactions of  organisms with other organisms and with
              the environment.    The project brings together the efforts of two major 
              laboratories that have constituted different parts of the  process.  The
              Americans have expertise in molecular marine  biology, larval settlement and
              spawning cue biochemistry and  molecular mechanisms controlling recruitment. 
              Japanese  expertise is in the area of biology and ecology of mass-  spawning
              corals and cultivation of their larvae.  Techniques  to be developed for the
              control of spawning and  metamorphosis should accelerate research on the
              ecologically  important corals world-wide, and should ppovide an alternate 
              means of production that can reduce the existing pressure of  commercial
              harvesting on natural stocks.  Through the  exchange of ideas and technology,
              this project will broaden  our base of basic knowledge and pro mote
              international  understanding and cooperation.  ***
