Title       : RUI: Regulatory Volume Decrease by Amphibian Red Blood Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9603568

Award Number: 9603568
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas B. Light LightD@Ripon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ripon College
	      300 Seward St P O Box 248
	      Ripon, WI  54971    414/748-8118

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9603568  Light           Water flows freely across the plasma
              membrane, so any  changes in extracellular or intracellular composition that
              alter  the thermodynamic equilibrium will elicit movement of water, and  change
              cell volume.  Since animal cells cannot maintain  hydrostatic pressure
              gradients across their membranes, they would  quickly lyse without the
              operation of compensatory mechanisms  that limit cell swelling.  Exposure of
              animal cells to a  hypotonic solution results in an initial increase in cell
              size,  followed by a slower, spontaneous regulatory volume decrease  (RVD)
              close to the original size.  This compensatory response  results from a
              swelling-induced increase in membrane permeability  to intracellular solutes,
              thereby decreasing the driving force  for water influx.  Although the general
              features of RVD have been  described, the details of the cellular mechanisms
              that underlie  this process, especially the regulation of ion channels, are 
              largely unknown.  The specific objectives of this grant are to  characterize
              the properties and regulation of potassium channels  involved with RVD, and to
              examine the signal transduction and  intracellular mechanisms that regulate
              RVD.  These studies will  be done on the Necturus maculosus (mud puppy) red
              blood cells.  These cells have a great ability to regulate their volume in 
              hypotonic media, and this process depends on ion channels and  intracellular
              messengers.  Osmotic fragility and cell volume will  be measured, and ion
              channels will be studied by the patch clamp  technique.  These studies will
              increase our understanding of the  transduction step between cell swelling and
              ion efflux, and  provide insight on the properties and regulation of ion
              channels  used for RVD.         Since cell membranes are freely permeable to
              water,  they need to regulate their volume in dilute solutions.  When  exposed
              to large volumes of water or very dilute solutions cell  show an initial
              increase in cell size, and then a regulatory  volume dec rease (RVD) to their
              original size.  This grant will  study the mechanism of this process, by
              studying the regulation  of ion channels involved.          ***
