Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Regulation and Roles of Signal Transducing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1997     
File        : a9603360

Award Number: 9603360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26150              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Frohman Michael@pharm.som.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603360  Frohman    This award supports a two year collaborative research 
              project between Professor Michael Frohman of the State  University of New York
              (SUNY) at Stony Brook and Professor  Yoshinori Nozawa of the Gifu University
              School of Medicine  in Japan.  The project will investigate the biochemical, 
              cellular, and physiological roles of Phospholipase D (PLD),  an enzyme thought
              to be involved in signal transduction,  vesicular trafficking, and the control
              of cell division.  The major goals of this project are:  1) to continue 
              structure-function experiments using site-directed  mutagenesis to identify
              amino acids required for interaction  with cofactors such as protein kinase C
              and small G-  proteins, and intracellular localization; and  2) to  determine
              whether PLD1 or 2 are activated by stimulation of  specific signal transduction
              pathways in well characterized  cell lines, and whether such activation is
              necessary or  sufficient to generate the subsequent cellular responses  that
              have been ascribed to PLD activation in general.    The project brings together
              the efforts of two laboratories  that have constituted different parts of the
              process.  The  Americans have extensive experience with standard and  advanced
              molecular biology techniques, microinjection of  plasmids and proteins into
              cells, embryonic in situ  hybridization, and transgenic mouse technology.  The 
              Japanese have  been using approaches to study PLD for a  decade and have
              extensive experience with a wide variety of  pharmacological PLD activators and
              inhibitors, and with  measuring the cellular consequences correlated with PLD 
              activation, such as serotonin secretion, mast cell  degranulation, and
              diacylglycerol production.  PLD  activation has been linked to a wide variety
              of normal  physiological and disease processes in many different kinds  of
              cells and tissues.  Results of the research will provide  realistic expectation
              about the advantages and limitation of  the different model systems. This would
              serve as the basi s  to determine which models should be implemented.  Through 
              the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will  broaden our base of
              basic knowledge and promote  international understanding and cooperation.  ***
