Title       : Biosynthesis and Regulation of the Phytotoxin Coronatine in Pseudomonas Syringae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a9603618

Award Number: 9603618
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol L. Bender cbender@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Bender   9603618  Coronatine is a phytotoxin produced by the plant pathogenic
              bacterium Pseudomonas syringae. Previous work showed that coronatine
              biosynthesis is regulated by temperature and controlled by three regulatory
              proteins (CorR, CorS, and CorP). One objective of this research project is to
              utilize a genetic approach to determine if the three regulatory proteins are
              directly responsible for thermoregulation, or if another level of control is
              present and responsible for coronatine gene expression at low temperatures. The
              functional role of the three regulatory proteins encoded by the modified
              two-component regulatory system will also be investigated. Each protein will be
              purified and in vitro assays will address the following: (a) the role of CorS
              as both a positive and negative regulator of coronatine biosynthesis; (b) the
              potential involvement of CorR and CorP in a phosphorelay; and (c) the role of
              CorR as a transcriptional activator of all thermally regulated transcripts in
              the coronatine gene cluster. Previous work has also shown that the biosynthesis
              of coronafacic acid, a component of coronatine, was shown to require the
              coordinated effort of mono- and multifunctional polyketide synthetases. This
              research will confirm the role of a multifunctional polyketide synthetase in
              the biosynthesis of coronafacic acid. The complete nucleotide sequence of the
              coronafacic acid gene cluster will be obtained and used to deduce the
              functional roles of catalytic sites within the large proteins associated with
              coronafacic acid biosynthesis. Nonpolar mutations will be constructed within
              the coronafacic acid gene cluster and used to assess the potential involvement
              of a cyclopentenene compound in coronafacic acid biosynthesis.  Significance.
              Many of the diseases caused by the plant pathogenic bacterium P. syringae are
              more severe at cooler temperatures, so it is likely that other traits in this
              bacterium are also controlled by temperature. Furthermore, the regulatory
              controls involved in coronatine b iosynthesis are likely to have a much broader
              significance and be relevant in other bacteria where gene expression is
              controlled by temperature. The identification of a regulatory system which
              responds to reduced temperatures will be of practical usage in situations where
              gene expression at lower temperatures is desirable. Furthermore, the
              characterization of the gene cluster encoding the polyketide coronafacic acid
              will be of immense benefit to other research groups working on polyketides, but
              especially those working on multifunctional polyketide synthetases. Most
              research on the latter class of enzymes occurs largely in industry, and the
              data is generally not released to the public. Also, much of the previous work
              on polyketides has occurred with Gram-positive bacteria, but little is known
              about polyketide synthesis in Gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas. The
              modification of polyketide gene clusters in Pseudomonas has enormous potential
              to increase the number of new compounds with altered biosynthetic and
              antimicrobial activities. This research will contribute towards that goal by
              elucidating the genes involved in the biosynthesis of coronafacic acid, a
              complex polyketide of mixed origins.
