Title       : Physiological and Molecular Characterization of Ca Pump and Exchanger; an
               Integrated Approach Modeled on the Freshwater Crayfish Molting Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  2000  
File        : a9603723

Award Number: 9603723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele G. Wheatly michele.wheatly@wright.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603723  Wheatly    The mineral calcium (abbreviated Ca) is of fundamental
              biological importance.  In animals it is a component of biominerals such as
              skeleton and shell.  It is also necessary for muscle contraction and for
              relaying messages from the exterior to the interior of the cell.  For these
              reasons, scientists are very interested in how Ca moves between different parts
              of the body and specifically how it is transported across cell membranes
              (boundaries).  These processes are easily modeled in crustaceans (aquatic
              arthropods) for two reasons.  First their calcium carbonate skeleton is
              external and therefore far more accessible than the backbone of vertebrates. 
              More importantly, in order to grow, they undergo the molting cycle which
              involves Ca cycling out of and into the animal.  In preparation for molting, Ca
              is reabsorbed from the old skeleton and either recycled or lost (Ca leaves). 
              Once the old skeleton is shed, the animal must rapidly mineralize the new
              skeleton (calcium enters).  Calcium leaves/enters via specialized layers of
              cells (epithelia) that communicate either directly or indirectly with the
              external water.  The calcium exchanging surfaces include gill, kidney and gut. 
              Ca movement across these cells is effected by specialized proteins situated in
              the cell membrane.  Manufacture of specific proteins is under the control of
              genetic material (termed DNA) in the nucleus of the cell.  In this grant, the
              PI proposes to use the crustacean molting cycle to (1) study the dynamics of Ca
              transport across vesicles (resealed patches of cell membrane akin to a water
              balloon) and to (2) isolate the DNA that codes for the Ca pumping proteins and
              to assess whether abundance of the DNA is regulated by steroids.  These studies
              will enable understanding of the evolution of Ca transporting proteins common
              to all cells.  ***
