Title       : Monolayers to Bilayers to Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9603092

Award Number: 9603092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harden M. McConnell harden@leland.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603092  McConnell  This research seeks to study putative liquid-liquid phase
              separations in lipid bilayer membranes, and their possible role in the function
              of biological membranes. The approach to these problems relies heavily on the
              previous finding in this laboratory of liquid-liquid phase separations in lipid
              monolayer membranes. The interest in liquid-liquid phase separations (along
              with their critical point properties) stems from their possible role in
              biological membranes, including membrane fusion, shape, trans membrane
              asymmetries, as well as enzymatic regulation of lipid composition. A major
              challenge in this work is to demonstrate unequivocally a one liquid to two
              liquid phase transition in a lipid bilayer membrane. A second challenge is to
              investigate the possibility that such transitions play a role in the regulation
              of lipid composition of biological membranes in response to physical or
              chemical factors (e.g., temperature or hormones). The techniques to be used in
              these studies rely heavily on fluorescence microscopy.    The membrane that
              surrounds a living cell is very much like a very thin, two dimensional liquid.
              This liquid is quite complex being composed of many sorts of lipid molecules
              that together form this two-dimensional membrane. There is much experimental
              evidence that the physical properties and chemical compositions of these
              membranes are carefully regulated in living cells, but the relationship between
              the physical and chemical properties is very poorly understood, as is the role
              of these properties in the function of cells. The goal is to find out if
              liquid-liquid phase separations exist in these membrane liquids, and if they
              serve important biological functions.
