Title       : Evaluation of Avian Cognitive Abilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9603803

Award Number: 9603803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irene M. Pepperberg impepper@media.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9178,9251,EGCH,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Pepperberg  9603803    The PI's goals are to examine the cognitive and 
              communicative capacities of Grey parrots.  Results from  these studies will
              provide insights into the evolution of  intelligence, how input affects
              learning, and comparative  neurobiology and anatomy.  (1) Comparisons with
              other  "language"-trained animals (e.g., on representational  abilities and how
              well problem-solving skills are  transferred to new contexts) will demonstrate
              the extent to  which intelligence has evolved (independently) in mammals  and
              birds: It is not yet known, for example, if labels  acquired by Grey parrots
              represent board or narrow  (specific) concepts:  Do parrots that, for example,
              label a  particular sound pattern as "3" understand that this concept  of
              "threeness" extends to physical entities?  The PI will  examine how well such
              transfer occurs without training.  In  addition, can a bird extend concepts,
              such as  bigger/smaller, that are learned in one context (e.g., mass)  to
              respond to questions in another context (e.g., ordinality  of number)?  The
              experiments will provide information about  parrots' comprehension of such
              concepts and data for cross-  species comparisons.  (2) Data on how various
              aspects of  input affect learning and the extent of parrots'  communicative
              abilities may enable us to improve programs  for other interspecies
              communication projects and possibly  for dysfunctional humans: Parrots that are
              taught a human-  based code can undergo experimental manipulations to 
              determine optimal conditions for learning the code; these  conditions may be
              extended to other species.  The  experiments focus on the extent to which
              acquisition is  affected by (a) species identity of the trainer and (b) the 
              amount of reference, functionality, and social interaction  in the training
              input.  (3) Showing how parrots, with brains  and vocal tracts so unlike those
              humans, acquire meaningful  English speech provides comparative data on
              neuroanatomical  correlates of cognition and on how differen t anatomical 
              structures produce similar sounding utterances. Differences  exist in
              psittacine and human neural and auditory  mechanisms, yet speech patterns are
              mutually comprehensible;  my data should provide insights into speech
              perception and  information processing.  Parrots and humans differ with 
              respect to lungs, bronchi, trachea, nasal cavity, larynx,  and tongue, and
              parrots uniquely use air-sacs and a syrinx  whereas humans uniquely use lips
              and teeth; I am therefore  studying alternative mechanisms for producing human
              speech.  (4) Finally, elucidating the intelligence of Greys may  encourage
              conservation efforts for all psittacids.
