Title       : Composite Auxin Response Elements and the Auxin Signal Transduction Pathway
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1999  
File        : a9603678

Award Number: 9603678
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Guilfoyle GuilfoyleT@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gretchen Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9604208  Guilfoyle  The plant hormone auxin is involved in or controls a wide
              variety of developmental processes.  Auxin-induced cell division, cell
              elongation and cell differentiation all involve distinct patterns of gene
              expression.  A variety of early or primary response genes that are specifically
              induced by auxin have been identified in these growth and developmental
              processes.  Most of the early auxin response genes are expressed in a
              tissue-specific and organ-specific manner in the absence of exogenous auxin
              application.  To observe a substantial induction of these genes by exogenous
              auxin, it generally is necessary first to deplete auxin by bathing excised
              organs in auxin-free medium.  Soybean GH3 is an early auxin response gene that
              differs from others in four important ways.  First, it is expressed at very low
              levels in the absence of exogenous auxin application.  Second,  GH3 mRNA can be
              induced at least 50-fold in seedlings and plants without subjecting excised
              organs to the auxin depletion protocol.  Third, the gene is induced in
              virtually every cell, tissue or organ of a seedling or plant.  Fourth, the GH3
              promoter is highly responsive to auxin in a variety of heterologous plant
              species whether assayed transiently in protoplasts or in stable transformants. 
              The GH3 gene promoter consists of at least three separate auxin response
              elements (AuxRE) within 250 base pairs of the transcription start site, which
              have been characterized with respect to independent function,
              tissue/organ-specific expression, DNA sequence, and auxin responsiveness. 
              Moreover, novel AuxREs have been constructed that are equivalent or several
              fold more inducible by auxin than natural AuxREs or the entire GH3 promoter,
              and transcription factors have been cloned that bind specifically to composite
              AuxREs.  This research will use both natural composite and more active
              synthetic AuxREs to precisely determine how AuxREs function in auxin-responsive
              promoters, and to identify transcription factors that interact with  composite
              AuxREs and determine their mechanism of action.    The plant hormone auxin is
              involved in or controls a wide variety of developmental processes. 
              Auxin-induced cell division, cell elongation and cell differentiation all
              involve distinct patterns of gene expression.  A variety of early or primary
              response genes that are specifically induced by auxin have been identified in
              these growth and developmental processes.  Soybean GH3 is an early auxin
              response gene that is induced in virtually every cell, tissue or organ of a
              seedling or plant. The regulatory region (promoter) of the GH3 gene consists of
              at least three separate auxin response elements (AuxRE) which have been
              characterized with respect to independent function, tissue/organ-specific
              expression, DNA sequence, and auxin responsiveness.  Moreover, novel AuxREs
              have been constructed that are equivalent or several fold more active than
              natural AuxREs.  This research will use both natural composite and more active
              synthetic AuxREs to precisely determine how AuxREs function, and to identify
              transcription factors that interact with AuxREs and determine their mechanism
              of action.
