Title       : Dynamics of Elementary Processes in Solutions of Biopolymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9603744

Award Number: 9603744
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Schurr schurr@chem.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603744  Schurr  Several problems concerning the structures and thermodynamics
              of supercoiled plasmids, bending- and temperature-induced perturbations of DNA
              secondary structure, and the dynamic bending rigidity of DNA will be
              investigated by a variety of modern optical techniques and simulation methods.
              Rotational, translational and deformational Brownian motions of particular DNAs
              and DNA/intercalator complexes will be assessed by time-resolved fluorescence
              polarization anisotropy (FPA), dynamic light scattering (DLS), a transient
              polarization grating (TPG) method currently under development, and a transient
              photodichroism (TPD) method to be developed.     DNA is significantly deformed
              by twisting and/or bending in many of its biologically important states, for
              example in supercoiled DNAs. The global (tertiary) structures of such
              supercoiled DNAs facilitate important biological functions, such as
              recombination, and the deformational strain energy stored in such molecules is
              used to drive important biological processes, such as the opening' of the
              double-helix prior to DNA replication. Understanding the contribution of
              deformational strain to the energetics and structures of such species requires
              knowledge of the DNA elastic constants for twisting and bending. Those same
              elastic constants also provide information about 'switching' of the local
              (secondary) structure of the DNA. It has been proposed that a regulatory
              protein might enhance the rate of gene expression via some alteration of the
              DNA secondary structure at its binding site and long-range (equilibrium)
              'transmission' of that altered structure along the DNA to the binding site of
              the 'informationreading-proteins'. Since many proteins that enhance gene
              activity also bend the DNA in one way or another, there is some suggestion that
              bending of the DNA might be involved in secondary structure 'switching'. The
              research planned will investigate the twisting and bending elastic constants
              and the energetics of supercoiling over a wide range of  temperatures. It will
              also examine the 'switching' of DNA secondary structure that is induced by
              bending and other perturbations, and some of the factors that might control the
              secondary structure 'switching' equilibrium.
