Title       : Rare Radiative Decays of the Phi Meson
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9603634

Award Number: 9603634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Kolata   (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. LoSecco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   A detector that will be constructed for an experiment  at CEBAF to measure
              rare radiative decays of the Phi Meson.  The experiment is a collaborative
              effort involving nuclear  and high-energy physicists from several universities.
               It  has received the highest rating from the CEBAF Program  Advisory
              Committee.  The total cost of the detector will be  shared with the Department
              of Energy and with several of the  universities involved in the project; this
              funding is  already in place.  Partial support will be provided by the  NSF
              Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) as part of  an enabling initiative
              for instrumentation development.       The goal of the experiment is to measure
              rare radiative  decays of the phi meson in order to study the quark  structure
              of daughter states as well as to probe possible  symmetry violations. 
              Sensitivity to branching ratios at one  part in ten thousand will permit
              significantly improved  charge conjugation tests, as well as providing
              important  information about the structure of poorly understood scalar  meson
              states.       The detector will consist of an electromagnetic  calorimeter
              which will detect all-photon decay modes of the  phi meson.  The requested
              funds will be used to construct a  charged-particle veto wall to ensure a
              neutral final state,  a dedicated data acquisition system, and various
              ancillary  devices such as a suitable target and beam pipe and  calibration
              system for the calorimeter.  Graduate education  is a central but implicit
              element in this project.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
