Title       : Calcium Signaling in Deflagellation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9603716

Award Number: 9603716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $353249             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne M. Quarmby   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603716  Quarmby    Technical  The goal of this proposal is to analyze signaling
              pathways in Chlamydomonas, a unicellular, biflagellate alga. Chlamydomonas
              exhibits two dramatically different behaviors that involve increases in  Ca2+
              i: (1) pH-triggered shedding of the two flagella and (2) light-triggered
              changes in swimming behavior. The ultimate objective is to understand the
              mechanisms whereby pH shock leads to flagellar shedding, while a light stimulus
              results in a change in swimming behavior and not in deflagellation, even though
              both of these pathways involve Ca2+ signaling. The approach is to begin with a
              complete dissection of the Ca2+ signaling pathway of pH shock-induced
              deflagellation. From work under the NSF award which currently supports this
              project, it is known that a brief pH shock activates the ilflux of Ca2+ which
              triggers deflagellation. Mutants with 2 phenotypes have been characterized: (1)
              The adf strains are defective in pH-regulated Ca2+ influx and (2) the fa
              strains are defective in responding to the Ca2+ signal of deflagellation. The
              central hypothesis of this proposal is that the Ca2+-binding properties and
              localization of the protein which senses the Ca2+ signal of deflagellation are
              such that this protein responds selectively to the deflagellation Ca2+ signal
              and does not detect phototactic Ca2+ signals.  This hypothesis provides an
              excellent framework to test the idea that the temporal properties of a Ca2+
              signal determine the cellular response.  The first aim is to characterize a
              gene from the Ca2+ sensing pathway which is defective in the fa strains. A
              molecularly tagged allele has already been isolated and the location of the
              gene determined. The fa clone will be expressed in E. coli in order to generate
              antibodies and to produce protein for biochemical characterization. Ca2+
              binding studies will test the prediction that this protein binds Ca2+ slowly
              and with low affinity. The second aim is to screen for new deflagellation
              mutants in order to determine how many d ifferent proteins are involved in (a)
              responding to the increase in  H+ i and gating the Ca2+ channel, and (b)
              binding the influxed Ca2+ and severing the flagella. From ongoing work under
              this award, it is known that the Ca2+ channel of deflagellation is distinct
              from the channels involved in phototaxis. The third aim is to clone a gene from
              the adf pathway and generate antibodies in order to directly test the idea that
              the Ca2+ channel involved in deflagellation is located in the flagellar
              transition region. The discrimination of Ca2+ signals within a single cell is a
              fundamental problem in cell biology. Chlamydomonas provides a unique
              experimental system to determine how the cell can distinguish the Ca2+ signals
              which result in distinct physiological responses because the behaviors, such as
              phototaxis and deflagellation, are easily observed by microscopy and mutations
              in the pathways are easily identified. Chlamydomonas is haploid and produces
              meiotic spores amenable to tetrad analysis. Techniques are available for
              transformation and for cloning. The fundamental mechanisms of Ca2+ mediated
              signal transduction have been conserved throughout evolution, therefore, it is
              reasonably hoped that information acquired in this study will provide new
              concepts of Ca2+ signaling.    Non-technical  Calcium ions play a central role
              in transmitting the signals perceived by a wide variety of environmental and
              hormonal receptors to induce cellular reactions. Understanding the role of
              calcium in transmitting signal information can be efficiently analyzed by using
              simple model organisms of which the unicellular algae Chlamydomonas is among
              the favorite systems of biologists. Acid pH induces Chlamydomonas to shed its
              flagella which involves a calcium mediated signaling pathway to cellular
              components that mediate the flagellar shedding. Dr. Quarmby will use a
              multidisciplinary approach to elucidate the role and interactions of calcium in
              flagellar shedding. This project is important because it will elucidate fundam
              ental processes involved in calcium mediated signaling that are likely to be
              evolutionarily conserved in animals and plants.   ***
