Title       : Biochemical and Molecular Basis of Phytoalexin Synthesis in Sorghum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9603439

Award Number: 9603439
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Nicholson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Goldsbrough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9603439  Nicholson  The project deals with the biochemical basis of disease
              resistance in sorghum. The overall goal is to determine the route of synthesis
              of the sorghum phytoalexins which are 3-anthocyanidins.  Phytoalexin synthesis
              will be studied as it occurs in response to infection by the fungi
              Colletotrichum sublineolum and Bipolaris maydis. The work will include
              investigation of the route of biosynthesis of the phytoalexins, analysis of
              enzymes essential for phytoalexin synthesis, comparison of the fungal infection
              process in mature leaves with that which occurs in juvenile leaves, and
              determining if specific members of the phenylalanine ammonia-lyase and chalcone
              synthase gene families are associated with phytoalexin synthesis. In the first
              objective, metabolic intermediates in phytoalexin synthesis will be identified.
              This will be done by trapping intermediates using 14C as a radio label tracer.
              Compounds will be identified by high performance liquid chromatography in
              combination with Plasma Desorption Mass Spectrometry and Fast Atom Bombardment
              mass spectrometry. The second objective will be to determine whether the levels
              of activity of two enzymes essential for phytoalexin synthesis increase in
              response to infection. Although the enzymes are necessary for the synthesis of
              the two most fungitoxic phytoalexins, they have never been assayed in sorghum.
              The first enzyme is flavonoid-3'-hydroxylase which is required for
              hydroxylation at the 3' position to form luteolinidin. The second is an
              O-methyltransferase which is essential for the formation of the most fungitoxic
              phytoalexin, 5-methoxyluteolinidin. The enzymes will be assayed in time course
              studies that follow phytoalexin synthesis. In the third objective, elements of
              the C. sublineolum infection process will be studied to determine if the
              expression of host resistance is associated with the ability of the fungus to
              penetrate and colonize leaves of different ages. This is important because
              juvenile plants are uniformly resistant t o C. subIineolum. However, when
              plants of a susceptible genotype mature they lose their ability to express
              resistance and become susceptible to the fungus. Methods to be used will
              include scanning electron microscopy in combination with micromanipulation and
              fluorescence microscopy to determine in vivo fungal growth and development and
              to identify the exact time of penetration. Patterns of phytoalexins synthesized
              as well as the time of synthesis in resistant and susceptible cultivars will be
              determined as a function of leaf age, and the information will be correlated
              with events in the infection process. In the final objective, gene-specific
              probes for members of the PAL and CHS gene families will be used to study the
              expression of these genes in response to fungal infection.    This work will
              have a significant impact on understanding how grain crops protect themselves
              from diseases caused by fungi. Some plants, such as sorghum, produce unique
              compounds called phytoalexins when they are attacked by fungal pathogens. The
              phytoalexins are often very toxic to the pathogens and thus help the plant to
              resist disease. The aim of this project is to discover how the sorghum plant
              makes these important resistance compounds. The research will contribute
              substantially to understanding what controls the synthesis of these unique
              compounds. The work should enable the development of environmentally benign
              ways to protect important crops such as the grains.
