Title       : Role of Winter Water Relations in Determining the Upper Elevational Limits of
               Three New England Conifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  1998  
File        : a9603860

Award Number: 9603860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189864             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Boyce rboyce@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Friedland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603860  Boyce    Evergreen conifers, unlike diciduous trees, must keep  their 
              foliage  alive during the winter.  In addition  to  freezing  stress, they must
              deal with drought, or desiccation.  A  lot  of  water  is  found in the winter
              environment,  but  it  is  usually  locked  up  as snow and ice and is 
              unavailable  to  plants.   Conifer foliage is adapted to minimize water  loss 
              during the winter; losses are replaced during above-freezing  periods,  when
              water stored in the wood melts and  can  flow  into   the  foliage.   Shorter 
              growing  seasons   at   high  elevations decrease foliar resistance to winter
              water  loss,  while  the  frequency and duration of warm  periods  in  the 
              winter  also  decreases.  Thus, the  amount  of  water  lost  increases, while
              the ability to replace it decreases.    Winter desiccation appears to cause
              alpine treeline in  some  places.   However, its role in setting the upper
              elevational  limits  of  conifers  that do not  extend  all  the  way  to 
              treeline  is  poorly  known.  This study  will  examine  the  foliar  winter
              water relations, or water balance,  of  three  important  New  England 
              conifers that  differ  in  location  preferences  and  growth strategies:  
              white  pine,  eastern  hemlock and red pine.  Our preliminary data suggest that
              the  older foliage in these species may experience damaging water  levels  
              during  the  winter.   We  will  use  physiological  measurements of trees
              collected near their upper elevational  limit  to determine desiccation stress.
               These data will  be  coupled  with climatic data collected at the research 
              sites  to  predict water relations.  This approach may be  extended  to  other
              species and under conditions imposed by a changing  climate.
