Title       : Regulation of the B. Subtilis trp Genes by the trp RNA- binding Attenuation
               Protein (TRAP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1999       
File        : a9603594

Award Number: 9603594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Gollnick gollnick@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603594  Gollnick  The importance of RNA binding proteins as regulators of gene
              expression has become increasingly clear in recent years.  The trp genes of
              Bacillus subtilis are regulated by an RNA binding protein called TRAP (trp
              RNA-binding Attenuation Protein).  TRAP regulates the expression of trp genes
              in three ways which all involve tryptophan-dependent binding of  TRAP to RNA. 
              Transcription of the trpEDCFBA operon is controlled by an attenuation
              mechanism.  TRAP binding to a site containing 11 (G/U)AG repeats in the leader
              sequence of  trp operon transcript affects the secondary structure of the
              attenuator and promotes formation of a transcription terminator.  TRAP also
              regulates translation of the trpE and trpG genes.  TRAP is proposed to
              sequester the ribosome binding site of the trpE mRNA by altering the secondary
              structure of the mRNA leader sequence, and to compete directly with ribosomes
              for binding to the trpG mRNA.  Recent X-ray crystallographic analysis of the
              TRAP-L-tryptophan complex revealed a novel macromolecule consisting of 11
              identical subunits arranged in ring structure with a 23 Angstrom hole.  Each
              subunit is composed entirely of beta-strands, beta-turns and random coils. The
              discoveries that TRAP is an 11-subunit protein and that its trp RNA binding
              site contains multiple small sequence repeats has led to a model in which the
              trp RNA wraps around the TRAP so that each of the 11 repeats in the trp RNA
              leader sequence interacts with one TRAP subunit or a combination of adjacent
              subunits. The objective of this research is to determine precisely how TRAP
              recognizes its target RNAs including the identification of the RNA binding
              domain of TRAP and the determinants of target RNA specificity for TRAP, and the
              characterization of the kinetics and thermodynamics of TRAP - RNA interaction.
              This research will provide new information about how proteins recognize RNA and
              will result in better understanding of the basic principles of protein-RNA
              interaction that may govern more com plicated processes of transcription,
              translation, RNA processing and transport in eukaryotes.    The importance of
              RNA binding proteins as regulators of gene expression has become increasingly
              clear in recent years.  The genes responsible for tryptophan biosynthesis in
              the bacteria Bacillus subtilis are regulated by an RNA binding protein called
              TRAP (trp RNA-binding Attenuation Protein), which requires the amino acid
              tryptophan to bind to RNA.  Recent structural analysis indicates that TRAP is a
              novel macromolecule consisting of 11 identical subunits arranged in ring
              structure.  This research will determine how TRAP recognizes and binds to its
              target RNA, and will provide new information and a better understanding of the
              basic principles of protein-RNA interaction that may govern more complicated
              processes of transcription, translation, RNA processing and transport in
              eukaryotes.
