Title       : Biomechanical and Physiological Limits to Animal Flight Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9603736

Award Number: 9603736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Dudley r_dudley@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Dudley  9603736    Inherent limits to exercise performance an athletic capacity
              of animals are little-understood.  For animal locomotion generally, the highest
              known rates of aerobic metabolism are found in flying forms, particularly among
              hummingbirds and insects.  Dr. Dudley will examine the physiological and
              biomechanical limits to flight performance in hummingbirds and in insects of
              comparable body mass.  Oxygen concentration and air density of experimental gas
              mixtures will be simultaneously variesd so as to aerodynamically and
              physiologically challenge hovering hummingbirds and moths.  The limits to
              flight performance will be evaluated behaviorally by determining the air
              densities and oxygen concentration at which these animals can no longer sustain
              hovering flight.  Simultaneous measurements of oxygen consumption will evaluate
              the associated maximal metabolic rates, while aerodynamic models will be
              applied to the observed wingbeat kinematics to estimate the associated
              expenditure of mechanical power by the flight muscle.  An additional series of
              experiments will then be implemented that provide enhanced oxygen availability
              at equivalent air densities, so as to test the hypothesis that diffusive oxygen
              flux is the limiting step in maximum aerobic performance of these two taxa. 
              Increased rates of oxygen consumption under such conditions will indicate that
              diffusive constraints limit maximum locomotor performance, whereas no such
              increase will suggest limits of convective flux within the respiratory system,
              or biomechanical constraints on flight mechanics.  The null hypothesis predicts
              that the tracheal respiration of moths will ultimately be limited by oxygen
              availability, whereas the pulmonary-based ventilation of hummingbirds will show
              no such energetic enhancement under conditions of increased oxygen availaility.
               More generally, this research will demonstrate inherent design constraints of
              both vertebrate and insect resporatory systems under conditions of maximum
              performance.
