Title       : Neurochemical Correlates of Prolactin Secretion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1998  
File        : a9603780

Award Number: 9603780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori L. Badura badura@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Badura  9603780    Prolactin, a protein hormone secreted by the anterior 
              pituitary gland, is involved in modulating a large variety  of physiological
              and behavioral states in mammals, including  lactation, estrous cyclicity,
              maternal behavior, and immune  system function.  While prolactin is clearly
              involved in  many different physiological processes, the precise  mechanism of
              action and the ways in which prolactin  secretion is controlled under various
              conditions is not well  understood.  The primary approach has been to examine
              how  various factors affect the surges of prolactin that occur  during stress,
              lactation, or during the estrous cycle.  The  problem is that surges of
              prolactin involve the activation  of multiple systems and, therefore, the
              results from this  approach can be very difficult to interpret.  Dr. Badura 
              seeks to enhance our understanding of the role of individual  modulatory
              systems to the prolactin response by examining  changes in basal prolactin
              levels that fluctuate throughout  the year.  She is taking advantage of the
              fact that  prolactin shows a marked annual fluctuation that corresponds  with
              changes in photoperiod, most likely daylength.  Indeed  Dr. Badura has
              demonstrated that nonstimulatory daylengths  will induce naturally occurring
              declines in circulating  prolactin.   Using this model, she will characterize
              the  neurotransmitters within the paraventricular nucleus of the  hypothalamus,
              a major neuroendocrine brain region that  regulates pituitary function.  Using
              in vivo microdialysis  and HPLC-EC techniques, Dr. Badura will correlate the 
              release and metabolism of neurotransmitters with alterations  that are seen in
              basal prolactin release under different  photoperiod conditions.  She will also
              use this model and  protocol to untangle some of the potential effects of 
              gonadal steroid hormones on this system in both  males and  females.  In
              addition, Dr. Badura will examine how these  regulatory factors influence
              pituitary function directly  under different  environmental conditions.  The
              results from  these studies will provide new knowledge in our  understanding of
              neuroendocrine processes.  Dissecting the  mechanisms by which prolactin
              regulates apparently unrelated  physiological systems will enhance our
              understanding of the  adaptive significance of evolving hormonal systems that 
              possess multiple targets and function.
