Title       : Understanding Protein Folding: From Lattice Models Towards Real Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  2000   
File        : a9603839

Award Number: 9603839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jose N. Onuchic jonuchic@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603839  Onuchic  The funnel landscape theory of protein folding will be fully
              developed.  The main idea that emerges from the statistical energy landscape
              theory is that globally the folding landscape resembles a funnel that is to
              some extent rugged, i.e. riddled with traps, in which the protein can
              transiently reside.  Detailed simulations of lattice and off-lattice minimalist
              models will be performed to investigate the details of the folding energy
              landscape.  Using a law of corresponding states, the connection between the
              landscapes of simple minimalist models and the ones of small fast folding
              proteins becomes possible.  An important feature of this funnel picture is that
              it enables the determination of the ensemble of configurations that participate
              in the folding event simply by thermodynamically sampling the configurational
              space.  No kinetic information is necessary.  This is essential since full
              kinetic simulations are impossible for a protein with full atomic details. 
              With the aid of the law of corresponding states and the sampling scheme,
              simulation of proteins at full atomic details will become possible and one will
              be able to predict quantitatively the importance of different amino-acids in
              the folding kinetics of different proteins.  The initial protein that will be
              studied is a three-helix bundle protein (fragment B of Staphylococcal protein
              A) because of its simplicity (fully alpha-helical and preliminary simulations
              already exist) but it will be followed by investigations of other fast folding
              proteins, such as the monomeric lambda-repressor and chymotrypsin inhibitor 2,
              for which many more site-directed mutagenesis experiments exploring folding
              stability and folding kinetics are available.    To understand how proteins
              fold is of great importance in biology.  To perform its biological function, a
              protein can not be thought of simply as a linear string of amino acids; its
              activity depends on its three dimensional structure and dynamics.  How can one
              predict the protein structu re by simply knowing its sequence?  A robust
              productive method would aid the understanding of biological processes at the
              molecular level by providing deeper insights into the structure/function
              relationship in biomolecular activity.  Although this question has haunted
              scientists for several decades, very little progress has been made until recent
              years.  Where knowledge is being gained, it arises from the integration of
              information from physics, chemistry, molecular biology and computer science. 
              Achieving this integration towards the understanding of the folding mechanism
              is the goal of this work.
