Title       : The Regulation of Cyclin-Dependent Kinase 4 in Mature B Lymphocytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9603784

Award Number: 9603784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Chiles thomas.chiles@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9603784  Chiles         The goal of the proposed research is to
              understand how B  lymphocytes grow and divide.  B lymphocytes are cellular 
              components of the animal immune system and their major function  is to produce
              antibodies or immunoglobulins.  Antibodies are  proteins that bind foreign
              substances and aid in their  elimination  from the body.  When the immune
              system detects  foreign substance, B cells initially respond by growing and
              then  producing antibodies.  Proliferation of B cells is controlled by  both
              extracellular growth stimulatory and inhibitory signals  acting principally in
              the G1 phase of the cell cycle.  The  intracellular mechanisms by which these
              different signals produce  changes in the growth response of B lymphocytes are
              unknown.  The  present work focuses on the regulation of a protein kinase, 
              cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (Cdck4).  It is proposed that  Cdk4 is a necessary
              component in B cells which functions to  mediate the action of extracellular
              growth signals.  Cdk4 has  been shown to activate cellular proteins involved in
              promoting  cell division and maturation in many non-lymphoid cell types. 
              Therefore, the mechanisms underlying the activation of Cdk4 by  growth
              promoting and growth inhibitory signals in primary B cell  is the major focus
              of this study.  A comprehensive analysis will  be made of the regulation of
              intracellular proteins that control  the activity of Cdk4, including G1 cyclin
              and Cdk inhibitor  proteins (Cdk-1s).  Studies will also focus on ascertaining 
              whether Cdk4 is required for cell cycle division by blocking the  expression of
              Cdk4 in B cells  The results of these studies will  define the regulation of
              key cell cycle regulatory components  which directly control the clonal
              expansion of primary B  lymphocytes.   These studies will be done in normal B
              cells,  whereas most studies are done on  cell lines.      These studies are
              aimed at determining the regulation of the cell  cycle in response to growth
              stimulatory and inhibitory signals   which control the expansion of mature
              normal B cells.        ***
