Title       : RUI: Steroid-Induced Plasticity in Brain and Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a9603651

Award Number: 9603651
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $246349             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph G. Dulka jdulka@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Michael Conlon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9178,9229,9251,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9603651  Dulka    There are striking sex differences in the central nervous 
              system, and in the physiology and behavior of most  vertebrates.  Steroid
              hormones derived from the gonads of  males and females are primarily
              responsible for generating  and maintaining these differences.  Androgens and
              estrogens  have been shown to both organize sex-specific neural  pathways
              during critical periods of development, and cause  structural remodeling of
              existing neural pathways later in  adulthood.  This steroid-induced neural
              plasticity in  adulthood not only involves changes in synaptic connections  and
              neuronal morphology, but also changes in the expression  of pathway-specific
              neuropeptides.   This is very important  since neuropeptides play an important
              role in modulating  neurotransmitter activity.  Moreover, there is surprisingly
               little information on neuropeptide systems which either  originate in, or
              innervate sexually dimorphic brain regions.  Dr. Dulka is using a
              neuroethological model system to  examine this issues.  He will explore how
              steroid-induced  neural plasticity of neuropeptides mediate behaviors in 
              vertebrates.  Dr. Dulka has found that the neuropeptide  substance P located in
              several important forebrain regions  is sexually dimorphic in that males, not
              females, have an  intense network of substance P activity.  He  will use a 
              multidisciplinary approach that includes neuroanatomical,  neurophysiological,
              biochemical, and behavioral techniques  to determine how androgens modulate the
              substance P system  in the brain to influence a complex communicatory behavior.
               These results are crucial to understanding the basic  mechanisms underlying
              neural plasticity.  Furthermore, they  will generate important new knowledge of
               steroid and  peptide hormone interactions in the brain of vertebrates,  and
              how such interactions play a role in establishing sex  differences in neural
              organization, circuitry, and behavior.
