Title       : Tyrosine Phosphatases in Axon Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9603928

Award Number: 9603928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $403622             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bixby   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian A. Masters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  9603928  Bixby     The precise growth of nerve fibers (axons) to their
              targets during embryonic development is required for the normal functioning of
              the adult brain.  Axon growth is a highly regulated process, in the sense that
              numerous overlapping mechanisms must operate to ensure that it occurs
              correctly.  One major mechanism regulating the growth of axons involves two
              classes of enzymes that modify proteins inside nerve cells -- tyrosine kinases,
              which add regulatory phosphate groups to proteins, and tyrosine phosphatases,
              which remove these regulatory groups.  Addition or removal of regulatory
              phosphate groups has profound effects on the functioning of proteins inside
              nerve cells.  Of the two groups of enzymes, much less is known about the
              organization and function of tyrosine phosphatases than is known about kinases.
               Dr. Bixby has identified two particular tyrosine phosphatases that are found
              in developing neurons, and which are likely to be involved in regulating the
              growth of axons in the brain and spinal cord.  One of these, called CRYP-2, is
              present on the neuronal cell surface, and has both an extracellular (receptor)
              domain and an intracellular (enzymatic) domain.  The other, called SHP-2, is an
              intracellular protein.  In a series of experiments, Dr. Bixby's lab will
              characterize which developing neurons have CRYP-2 on their surfaces, identify
              the proteins that bind to the receptor domain of CRYP-2, and examine the role
              of CRYP-2 in regulating axon growth from cultured nerve cells.  In a second
              group of experiments, Dr. Bixby will use recombinant DNA techniques to cause
              neurons to produce SHP-2 in abnormal amounts, or to inhibit the function of
              SHP-2, in developing neurons.  The consequences for axon growth of the abnormal
              production or the loss of SHP-2 will be assessed.  Results from this project
              will expand our knowledge of the ways in which axons grow by identifying
              specific molecular mechanisms responsible for regulating this process in the
              developing brain and spinal  cord.
