Title       : Theoretical Nuclear Structure Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9603006

Award Number: 9603006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Virginia R. Brown                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry P. Draayer draayer@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1245      THEORETICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The nuclear theory program in the Department of Physics and  Astronomy at
              Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge is focused  on the properties of
              atomic nuclei under extreme conditions:  high spin, large deformation,
              stretched isospin, etc.  Of special  interest is the structure of strongly
              deformed nuclei of the rare  earth and actinide regions.  The collective modes
              of these nuclei  involve a large fraction of the total number of constituent 
              nucleons and therefore a special shell-model theory --- one that  is not bound
              by the usual constraints of an independent particle  picture --- is required to
              understand these collective features.  The proposed research will focus on
              several matters:  potential  energy surfaces and excitation energies;
              electromagnetic moments  and transition strengths; giant resonances; nuclear
              currents;  double beta decay strengths; and superdeformation.  However, a 
              deeper and more challenging objective of the proposed research is  to probe
              those special features of the nucleon-nucleon  interaction that give rise to
              mean fields and observed collective  phenomena.  In particular, the proposed
              program will continue to  focus on the origin of pseudo-spin symmetry and the
              complementary  of proton and neutron dynamics.  The training of graduate 
              students (currently five) and the building of international  collaborations
              (from former Soviet Union countries and Mexico, in  particular) are an integral
              part of the research  effort.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                   
