Title       : RUI: Mutational Analysis of Gene Regulation in Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  2000        
File        : a9603747

Award Number: 9603747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279840             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary L. Alleman alleman@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Alleman  9603747  r is one of four loci in maize that regulates the expression
              of the genes in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway through the function of
              its product, helix-loop-helix transcription factor.  r determines the timing
              and tissue-specificity of anthocyanin deposition during development.  By
              analyzing mutants affecting the regulation of single transcriptonal unit r
              alleles, the principal investigator has established the basis for investigating
              tissue-specificity of r.  The R(Sc) gene of the R-st complex specifies
              pigmentation in the aleurone layer of the kernel and the coleoptile and
              scutellar node of the young seedling.  On going studies have identified a 493
              bp sequence (B' not) which is located in putative enhancer element in the Sc
              regulatory region.  This segment can be regularly deleted in certain
              heteroallelic combinations via a proposed gene conversion event with a
              displaced proximal region to produce enhanced Sc expression  Sc|P(enhanced) . 
              Alternatively, the B'not element or the surrounding enhancer region can be
              disrupted by transposable element Ds mutagenesis.  Ds insertions within this
              region block pigmentation slightly when they are in one orientation or totally
              when they are in the other orientation, possibly by disrupting the normal
              domain boundary. The upstream DNA sequence Ds insertional mutants, their
              derivatives, and a selected group of three variant alleles representing
              perturbation in strong seed color alleles (Sc) to determine the relationship
              between the structure and function of one class of r alleles.  Using this DNA
              sequence analysis, it will be determined the mechanism for Sc|P(enhanced)
              derivative production is by gene conversion.  Chromatin structure will also be
              analyzed for a class of alleles for which pigment is conditionally blocked.  An
              established collection of races of maize differing only by the r allele will be
              screened using a phenotypic assay and eventually DNA gel blot analysis to
              locate other related Sc-type alleles.  A genetic screen will  be region in
              order to localize other regions that are involved in developmental gene
              expression.  The studies constitute a detailed genetic dissection of the
              regulatory sequences controlling gene expression in higher plants and are of
              fundamental importance for understanding how genes are regulated during plant
              development.  By using mutagenesis in which the starting material is a series
              of variant alleles and single transcriptional unit r alleles determining
              pigmentation in the same that tissue.  The identification of tissue-specific
              regulatory elements in maize is crucial in order to genetically engineer this
              agronomically important species.
