Title       : U.S.-Panama Cooperative Research: Using Ecological Insightsin Search of
               Biologically Active Compounds from Rainforest Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9603073

Award Number: 9603073
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd L. Capson t.capson@m.cc.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5926,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9603073  Capson    This Americas Program award will fund a collaborative 
              research project between Dr. Todd Capson, University of Utah  and Drs. Mahabir
              Gupta and Pablo Solis, University of  Panama. They will conduct a search of
              biologically-active  compounds from plants in the rainforest of Panama.  The 
              scientific goals of the project are to examine the efficacy  of ecological
              insight for finding novel natural products  with biological activities.   
              Rainforest plants are subject to greater levels of attack by  insects and
              pathogens than are plants from any other region  of the world.  As a
              consequence, they have evolved both  higher levels of chemical defenses as well
              as a greater  diversity of compounds.  Mmst studies on the chemical  defenses
              in rainforest plants have been done in easily  collected mature leaves, but
              recent studies show that  expanding leaves are better defended chemically than
              mature  leaves.  To optimize the discovery of biologically-active  compounds,
              the researcher will be using leaf collections  that have been guided by
              ecological insight into plant  defenses, rather than by random collections of
              plants.  Extracts from freshly collected leaves will be subjected to  a broad
              panel of biological screens, and those showing  significant biological activity
              will be subjected to  bioassays to determine their individual components and 
              structure.  To assess the efficacy of the ecologically-  directed collections,
              random collections will also be made,  and their extracts  will be subjected to
              the same bioassays  as the targeted collections, to allow for a direct 
              comparison.    Although some of these biologically active natural products 
              could be medicinally-relevant compounds, most are likely to  be invaluable
              tools for researchers in disciplines such as  neurobiology, cell biology,
              biochemistry and physiology.  Results from this work will provide information
              that will  guide future studies directed towards the discovery of these 
              products. The knowledge of the Panamanian scie ntists about  the rainforest
              flora of the country,  and their expertise in  the use of modern techniques for
              vegetative identification  of plants, will be an important contribution to this
              study.  ***
