Title       : Mechanistic Studies of TfdA, an Alpha-Ketoglutarate- Dependent Dioxygenase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9603520

Award Number: 9603520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert P. Hausinger hausinge@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
               Hausinger   96-03520  Hausinger  Part 1. Technical  This study uses
              2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D)/alpha-keto glutarate dependent
              dioxygenase (tfdA) from Alcaligenes eutrophus as a model protein to examine the
              metallocenter properties and enzyme mechanisms in catalysis. This enzymes
              catalyzes the first step in biodegradation of the broadleaf herbicide 2,4-D. It
              couples the hydroxylation of 2,4-D, forming a compound that spontaneously
              decomposes to yield glyoxylate and 2,4-dichlorophenol, with the conversion of
              alpha-KG to CO2 and succinate in a ferrous ion-dependent reaction. TfdA is
              especially well suited to serve as a paradigm of this enzyme class because it
              is relatively small, highly soluble, end readily available in large quantities
              by using recombinant cell extracts and a simple two-step purification protocol.
              Furthermore, the tfdA gene is easily manipulated by genetic and recombinant
              methods. The objectives and approaches are: (1) characterize the metallocenter
              in TfdA bond to Fe(Il) or substituted metals by spectroscopic methods such as ,
              X-ray absorption, and electron paramagnetic resonance ; (2) Identify the
              residues that participate as metallocenter or in substrate or cofactor binding
              and enzymatic catalysis by site-directed mutagenesis; (3) define the enzyme
              mechanism by examining the reactivity of TfdA towards alternate substrates,
              inhibitors, and inactivators; and (4) initiate studies on a related protein
              from E. coli, TauD, a sulfonate hydroxylase that degrades sulfonates to form
              sulfite, the cellular sulfur source. Results from these studies, designed to
              further the understanding of the novel biodegradative chemistry of TfdA, and
              other enzymes, may be useful to biotechnological and bioremediative
              applications such as the selective hydroxylation or decomposition of other
              compounds.    Part 2. Non-technical  This project seeks to characterize the
              enzymatic mechanism of TfdA, an enzyme that catalyzes the first step in the
              decomposition of the broadleaf herbicide 2,4D (2,4-d ichlorophenoxyacetic
              acid), from Alcaligenes eutrophus. TfdA is a representative of an important,
              yet poorly understood, class of ferrous ion-dependent enzymes that couple the
              oxygen-requiring decomposition of alpha-ketoglutarate to the hydroxylation of a
              substrate. Changes occurring at the metallocenter will be examined by
              spectroscopy, the roles of selected amino acid residues studied by molecular
              biological methods and the enzyme mechanism deduced by analyzing its reactivity
              towards substrates, inhibitors, and inactivators. In addition, the properties
              of this enzyme will be compared to those proteins related in sequence. Results
              from these studies should advance the understanding of the novel reaction
              mechanisms of enzymes useful in biotechnology and biodegradation.              
                                                                                             
              80  Fane  The proper assembly of viral proteins and nucleic acids into a
              biologically active virion involves numerous and diverse macromolecular
              interactions.  The main objectives are to elucidate these critical interactions
              and to define the structural domains of the responsible macromolecules.  A
              combination of genetic, biochemical and structural approaches (X-ray
              crystallography) will be employed to accomplish the object. Like molecular
              chaperones, scaffolding proteins direct other proteins in achieving their
              proper three-dimensional conformations.  Within the context of this analogy,
              the atomic structure of a procapsid offers a depiction of a chaperone-like
              protein complexed with its substrate.  Prior results suggest that the
              Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many properties with
              molecular chaperones.  Prior results also indicate that the internal
              scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact with their
              substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces.  Determining the
              atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign scaffolding
              proteins, will directly address this questio n.  The present (X174 procapsid
              structure does not contain the internal scaffolding protein which is lost
              during purification.  During the first year of support, alternate genetic and
              purification strategies will be explored to stabilize this protein.  The
              current protocols will still be employed to gather additional data to refine
              the external scaffolding protein structure.  Also within the first year, the
              genetic and purification strategies needed to generate alpha procapsids will be
              developed.  Continuation of the structural work, done in collaboration with Dr.
              M. G. Rossmann, will proceed throughout the support period.    The recently
              solved atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein, gpD, suggests that
              it also shares many features with molecular chaperones.  Thus gpD, like a
              molecular chaperone, can bind to other proteins in many different ways.  While
              some domains make contact with the coat protein in varied manners, one of these
              domains may determine the protein's substrate specificity for a particular
              viral coat protein.  the plasmid-based cross complementation system has been
              extended to this gene.  Unlike the internal scaffolding proteins which exhibit
              a great deal of divergence in primary structure, the external scaffolding
              proteins share 75% sequence identity.  The (X174 protein, however, is unable to
              productively direct the assembly of other Microviridae virions.  A comparison
              of the primary structure reveals that the divergent residues are localized to
              the NH2 -termini of the proteins which forms a large (-helix in the (X174
              atomic structure.  These observations suggest a model in which the
              scaffolding's specificity for a particular viral coat protein resides in this
              region.  This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric polypeptides.  During the
              first year of support, restriction sites needed to construct chimeric external
              scaffolding proteins will be introduced.  The (X174 gene will be recloned and
              clones of other Microviridae D genes will be generated.  Characterization  of
              the chimeric genes and gene products will commence in the second year.  The
              results of these analyses may also provide insights into the design of
              recombinant proteins.    All viruses must assemble themselves by means of
              multiple protein interactions.  viral assembly is often dependent on proteins
              known as scaffolding proteins.  Analogous to scaffoldings used in the
              construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are found in virus assembly
              intermediates but not in the mature viruses.  Two different scaffolding
              proteins, external and internal, are required for the assembly of the
              Microviridae family of viruses.  With These viruses we are able to purify viral
              intermediates which still include the external scaffolding protein.  By
              examining the atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein and
              performing genetic analyses with both the internal and external proteins, we
              have determined that different regions of the scaffolding proteins may have
              specific and identifiable functions.  Refining the atomic structure of these
              proteins and testing our hypotheses regarding their various functions by
              constructing hybrid Microviridae scaffolding proteins are the main objectives
              of the proposed work.  The results of these analyses will provide further
              insights into virus assembly and the design of recombinant proteins.
