Title       : The Well-Connected Educator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9603359

Award Number: 9603359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $166368             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gwen Solomon   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Solomon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Learning Resources, Inc.
	      1229 Burlingame Avenue
	      Burlingame, CA  94010    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9603359  Solomon    The Well-Connected Educator will be a place on the Internet
              for publishing teachers' and other educators' writing-their great ideas,
              models, strategies and information  about the use of technology  for teaching
              and learning.   The objectives of  The Well-Connected Educator include creating
              an arena for educators to publish; disseminating lessons learned; providing a
              forum for discussion of educational technology issues; encouraging reflective
              practice and collaboration, and promoting thinking among teachers,
              administrators, and others in the education community about education reform
              and the impact of technology on reform.   It will give a voice to those who are
              most directly concerned with implementing educational technology and give their
              peers valuable, first-hand information about using technology for teaching and
              learning. All articles will be archived and searchable on a variety of
              categories.   Ultimately, the goal is to create an environment of trust for
              educators to publish and read each others' works in order to learn from one
              another. If this environment is sustained over a period of  years, it may help
              to change the culture of teaching to one that includes respect for educators as
              professionals, self respect, and the knowledge that teachers have valuable
              information and should publish it. In addition, it can serve as a vehicle for 
              a cadre of teacher-leaders to emerge, giving them a national voice while it
              encourages them to remain in the classroom. In addition, it can help the
              various groups to understand one another's perspectives; such understanding is
              key to education reform.  ***
