Title       : U.S.-India Collaborative Research: Design & Analysis of Highly Available
               Distributed Systems, Award in Indian Rupees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9603099

Award Number: 9603099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marjorie Lueck                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16129              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pankaj Jalote   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indian Inst Tech Kanpur
	      
	      Kanpur, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9603099  Jalote  Description:  This proposal is for a research collaboration  
              between Satish K. Tripathi, Chair, Department of Computer  Science, University
              of Maryland and Pankaj Jalote, Dept. of  Computer Science, Indian Institute of
              Technology (IIT), Kanpur.  This project addresses a number of design and
              analysis issues  relating to replicated systems.  Its basic goal is to enable
              the  designer to analyze replicated systems for the purpose of  predicting
              performance and tuning them to obtain the highest  availability.  The most
              important issues include: availability  analysis, the effect of parameters such
              as degree of replication  and node/network reliability, parameters to maximize
              system   availability, and preferred protocols.    Scope:  Considering the
              growing need for computer systems that  offer high availability, this research
              is timely and has broad  application potential.  The P.I.s have complementary
              expertise in  two areas critical for the research.  Jalote is internationally 
              known in fault-tolerance and software engineering.  Tripathi is  an
              accomplished computer scientist and well known for his work in  performance
              evaluation.  Computer science is an area of   exceptional strength in India and
              the IIT Kanpur one of the top  research institutions in this field.  The
              collaboration should be  productive with many mutual benefits anticipated.   
              ***
