Title       : A Cell Wall Associated, Receptor Like Kinase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9603703

Award Number: 9603703
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34872              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Kohorn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Iohorn  9603703  Technical  We have identified  a family of  Arabidopsis
              thaliana  proteins, designated Waks for Wall Associated Kinase, that are
              tightly associated with the cell wall, and that have  cytoplasmic kinase
              domains. The cell wall bound, extracytoplasmic domain of each family member
              contains several Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) repeats. Waks differ, however,
              in the extracellular domain . In different 100 amino acid blocks one Wak has 
              54% identity (perfect spacings) to tenascin. In another there is  identity with
              a neurexin  and in another  there identity with extensin.  The Wak family is
              expressed in all vegetative tissues of Arabidopsis, and has relatives in other
              Angiosperms.  Based on immunoelectron microscopy and biochemical analysis, Waks
              provides a physical continuum between the cell wall and the cytoplasm. Since
              the kinase is cytoplasmic it also has the potential to mediate signals to the
              cytoplasm from the cell wall. Indeed, we find that at least one Wak interacts
              with a cytoplasmic type 2C protein phosphatase that is likely the first step in
              the transduction pathway. Future experiments will focus on the genomic
              organization and specific expression of each family member, and their
              interaction with each other and cytoplasmic proteins. We have isolated a T-DNA
              disruption of the Wak locus that is tightly linked to an embryonic lethal
              phenotype, and we plan to use this mutant background to assay functional
              domains of the Waks. Moreover, expression of dominant negative Wak mutations
              also show that the family is essential for viability, and genetic screens will
              be used to identify interacting proteins.    Non-Technical  Extrinsic signals
              impinging upon plant cells first interact with the cell wall that surrounds the
              cell. Many of these extrinsic signals induce overt alterations in a plant's
              physiology and morphology. The site of detection of these most of these signals
              is unknown. Dr. Kohorn has discovered a class of signaling proteins (cell-wall
              associated kinase or Wak) that app ear to be associated with the inner surface
              of the cell wall directly adjacent to the cell surface. With this award Dr.
              Kohorn will characterize the genes encoding Wak and to examine how Wak
              interacts with other proteins to create a coupled cascade where signals
              perceived by Wak are transmitted into the cell to exert physiological effects. 
              ***
