Title       : Analysis of Multiple Drug Resistance in Saccharomyces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9603553

Award Number: 9603553
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283064             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Golin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Golin  9603553  Bacteria and eukaryotic cells can become resistant to a number
              of structurally and mechanistically distinct toxic agents in a single step.  In
              yeast, resistance to multiple toxin resistance is mediated in large part by the
              product of a gene called PDR5.  Sequence analysis of this gene shows that it
              resembles the ABC family (ATP-binding cassette) of transmembrane proteins.
              Included in this group are specific permeases such as the prokaryotic histidine
              transport system, the Drosophila brown and white pigment transport proteins,
              and the yeast hormone STE6, which facilitates the release of mating factor from
              yeast cells.  Lack of the product of this gene leads to hypersensitivity to a
              number of toxins, due to inability to transport toxins out of the cell.
              Revertant strains have been isolated that have regained some resistance to
              toxins, even if the PDR5 gene is deleted.  Genetic experiments carried out to
              date show that it is unlikely that resistance is the simple recruitment of a
              different transporter, and genes that have mutated are being characterized as
              to their possible functions, taking advantage of the known sequence of the
              yeast genome.  An unexpected result of these studies is that most of the
              revertants appear through genetic tests to be mutations in two closely linked
              genes rather than a single gene, even though the frequency of such double
              mutations occurring in the same cell should be too low to be observed.  Thus,
              the two mutations are most likely the result of a single event.  To better
              understand this phenomenon, experiments are being done to clone, sequence and
              analyze resistance factor genes from each such cluster of paired revertant
              strains.  The sequence data should  determine whether or not there is extensive
              homology between the clusters and whether resistance might be due to gene
              conversion and/or DNA rearrangements.     This research will provide insight
              into how noxious compounds are normally removed from cells and alternative
              strategies cells can use when th e major transport system is disrupted. In
              addition, it will lead to an understanding of an unusual genetic mechanism that
              leads to the multiple mutations by which cells can activate the alternative
              systems.
