Title       : Solid-State NMR Derived Structure: Membrane-Bound Polypetides to Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1998   
File        : a9603935

Award Number: 9603935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy A. Cross cross@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Quine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603935  Cross  The knowledge gained from the gramicidin studies will now be
              used to face the challenges associated with a biosynthetically prepared
              protein, M2 protein, studied as a dilute species in a lipid bilayer.
              Improvements in sensitivity will come from modications in the sample geometry,
              increased field strength and improvements in the experimental protocols.
              Linewidths in the M2 samples are primarily dominated by sample heterogeneity
              which through adjustments in sample preparation techniques can be addressed and
              there is also reasonable expectations that linewidths (in ppm) at least in some
              cases will decrease the increasing field strength.  The mathematical challenges
              will involve the characterization of imperfect alpha-helices that are prevalent
              in membrane proteins.  The work will take this solid state NMR method that
              utilizes orientational rather than distance constraints and apply it to a
              "real" protein system.    High technology methods involving Nuclear Magnetic
              resonance (NMR) spectroscopy will be developed to solve the three-dimensional
              structures of macromolecules.  Typically such structures are determined by
              diffraction methods applied to crystallized samples, but there are many
              important macromolecules that are not crystallizable.  This unique NMR approach
              uses samples that are uniformly aligned, in other words they are oriented in
              one dimension, while crystals involve three-dimensional order.  The molecular
              system that will be used for demonstrating these methods is protein that forms
              an ion channel in membranes.  The NMR data obtained will be analyzed by new
              mathematical approaches that will be generally applicable to many molecular
              systems.  Overall, the development of this structure determination approach
              will open new avenues of research for a great many types of molecules that are
              not easily crystallized.  The work will provide great training opportunities
              for graduate students and postdocs in an interdisciplinary environment where
              molecular biology, synthetic chemistr y, NMR spectroscopy, NMR hardware
              development, molecular modeling and mathematical analysis occur in the confines
              of this research effort.
