Title       : The Role of Specific Residues in Protein-Protein Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1999    
File        : a9603807

Award Number: 9603807
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl Frieden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603807  Frieden  The goal of this project is to examine the effect of site 
              directed mutations on interactions between similar units  within a filamentous
              protein.  The model system to be used  is actin.  The crystal structure of
              monomeric muscle actin  is known but it is not necessarily clear what the
              important  contacts between actin monomers within the filament are.  Thus,
              within the actin filament the interactions to be  examined are those that occur
              between actin monomers.  For  this study it is planned to use mutants of  yeast
              actin,  this protein being approximately 90% identical to muscle  actin. Yeast
              (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) contains a single  actin gene obviating the need for
              separating different actin  isoforms. A number of yeast strains expressing
              mutant actins  are already available while others are under construction in 
              this laboratory.  Yeast  actin can be obtained in reasonable  yields from both
              wild-type and mutant strains.  The first  goal of this project is to examine
              the effect of site  directed mutations, based on the known monomeric crystal 
              structure, on the polymerization of actin itself to  determine whether the
              mutation affects the formation of  actin nuclei leading to filament formation
              or the elongation  of the filament or both processes.  Determination of the 
              mechanism of actin polymerization can be made using  sophisticated kinetic
              studies. Such studies are to be  carried out following the polymerization
              process either by  using a fluorescent label covalently attached to the actin 
              or the intrinsic fluorescence of actin.  Both these  fluorescent methods are
              applicable because the fluorescence  change is known to follow the
              incorporation of monomer into  polymeric actin.    Actin, a protein that is
              ubiquitous in all cells from yeast  to humans, is a critical component in
              metabolic function. In  muscle cells it interacts with the protein myosin to
              give  rise to muscle contraction.  In non-muscle cells, either  alone or in
              combination with other proteins, actin i s  responsible for maintaining the
              structure of the cell and  for many cellular functions.  The polymerization and
               depolymerization of actin controls such processes as cell  movement, uptake of
              other molecules and response to  extracellular signals such as hormones.  The
              actin molecule  is made up of 375 amino acid residues which fold together to 
              give a specific three dimensional structure.  Specific  residues within this
              structure play an important role in the  interaction of actin molecules with
              themselves to form the  polymeric species while others are important for
              interacting  with other protein molecules which control cellular  processes. 
              In this project site-directed mutagenesis,will  be used to change specific
              residues in the actin molecule.  The effect of these changes on the properties
              of the actin  molecule itself and on its interactions with other proteins  will
              be determined. The results will help to clarify the  general role of certain
              amino acid residues in the  interactions between proteins.
