Title       : Genetic Study of Contractile Vacuole Membrane Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a9603675

Award Number: 9603675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Luykx PLUYKX@UMIAMI.IR.MIAMI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603675  Luykx    Technical    The function of the contractile vacuole will be
              analyzed through the study of Chlamydomonas mutants.  Although contractile
              vacuole function(s) have been studied in Chlamydomonas and other biological
              systems from a number of approaches, such as electron microscopy, a systematic
              genetic approach has not hitherto been used.  The Principal Investigator has
              already isolated several osmoregulatory mutants by means of UV mutagenesis and
              insertional (plasmid) mutagenesis.  The research in this proposal aims to: (1),
              characterize the mutants genetically and morphologically (by video- and
              electron microscopy); (2), isolate additional mutants with impaired
              osmoregulatory function; (3), employ the mutants to define basic processes of
              the contractile vacuole cycle; and (4) isolate genes regulating water transport
              and associated membrane fusion events.  The information obtained from this work
              will be helpful in understanding these important and widespread membrane
              processes in eukaryotic cells generally.    Non-Technical  Water is required to
              maintain the living state of cells.  All cells regulate the amount of water
              contained within them by regulating the rate of water exchange with the
              external environment.  Thus, control of cell water content is an important
              phenomenon in living cells, yet it remains poorly understood.  In the
              unicellular alga Chlamydomonas, as in many other unicellular organisms, cell
              water content is controlled by the contractile vacuole system, which entails a
              system of membrane permeability, membrane transport, and membrane fusion.  The
              function of the contractile vacuole involves the segregation and expulsion of
              water that enters the cell continuously by osmosis.  Although it has been
              studied to some extent by electron microscopy, it has not been subjected to
              experimental approaches such as genetic analysis.  The advantage of using
              Chlamydomonas for this type of project is that its genetics and cellular
              biology in general is well described and therefore  the contractile vacuole is
              amenable to efficient investigation.  This project will focus on characterizing
              mutants of the contractile vacuole, which will lead to identification of genes
              whose products are involved in the control of water balance.  The results of
              this work should have broad significance in the fundamental aspects of water
              regulation in living cells.  ***
