Title       : Molecular Basis of Self-Incompatibility in Petunia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  1999      
File        : a9603993

Award Number: 9603993
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teh-hui Kao txk3@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Teh-hui Kao  96-03993    Petunia inflata possesses gametophytic
              self-incompatibility which is controlled by a polymorphic locus, the S locus.
              Matching of S alleles carried by the pollen and pasta results In Inhibition of
              pollen tube growth in the style. The goal of this proposal is to understand how
              a pistil distinguishes between self and non-self pollen.  Because so far only
              the products of pistil S alleles, S proteins or S RNases, have been identified,
              the first two objectives of this proposal are the identification of the pollen
              S gene and its allelic products. In the first objective, four approaches will
              be used to identify potential candidates for the pollen S gene: S protein
              affinity chromatography, the yeast two-hybrid protein-protein interaction
              assay, peptide display library screening, and mRNA differential display. cDNAs
              for the proteins peptides, and PCR fragments identified will be isolated and
              examined to determine whether their corresponding genes co-segregate with S
              alleles and show sequence variation between alleles, two criteria for the
              pollen S gene. The second objective is to use gain-of-function and
              loss-of-function approaches to ascertain whether any of those pollen genes that
              meet the above two criteria is the pollen S gene. The third objective is to use
              two approaches to ascertain whether allele specific inhibition of pollen lies
              in selective uptake of self S proteins into pollen tubes. The first approach is
              to examine whether production of a mutant S3 protein lacking RNase activity in
              the cytoplasm of S3 pollen of transgenic plants has a dominant negative effect
              on the self-incompatibility behavior of S3 pollen. The second approach is to
              examine whether S3 protein is taken up by S2 (non-self) and/or S3 (self) pollen
              tubes by immunolocalization of microscopic sections of pollen tubes that grow
              out of cut ends of S3S3 pistils that have been pollinated with S2 and S3
              pollen, separately.  The use of RNases as recognition molecules is unique to
              the type of self-incompatibility  studied here, thus this proposed research
              when completed will uncover a new paradigm for cellular recognition in
              biological systems and expand the scope of the understanding of the biological
              functions of RNases. On the practical side, once the pollen S gene is
              identified, one can explore the possibility of restoring the
              self-incompatibility trait to self-compatible cultivated species to facilitate
              hybrid seed production. If successful, this will have a very important impact
              on agriculture.
