Title       : Transcriptional Regulation of Potassium Current
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a9603978

Award Number: 9603978
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas C. Spitzer nspitzer@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Spitzer  IBN:  9603978    Dr. Spitzer will analyze the molecular mechanisms
              that underlie expression of potassium current in embryonic spinal nerve cell. 
              Nerve cells transmit information with electrical signals, and acquire the
              ability to generate these signals called action potentials at very early stages
              of differentiation.  Initially, these action potentials allow the entry of
              substantial amounts of calcium ions.  Dr. Spitzer has shown that this calcium
              influx generates important signals that regulate several aspects of the
              development of nerve cells.  However, since this amount of calcium entry is
              toxic to mature nerve cells, the neurons must dramatically reduce the amount of
              calcium entry as they mature.  In earlier work Dr. Spitzer showed that the
              reduction of calcium influx is the result of an increase in potassium current
              that flows out of the nerve cells through protein pores, called potassium
              channels, opposing the calcium influx.  In the work supported by this grant he
              will determine the basis of the developmental increase in this potassium
              current.      Preliminary results suggest that expression of a particular gene,
              known as Kv2.2, which encodes the protein of which potassium channels are
              composed, may be responsible for the increase in this potassium current.  Dr.
              Spitzer will use antisense DNA sequences to suppress the synthesis of the
              protein in nerve cells isolated and growing in culture.  He will take advantage
              of the availability of a toxin, hanatoxin, that is a specific blocker of these
              channels, to check the success of these experiments.  If the antisense
              treatment suppresses expression of the Kv2.2 protein, the toxin will no longer
              affect the potassium current.  The results from the project will provide new
              knowledge about the regulation of excitability in the spinal cord.  The fact
              that the central nervous system of young vertebrates is especially vulnerable
              to epileptic seizure activity may be partly due to the calcium influx that is
              part of the early signaling mac hinery.  In the future it may be possible to
              suppress this calcium influx selectively by regulating the expression of
              particular potassium channel genes.
