Title       : Developing a Comprehensive Blood Volume Budget for Amphibians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1997  
File        : a9603025

Award Number: 9603025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49775              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley S. Hillman hillmans@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9603025  Hillman    Amphibians lose water very quickly, which must be
              replenished to sustain life.  As terrestrial vertebrates they consequently lose
              and gain water at ten times the rate of other vertebrates.  There is a greater
              potential for water deficits to occur (water loss exceeds water gain) as a
              consequence of these high water turnover rates.  Natural selection has favored
              tolerance to periodic water deficits, its in amphibians, with more terrestrial
              species having greater dehydration tolerance than aquatic species.  Amphibians
              have a two to four fold greater dehydration tolerance than mammals.  They
              consequently represent an excellent vertebrate model system to unravel what
              cardiovascular mechanisms are important in dehydration tolerance.    The
              cardiovascular system must deal with a decrease in its volume during
              dehydration.  The amphibians ability to compensate for low blood volume is
              different between different species and remarkable in comparison to other
              vertebrates.  The first step in describing the mechanisms involved in
              compensating for a decrease in blood volume is to develop a budget for all the
              avenues of fluid entry and fluid loss in the amphibian circulatory system.  The
              PI plans to develop such a blood volume budget for two species which differ in
              their tolerance to dehydration and ability to maintain blood volume.  This
              entails quantifying the volume of fluid moving through the kidneys, skin,
              bladder, lymph, nephrostomes and leaks in the capillaries.  The PI will
              describe the range of flows possible in low volume and high volume conditions
              across the various pathways of exchange.  The PI will also investigate some
              aspects of the neuroendocrine control of these pathways of fluid movement.    
              The work will: 1 ) provide the first non-mammalian blood volume budget; 2)
              provide the first measurements of vascular leakiness and compliance for
              amphibians; 3) provide a test of which aspects of the budget correlate with
              dehydration tolerance; and 4) increase  understanding of what c ardiovascular
              adaptations were important in the aquatic to terrestrial transition in
              vertebrate evolution.  ***
