Title       : The Social Evolution of Eurasian Steppe Communities in Southeastern Kazakhstan
               and the Rise of Ancient Civilizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9603661

Award Number: 9603661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia Chang cchang@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Claudia Chang and her colleagues
              will conduct three field seasons of archaeological and ethnographic research in
              the Chilik region of southeastern Kazakhstan which constitutes the boundary
              between the Tien Shan Mountains and the broad Eurasian steppe. The team brings
              together Western, Kazakhstani and Chinese specialists in archaeology,
              historical linguistics, geoarchaeology ethnography and archaeology to conduct a
              coordinated investigation into the origins and development of Eurasian nomadic
              societies. At Chilik, a large alluvial valley, the team will initiate the
              collection of vegetation, soils and geomorphological data to create a
              modern-day environmental baseline which will provide a context to interpret
              prehistoric economies of herding, farming and hunting and gathering. The team
              will construct a geographic (GIS) database that will allow them to implement a
              computer-based cartographic system to reconstruct how prehistoric peoples
              exploited the multiple environmental zones in the region and how patterns of
              exploitation are related to different site types. Reconnaissance surveys will
              provide the basis for sub-surface testing for buried archaeological deposits.
              Six sites representing the entire chronological span of human habitation will
              be selected for testing.  Larger scale block excavations will be conducted at
              Bronze and Iron Age sites. Complementary ethnographic data will be collected on
              contemporary Kazakh land use, economy, technology and social organization to
              provide a template for reconstructing past herding and farming economies. 
              Although archaeologists have long recognized that nomadic pastoral societies
              played an important role in Eurasian prehistory, this development has always
              been viewed from the peripheries - the regions where such groups came into
              contact with more settled agrarian societies. The recent opening of Kazakhstan
              to foreign researchers will now permit this development to be studied in the
              heartland. Dr. Chang and her collaborators will focus on four questions: 1.
              What evidence exists to establish that Eurasian steppe cultures had their own
              indigenous origins and internal dynamics in the evolution of complex society?
              2. How did the multi-resource economic base of this region play in role in what
              is likely a unique developmental process? 3. How can ethnographic data serve as
              a baseline for reconstruction the past? 4. How can the models of diffusion and
              migration that are currently used to explain the spread of Indo-European
              languages and related cultural traditions be illumined by archaeological data
              from this region?  This research is important for several reasons. It will open
              a long-closed area to international archaeological investigation. It will
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on the
              development of complex societies.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
