Title       : Recognition of Received Assistance in Capuchin Monkeys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1999   
File        : a9603923

Award Number: 9603923
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frans B. M. de Waal   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    PI:  Fran B.M. deWaal  Proposal # 9603923      Reciprocal exchange of
              goods and services is a universal  human economic activity.  In animals, so
              called  reciprocal  altruism  is a much-discussed yet much less investigated 
              issue.  Data accumulated over the past two decades are  largely based on
              observational research; there is little  agreement about the strength of the
              evidence.  Food-sharing  among capuchin monkeys (Cebus apella) - one of the few
               nonhuman primate species in which such behavior is well -  developed - may
              yield a handle on exchange: this behavioral  lends itself uniquely to
              experimentation.  After first  having studied sharing behavior itself, and the
              degree to  which it occurs reciprocally, the purpose the present study  is to
              investigate to what extent, if at all, it is used by  capuchins as a payment
              for cooperation.  For reciprocal  exchange to occur it would seem necessary
              that individuals  not only assist conspecifics, but also take notice of 
              received assistance.  The central question here is whether  rewards obtained
              through  cooperation are more readily  shared than rewards obtained through
              individual effort.  Trained for temporary separation from their group, our 
              capuchin monkeys have shown high rates of food transfer to  each other through
              a mesh partition.  Pairs of monkeys will  be presented with tasks in which one
              subject cannot obtain  food unless assisted by the other.  Food will be placed 
              outside a test chamber on a tray too heavy for a signal  monkey to pull close. 
              If both monkeys pull together,  however, one of them will obtain food
              subsequently can be  shared with the other.  Variation on this task, and
              control  procedures will be performed as well.  If cooperative  efforts do
              indeed promote sharing, this would suggest that  the principle of  one good
              turn deserve another  is not  limited to our own species.
