Title       : Cytoplasmic Structuring by Non-motor Microtubule Associated Proteins (MAPs)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1997      
File        : a9603730

Award Number: 9603730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanna B. Olmsted olmj@cc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603730  Olmsted    The long range goal of the proposed research is to
              understand how microtubule-  associated proteins  that are not motors
              participate in the function and organization of   microtubules and the
              structuring of the cytoplasm.  These studies focus on MAP 4, a  
              microtubule-associated protein that is  expressed during early development and
              in specific   adult tissues in mice.  The working hypothesis  is that the
              functions of this ubiquitous   protein are context-specific; MAP 4 structure
              and functions in cycling cells may differ   from those in differentiated
              tissues.  The basic approach will be to  dissect how variations   which
              naturally arise either by alternative splicing or by post-translational 
              modification   affect MAP 4 behavior within cells.   Chimeras will be generated
              in which MAP 4   constructs are modified at sites corresponding to
              characterized post-translational   modifications or which reflect primary
              sequence variations observed in specific tissues.    Living cells transfected 
              with MAP 4 constructs tagged with green fluorescent   protein or its spectral
              variants will be analyzed to deduce how such changes in MAP   structure affect
              microtubule dynamics in interphase and mitotic cells.  Other aspects of  
              cytoplasmic organization, including the distribution of cytoskeletal elements
              or major   membranous organelles, will also be analyzed to assess whether
              specific domains of   MAP 4 may interact with non-microtubular structures. 
              These studies should  provide   fundamental information on whether this
              ubiquitous protein has multiple roles depending    on its place of expression. 
                   Microtubules comprise one of the three major cytoskeletal systems in
              eukaryotic cells, and   one of two such systems known to be involved in
              intracellular motility phenomena by   serving as specific "tracks" along which
              ATP-powered molecular motors (dyneins and   kinesins) move.  In addition to the
              motor proteins, other specific proteins ("Microtubule-  Associated Proteins, or
              MAPs) are  known bind to microtubules, although their functions   are far from
              established.  Dr. Olmsted will carry out functional studies of one of these  
              MAPs, termed MAP-4.  The structure of the MAP-4 protein is known to vary among 
               different tissues, as a result of alternative splicing (different ways in
              which the cell "reads"   the gene) and/or posttranslational modifications;
              however, the functional significance of   these variations is unknown.  These
              functional studies will employ state-of-the-art   approaches such as
              site-directed mutagenesis and "green fluorescent protein" (a marker   that
              allows one to literally see, in a microscope, exactly where the MAP-4 protein
              is   located within the cell).  Evidence increasingly suggests that these
              various cytoskeletal   systems are not independent, but rather are dependent
              upon one another in terms of their   function within cells.  The results of
              these studies are expected to help us understand   MAP-4 function and its
              possible role in coordinating microtubule function with various   cellular
              structures, including other cytoskeletal systems.  ***
