Title       : Allele Interactions that Heritably Alter Transcription
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 6,  2000      
File        : a9603638

Award Number: 9603638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vicki L. Chandler chandler@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603638  Chandler     Technical     The b regulatory gene of maize encodes a
              basic-helix-loop-helix protein, which together with other regulatory proteins,
              activates the transcription of genes encoding the anthocyanin biosynthetic
              enzymes. Different b alleles activate the pathway in distinct tissues and at
              different developmental times. Because the alleles are differentially expressed
              and the amount of pigment produced is a sensitive indicator of regulatory
              protein levels, such expression can be studied at the plant level. It has been
              found that specific alleles, when in the same genome with other alleles can
              alter the second allele in a stable fashion and such alteration cannot be
              explained by Mendelian concepts. The name given to such phenomena is
              paramutation. Previous studies have shown that the sequences required for
              paramutation of b are tightly linked to the locus and lie in the 5' flanking
              region. However, DNA sequencing and extensive restriction mapping have not
              identified structural differences between the b alleles undergoing
              paramutation. Two models are proposed and experiments are devised to test the
              models. One model is that of unidirectional gene conversion which is consistent
              with the stability of the altered allele. The other model suggests that changes
              in chromatin structure may cause the heritable alterations in transcription
              that occur during paramutation. Questions to be asked are: What cis-acting
              sequences and other genes participate in paramutation? What cis-acting sites
              are required for b transcription? Do chromatin, DNA methylation or structural
              differences correlate with paramutation? Are b sequences in ectopic locations
              able to participate in paramutation? A variety of mutagenesis strategies are
              proposed to identify cis-acting sites and trans-acting loci required for the
              establishment or maintenance of paramutation and for b transcription.   
              Non-technical    Transcription can be altered by chromosome position or
              exposure to alternate alleles, suggesting that genes are  not regulated just by
              local cis-acting sequences and factors that interact with those sequences.
              Examples of chromatin environments regulating gene expression come from studies
              of mammalian X-chromosome inactivation, genome imprinting, silencing of yeast
              mating-type loci, position effect variegation in Drosophila, paramutation and
              gene silencing in plants. Mechanisms are not understood in any system, although
              evidence suggests that either DNA or chromatin modification, or both, could be
              involved. The proposed studies to probe allelic interactions that alter
              transcription at a corn regulatory gene should help to address this deficiency.
