Title       : 1997 Cold Springs Harbor Laboratory Meeting on Tyrosine Phosphorylation and Cell
               Signalling: to be held May 7-11, 1997, Cold Springs Harbor, New York
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  1997  
File        : a9603666

Award Number: 9603666
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas K. Tonks tonks@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1114      CELL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  9603666  Tonks            The phosphorylation of  proteins on tyrosyl
              residues is an  essential element  in he control of many fundamental cellular 
              processes including growth and proliferation, differentiation,  cytoskeletal
              function and the cell cycle.   At the present time  there is a lot of progress
              in determinating the structure,  regulation and function of protein tyrosine
              k8inases (PTKs) and  protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), the coordinated
              action of  which governs the levels of cellular  phosphotyrosine.  This  grant
              is to provide funds for the third meeting on Tyrosine  phosphorylation and
              cellular signaling ,which will provide a  format in which studies of PTK and
              PTPs will be integrated so  that the scientists can see how their results
              contribute  to the  overall big picture. The sessions will be organized around 
              physiological processes and  cellular functions to provide a  biological
              context.  With the exception of 2 keynote addresses,  all speakers will be
              selected from the submitted abstracts.  This  will encourage graduate students,
              postdocs and young independent  investigators to present the talks. It shoud 
              also facilitate the  presentation of the most recent results.        This
              meeting on tyrosine phosphorylation and cell signalling ,  palcae emphasis on
              the biological function of htese proteins.  The format also encourages young
              scientists and new findings to  be presented and discussed.   The intent is to
              encourage  cohesiveness and communication among scientists working on 
              phosphorylation and cell signaling.                                ***
