Title       : Genetic Analysis of Hin-Mediated Site-Specific Recombination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2000 
File        : a9603585

Award Number: 9603585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly T. Hughes hughes@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bradley T. Cookson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Hughes  9603585  The Salmonella Hin recombinase catalyzes a site-specific DNA
              recombination event resulting in the reversible inversion of a 1-kilobase
              segment of the chromosome.  This reversible chromosomal inversion event results
              in a regulatory switch known as flagellar phase variation, which is the
              alternate expression of either one of two antigenically distinct flagellin
              antigens expressed on the bacterial cell surface.  The long-term goal of this
              project is to understand in molecular detail the mechanism of DNA strand
              exchange catalyzed by the Hin recombinase during the chromosomal inversion
              process.  The approaches described in this project are novel and involve the
              development of sophisticated genetic tools that allow the dissection of
              individual steps of the DNA inversion reaction in vivo.  DNA inversion is
              thought to occur in the following steps:  1) Hin dimerizes and binds to 26 base
              pair hix recombination sites that flank the invertible segment of the
              chromosome;  2) Fis (Factor for inversion stimulation) then binds its target
              DNA sites within a DNA sequence known as the recombinational enhancer; 3)
              Synapsis occurs:  Hin dimers interact to form tetramers bringing hix
              recombination sites within local proximity; 4) Invertasome formation:  Hin
              bound to hix sites interacts with Fis bound to the DNA enhancer segment to
              generate the formation of a nucleoprotein intermediate competent for DNA
              cleavage; 5) DNA cleavage; 6) DNA strand rotation and exchange; 7) DNA
              religation; 8) Nucleoprotein complex dissolution.  In this project genetic
              tools are described that allow the identification of mutants in Hin and Fis
              that cannot catalyze one of the steps in the recombination reaction.  Using
              these tools, the step for which a specific hin or fis mutant is defective can
              be identified directly, without requiring protein purification and biochemical
              characterization of each mutant.  Through standard molecular techniques the
              specific amino acid defect in Hin and Fis is determined.  The characterization 
              of a large number of mutants allows the identification of the amino acids in
              Hin and Fis required for specific steps in the recombination process.  Finally,
              this collection of mutants will be used in structure/function studies as part
              of a detailed molecular characterization of each step in the Hin-mediated DNA
              recombination reaction.  This work will provide insight applicable to areas of
              biology in which DNA strand exchange is a fundamental component of the
              biological process under investigation.
