Title       : Theoretical Analysis of Slow Motions in Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  2000     
File        : a9603556

Award Number: 9603556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1997      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Oleg Jardetzky jardetzky@camis.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey c. Hoch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603556  Jardetzky  The goal of this research is to (1) To develop a physical 
              model to relate the motion of the protein backbone to the  ensemble average of
              auto-correlation functions for NH and CH  bond vectors, which are measured
              using NMR.  In order to  overcome the time limit  (1 ns) on calculating
              molecular dynamics of proteins,  molecular dynamics with random walks in
              dihedral angle space  - the MCDIS-MD (Monte Carlo in Dihedral Angle Space with 
              Molecular Dynamics) procedure recently reported by Zhao and  Jardetzky will be
              used.  Correlation functions based on the  investigator's theoretical results
              will be calculated from  the trajectory, which can be Fourier transformed to
              spectral  density functions.  Probability distribution and correction  matrices
              among the various dihedral angles will also be  constructed.  (2) To identify
              relevant time scales by  carrying out a detailed analysis of relaxation data,
              using  the formalisms developed by Lefevre et al. and King and  Jardetsky.
              Three proteins on which extensive relaxation data  are already available are
              chosen for the initial analysis:  lysozyme staphylococcal nuclease and
              trp-repressor. (3) To  use the percolation formalism of Hoch to identify
              clusters of  trajectories that reflect conformational transitions that may  be
              expected to be slow and to match the spectral density  terms calculated from
              each cluster against the spectral  density terms independently derived from
              experiment.  Modeling the types of motions that can account for the slow 
              motion terms in NMR data would be a significant advance in  the understanding
              of protein dynamics.    Understanding a protein as a molecular mechanism -
              which it  is - requires detailed and accurate knowledge of its  structure and
              dynamics.  Knowledge of protein structure is by  now very extensive - over 1000
              structures at atomic  resolution have been determined by x-ray and NMR.  In 
              contrast, knowledge of protein dynamics is still rather  fragmentary. 
              Theoretical Molecular Dynamics simulation s of  protein motions have
              contributed greatly to the understanding  of proteins, but remain limited to
              the study of very fast  (piconanosecond) motions for both theoretical and
              practical  reasons.  To interpret the information on slow motions ( on  nano-to
              microsecond or longer time scales) contained in NMR  relaxation and proton
              exchange measurements, more powerful  statistical mechanical tools must be
              applied, such as the  MCDIS-MD method to be developed under the terms of this 
              grant.
