Title       : Conference on Aminoacyl tRNA Synthetases in Biology and Disease being held
               February 1, 1997 in Taos, New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  1997   
File        : a9603161

Award Number: 9603161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan A. Martinis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Keystone Ctr For Cont Ed
	      PO Box 606
	      Dillon, CO  804350606    303/468-5822

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603161  Martinis  This project is to organize a meeting with focus on tRNA
              synthetase.  The meeting will be held as a part of the Keystone Symposia, at
              Taos, New Mexico from February 1 to 6, 1997.  It is to provide a  state of the
              art? forum at an international level for the exchange of information engaging
              both young and seasoned investigators.  The keystone conferences have an
              established policy for the participation of women, minorities and persons with
              disabilities, and representation from industry versus academic institutions,
              and will be adhered to in both the spirit and the practice.    The Scientific
              program will cover a range of topics which include diversity, interaction,
              structure, recognition, processing, acylation, and unusual functions and is to
              be presented by speakers from France, England, Japan, Israel and USA.  The
              support from NSF will be used to subsidize 10 students and two cochairs for
              travel.     The tRNA synthetases constitute a group of enzymes whose exquisite
              substrate specificity helps to insure proper translation of the genetic code. 
              An international conference on this topic was held in 1990, and much progress
              has been made since. Another meeting would be timely and desired.  The
              conference being organized will be held at Taos, New Mexico from February 1 to
              6, 1997, under the auspices of the Keystone Symposium.  While the program will
              feature presentation by international experts on the subject, the support will
              be used mainly to help defray expenses of student participants.    January 8,
              1997 (PCH)    9604680  Fane  The proper assembly of viral proteins and nucleic
              acids into a biologically active virion involves numerous and diverse
              macromolecular interactions.  The main objectives are to elucidate these
              critical interactions and to define the structural domains of the responsible
              macromolecules.  A combination of genetic, biochemical and structural
              approaches (X-ray crystallography) will be employed to accomplish the
              objectives. Like molecular chaperones, scaffol ding proteins direct other
              proteins in achieving their proper three-dimensional conformations.  Within the
              context of this analogy, the atomic structure of a procapsid offers a depiction
              of a chaperone-like protein complexed with its substrate.  Prior results
              suggest that the Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many
              properties with molecular chaperones.  Prior results also indicate that the
              internal scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact
              with their substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces. 
              Determining the atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign
              scaffolding proteins, will directly address this question.  The present (X174
              procapsid structure does not contain the internal scaffolding protein which is
              lost during purification.  During the first year of support, alternate genetic
              and purification strategies will be explored to stabilize this protein.  The
              current protocols will still be employed to gather additional data to refine
              the external scaffolding protein structure.  Also within the first year, the
              genetic and purification strategies needed to generate alpha procapsids will be
              developed.  Continuation of the structural work, done in collaboration with Dr.
              M. G. Rossmann, will proceed throughout the support period.    The recently
              solved atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein, gpD, suggests that
              it also shares many features with molecular chaperones.  Thus gpD, like a
              molecular chaperone, can bind to other proteins in many different ways.  While
              some domains make contact with the coat protein in varied manners, one of these
              domains may determine the protein's substrate specificity for a particular
              viral coat protein.  the plasmid-based cross complementation system has been
              extended to this gene.  Unlike the internal scaffolding proteins which exhibit
              a great deal of divergence in primary structure, the external scaffolding
              proteins share 75% sequence identity.  The (X174 protein, however, is un able
              to productively direct the assembly of other Microviridae virions.  A
              comparison of the primary structure reveals that the divergent residues are
              localized to the NH2 -termini of the proteins which forms a large (-helix in
              the (X174 atomic structure.  These observations suggest a model in which the
              scaffolding's specificity for a particular viral coat protein resides in this
              region.  This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric polypeptides.  During the
              first year of support, restriction sites needed to construct chimeric external
              scaffolding proteins will be introduced.  The (X174 gene will be recloned and
              clones of other Microviridae D genes will be generated.  Characterization of
              the chimeric genes and gene products will commence in the second year.  The
              results of these analyses may also provide insights into the design of
              recombinant proteins.    All viruses must assemble themselves by means of
              multiple protein interactions.  viral assembly is often dependent on proteins
              known as scaffolding proteins.  Analogous to scaffoldings used in the
              construction of buildings, scaffolding proteins are found in virus assembly
              intermediates but not in the mature viruses.  Two different scaffolding
              proteins, external and internal, are required for the assembly of the
              Microviridae family of viruses.  With These viruses we are able to purify viral
              intermediates which still include the external scaffolding protein.  By
              examining the atomic structure of the external scaffolding protein and
              performing genetic analyses with both the internal and external proteins, we
              have determined that different regions of the scaffolding proteins may have
              specific and identifiable functions.  Refining the atomic structure of these
              proteins and testing our hypotheses regarding their various functions by
              constructing hybrid Microviridae scaffolding proteins are the main objectives
              of the proposed work.  The results of these analyses will provide further
              insights into virus assembly and the design of recombinant proteins.
