Title       : Neuropeptide Control of Ecdysone Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1999   
File        : a9603710

Award Number: 9603710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence I. Gilbert lgilbert@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603710  Gilbert    These studies concentrate on the means by which a hormone
              from the insect brain acts upon specialized glands (prothoracic glands) to
              cause these glands to synthesize a specific steroid hormone, an ecdysteroid. 
              Ecdysteroids cause the insect to molt i.e. shed its exoskeleton, so that it can
              grow.  These hormones also elicit metamorphosis i.e. the phenomenon by which a
              caterpillar is transformed into a pupa and then into an adult moth or
              butterfly.  The brain neurohormone that is synthesized and released as a result
              of environmental cues and the synthesis and release of ecdysteroids by the
              prothoracic glands must be extremely precise if the insect is to survive and be
              successful.  This grant will allow the PI to study the means by which this
              peptide hormone interacts with the prothoracic glands via a cascade of events
              that includes compounds known as second messengers i.e. cyclic AMP and protein
              kinases.  The role of these second messengers is the focus of this grant
              application and the mechanisms the PI has thus far examined are very similar to
              that of the human adrenal cortex which is stimulated by a pituitary hormone
              that also elicits the synthesis of steroids i.e. corticosteroids.  By utilizing
              the insect prothoracic glands which are composed of a single layer of
              homogenous cells, the PI hopes to gain insights into the mechanism of general
              peptide hormone induced steroidogenesis that would not be possible with the
              more heterogenous adrenal gland.  Further, any differences found between the
              two systems could be exploited by those studying the control of insect pests
              which so adversely affect human health and nutrition.
