Title       : Role of Surface Polysaccharides in the Bradyrhizobium Japonicum-Soybean
               Symbiosis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9603762

Award Number: 9603762
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Emerich emerichd@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Pueppke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Mawhinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9603762  Emerich  Symbiotic nitrogen fixation is the predominate pathway for
              conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into biologically usable forms.  While we
              know the rhizobial genes that make up the machinery for nitrogen fixation, the
              process is complicated by the symbiotic relationship that must first be
              established between the Rhizobia and the plant that leads to the development of
              plant root nodules.  The initial step of how contact is made between the
              bacteria and plant cells is in the focus of the proposed work.  The overall
              objective of the work is to elucidate the role of surface polysaccharides
              particularly extracellular polysaccharides in the infection/nodulation process
              of determinate legumes.  Although all types of polysaccharides will be
              considered, the proposal will focus on the role of extracellular
              polysaccharides in the Bradyrhizobium japonicum-soybean symbiosis.  Objectives
              include the search for genes that encode enzymes for polysaccharide synthesis,
              determination of the function of a reading frame that is involved in the
              synthesis pathway, determination of the nodulation capacity of mutant bacteria,
              and complementation tests.  The research will lead to a better understanding of
              plant-microbe communication/interaction.
