Title       : Raman Lidar Applications in Mesoscale Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a0129605

Award Number: 0129605
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270076             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond Hoff hoff@umbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Belay Demoz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore County
	      1000 Hilltop Circle
	      Baltimore, MD  21250    301/455-1000

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              While much progress has been made over the last decade in understanding the
              structural characteristics of severe weather systems, many questions remain
              unanswered on the critical factors that trigger deep convection.  Recent work
              has shown that the dryline, a sharp horizontal gradient in moisture and often
              found over the south central United States in spring and early summer, creates
              a favorable environment for initiation of convection.  This mesoscale
              phenomenon is significant because it is often linked to the occurrence of
              severe weather, which tends to develop along and to the east of the dryline. 
              This is particularly true during a cold frontal approach, which furnishes a
              mechanism for the lifting of the moist air.  To date however, there have been
              very few detailed studies of the moisture structure and evolution of the
              dryline.

The Principal Investigators will perform a three year study to
              quantify the detailed vertical and horizontal moisture stratification of the
              pre-thunderstorm environment and drylines as well as the potential role of
              humidity in the development and initiation of convective storms using the
              capability of Raman lidar systems.  They will use the Raman lidar to verify
              theoretical as well as numerical predictions of dryline characteristics
              dryline-front interactions and associated convection.  This project relies on
              acquiring and utilizing Raman lidar observations of water vapor mixing ratio
              and aerosol profile data observed between 1994 and 2000 during several field
              missions at different parts of the U.S.A.  Data from the International H20
              Project (IHOP), planned for May-June 2002 in the southern Great Plains of the
              United states, and the Water Vapor Intensive Operations (WVIOP) conducted by
              the Department of Energy (DOE) Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) program,
              also will be utilized.  A combination of analyses of existing data from Raman
              lidars, rawinsonde, radars, microwave radiometers, wind profilers and other
              conventional data sets and a numerical model will be used to achieve the
              objectives of this research.  Dynamic, thermodynamic and moisture structure of
              convergence zones, frontal surfaces, and drylines as well as the temporal
              development of the boundary layer will be analyzed.  

Areas of focus include
              the effects of small-scale variations in the vertical structure of moisture
              during drylines and cold fronts on storm initiation and convection and the role
              of the structure of the mid-tropospheric layer in storm dynamics and initiation
              and/or inhibition.  The calculation of convective available potential energy
              and convective inhibition as well as simple model simulations of selected case
              studies to better understand the role of wind shear in the initiation of
              convection are included.

The results of the research should provide a better
              understanding of the diurnal characteristics of the dryline, complement the
              theoretical predictions of convective initiation by proving or disproving the
              predicted quantities and eventually contribute towards improvements in the
              forecasting skills of severe weather conditions.
