Title       : Spring Topology and Dynamics Conference 2002, at the University of Texas at
               Austin on March 21-23, 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0129227

Award Number: 0129227
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cameron M. Gordon gordon@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan W. Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Luecke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0129227
Cameron M. Gordon

The Department of Mathematics at the
              University of Texas 
at Austin will host the 2002 Spring Topology and Dynamics
              
Conference. Now in its 36th year, this is the largest annual 
topology
              conference in the US. It has a broad scope that 
encompasses set-theoretic and
              general topology, continuum
theory and dynamical systems, geometric group
              theory and 
geometric topology. It thus provides a unique forum for
              
researchers in a wide range of disciplines within topology. 
There will be
              eight invited plenary one-hour lectures of a semi-expository nature, given by
              leading researchers in the 
areas covered. There will also be twenty invited
              half-hour 
lectures, together with 15-minute contributed talks, held in
four
              parallel sessions. The invited speakers have been 
selected with the help of
              an advisory committee of experts 
in the various subfields.

Topology is one
              of the major subdisciplines of mathematics, 
and, at just over a hundred years
              old, the youngest. It 
originated with Henri Poincare around 1900, who
              introduced 
it as a means of describing the qualitative behavior of 
certain
              physical systems (for example, our solar system),
whose complexity renders a
              precise quantitative analysis 
too difficult.  The wide range covered by the
              subject today 
is well represented by the Conference. General topology deals
              
with the abstract properties of topological spaces; set-theoretic
topology
              impinges upon the logical foundations of mathematics. 
The study of dynamical
              systems is close to Poincare's original motivation, and deals with the behavior
              of various iterative 
processes. These often give rise to complex objects,
              continua,
which are studied in their own right. Geometric topology 
deals
              with manifolds, objects which are locally like 
n-dimensional Euclidean space,
              but whose global structure 
might be quite complicated. For instance, there is
              a lot 
of current activity in 3-dimensional topology, whose goal
              is
essentially to describe all theoretically possible 
3-dimensional
              universes. Rich connections have recently 
been discovered between this
              subject and quantum physics, 
while on the other hand topological techniques
              from the 
theory of knots in 3-dimensional space have recently 
been applied
              to the study of DNA. Finally, geometric 
group theory, a relatively new
              subject, studies groups, 
which are algebraic objects, from a topological
              point of view; 
this is leading to deep connections between topology and
              
algebra. The interaction at the Conference between workers 
in all these
              different branches of topology is expected to 
be very fruitful.

