Title       : BE: A Multi-Method Analysis of the Social and Technical Conditions for
               Interdisciplinary Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2002   
File        : a0129573

Award Number: 0129573
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $253490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana R. Rhoten rhoten@hybridvigor.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julian Orr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Denise Caruso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hybrid Vigor
	      1300 20th Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941072910    415/543-8113

NSF Program : 1691      BE: DYN COUPLED NATURAL-HUMAN
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1689,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Numerous factors have driven the desire to promote more interdisciplinary
              research in the environmental sciences, including the desire to better
              understand the complex interactions among the many different natural and human
              systems that characterize the world and the need to better integrate the
              efforts of those researchers seeking to answer fundamental questions about
              various systems with those interesting advancing methods and techniques for the
              conduct of scientific research.  Despite the acclaim accorded interdisciplinary
              research, relatively little scholarly attention has been given to dynamics that
              result in effective work that spans disciplinary boundaries.  This project will
              use a multi-level, multi-method approach to study interdisciplinary
              collaboration as it relates to scientific production and innovation.  The
              investigators will combine a socio-anthropological approach with an
              organizational perspective to examine how interdisciplinary collaboration
              transpires as well as when and how it leads to scientific production and
              innovation.  This project will be a pilot study designed to test the
              effectiveness and tractability of a range of approaches on a sample of
              interdisciplinary centers that focus on environmental research and education
              and that have received NSF research support.  The pilot will emphasize two
              strands if research.  The first strand will focus on interdisciplinary research
              network structure.  It will use techniques of social network analysis to
              explore structural relations among individuals in eight sample centers.  Data
              used in this part of the pilot will be drawn from a variety of sources,
              including surveys of individual researchers, a census of ties among individuals
              within centers, and bibliometric analyses of citations in curriculum vitae. 
              The second strand will focus on interdisciplinary research network dynamics. 
              This strand will focus on interaction and organizational analyses of knowledge
              transfer, conversion, and integration.  Special attention will be given to the
              connectedness, centrality, and roles and positions of different researchers and
              disciplines in the networks of two sample centers.  Data will be gathered
              through the conduct of interviews, the review of artifacts and documents, and
              the observation of activities in the centers.  The results of these activities
              will be used to generate white papers, to make presentations as major meetings
              of groups like the American Association for the Advancement of Science and the
              American Sociological Association, and to submit papers to scholarly journals
              like Social Studies of Science, Science Communication, Human Communication
              Research, Social Epistemology, and Organization Science.

Through these
              analyses, the investigators expect to provide new insights into the personal,
              organizational, psychological, and intellectual components of the research
              environments and interactions within centers, and they expect to distinguish
              between factors that characterize successful interdisciplinary collaborations. 
              This project will advance general knowledge of the factors that lead to
              successful interdisciplinary research, thereby facilitating such work among
              members of the myriad research communities who now are exploring collaborative
              work with each other.  The project also should assist NSF and other funding
              agencies in assessing which proposed projects are most likely to generate new
              insights that span traditional disciplinary boundaries.  This project is being
              supported with funds designated by NSF for the support of projects in
              Biocomplexity in the Environment.

