Title       : A Functional Genomics Study of the Primary Pathways for Carbon Metabolism in a
               Hyperthermophilic Archaeon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0129841

Award Number: 0129841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Well over 200 genomic sequencing efforts have been completed ranging from
              pathogens and exotic microbes, to yeast, rice and human, yielding a phenomenal
              array of sequence information, the comprehension of which is only just
              beginning.  Understanding how a living cell works, however, obviously requires
              much more than simply determining the genome sequence and the number of genes. 
              A fundamental problem is how to find genes and assign functions to these genes.
               Insights can be obtained by analyzing the sequences of the proteins that the
              genes encode using the available databases, but by such methods less than half
              of the genes in a given organism can be assigned a function with any degree of
              confidence.  Hence, the roles of about half of the genes in any given genome is
              essentially unknown.  This suggests that half of life's biochemistry is
              unknown.  A major effort is therefore needed to assign biological roles to
              these unknown genes through functional genomic approaches.

The goal of this
              research is to identify genes involved in carbon metabolism of Pyrococcus
              furiosus, an archaeon (archaebacterium) that grows optimally at 100C.  The
              research will largely focus on finding genes involved in carbon metabolism in
              the 'unknown' half of  the microbial genome.  The P. furiosus 1.908 Mb genome
              contains approximately 2,200 putative genes.  The fundamental hypothesis to be
              tested is that many of the more than 1,000 genes of  unknown function play key
              roles in primary carbon metabolism by as yet unknown mechanisms.  This will be
              ascertained using DNA microarray analyses using all 2,200 genes in the P.
              furiosus genome.  Preliminary data have shown that a surprisingly large number
              of the unknown genes are regulated by the carbon source used to grow the
              organism.  The specific aims are a) to identify previously uncharacterized
              genes involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and C-1 compounds
              by analyzing expression levels using cells grown under a wide variety of
              conditions, b) to confirm gene expression data by enzymatic assays and
              metabolite analyses, and c) to characterize the key enzymes by direct
              purification using P. furiosus biomass from 600 liter fermentations and by
              using recombinant proteins that are available through a complementary
              structural genomics effort with P. furiosus.  It is anticipated that the
              results of this study will provide completely new insights into the metabolism
              of fixed carbon compounds and the role of what are currently hypothetical genes
              in both P. furiosus and in other organisms, including human.


