Title       : Optimal Utilization and Impact of Water Vapor and Other High Resolution
               Observations in Storm-Scale Quantitative Precipitation Forecasts (QPF)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0129892

Award Number: 0129892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $825133             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming Xue mxue@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jidong Gao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick H. Carr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith A. Brewster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In an effort to better characterize the four-dimensional distribution of water
              in the atmosphere with a view toward improving understanding of its impact on
              deep convection, the International H20 Project (IHOP-2002) field experiment
              will take place over the Southern Great Plains during May and June of 2002. 
              The four focus areas of IHOP are: 1) quantitative precipitation forecasting
              (QPF); 2) convective initiation; 3) atmospheric boundary layer processes; and
              4) instrumentation research.

The Principal Investigators will conduct
              storm-scale research with particular emphasis on moisture sensitivity and data
              assimilation in the context of numerical quantitative precipitation
              forecasting.  Specifically, they will:

1. Develop new and improved
              techniques, based particularly on variational approaches, for the analysis and
              assimilation of water and related diabatic fields (e.g., latent and sensible
              heating) at the scale of individual convective storms and their larger
              mesoscale clusters.
2. Study the impact of special and routinely available,
              high-resolution observations of water vapor and hydrometeor content on the
              forecasting of convective storm morphology and quantitative precipitation at
              resolutions of one to a few kilometers.  Both forward and adjoint models will
              be used to assess sensitivity and data impact.
3. Develop and evaluate
              techniques for estimating error characteristics (i.e., error covariance
              matrices) of numerical forecasts at the convective scale to improve the quality
              of three-dimensional and four-dimensional variational data assimilation.
4.
              Apply newly developed single Doppler velocity and thermodynamic retrieval
              algorithms to mobile radar data collected during IHOP and assimilate the
              retrieved data into a forecast model.  
5. Provide real-time, high resolution
              (2-3 km) analysis and forecasts for ranges between 6 and 12 hours, to assist
              the operational decision-making and targeting of mobile observations during the
              field phase of the IHOP.

The project will provide much needed education and
              training for graduate students and a post-doc in the increasingly important
              areas of variational data assimilation, numerical weather prediction and
              ensemble forecasting.  The research findings will have a direct path to
              operations through the PI's involvement as one of the lead scientists in the
              Weather Research and Forecast (WRF) model system development project.  Although
              much of the work to be performed herein will use the Center for Analysis and
              Prediction of Storms' (CAPS) Advanced Regional Prediction System (ARPS) owing
              to its maturity and capability, the new WRF will be used whenever possible. 
              Further, the results obtained here, and the software developed, will be applied
              to further the development of the WRF model as part of CAPS' involvement in the
              WRF project.
