Title       : A multi-Consumer Perspective of Consumer-Resource Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0129270

Award Number: 0129270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saran Twombly                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Priyanga Amarasekare amarasek@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number:  		DEB-01-29270
Proposal Title:		A multi-species perspective
              of consumer-resource dynamics
PI Name:  		Priyanga Amarasekare
Institution:
              		University of Chicago

	This research investigates how multiple predator
              and parasite species influence the dynamics (change in abundance) of their
              common prey or host species.  The ecological system that is the focus of
              research is the harlequin bug and two parasitoid species (parasitic insects
              that grow on and kill other insects) that attack the bug's eggs in southern
              California.  The system presents a puzzle: multiple parasitoid species can
              coexist on the same host stage as well as reduce fluctuations in host
              abundance.  Solving the puzzle requires understanding the mechanism(s) by which
              both parasitoid species coexist on a single host species, and how these
              mechanism(s) in turn influence the parasitoids' effect on the host.  The first
              goal is to distinguish between two hypotheses that address mechanisms of
              parasitoid coexistence are intraguild predation (IGP) and temporal niche
              partitioning (TNP).  Intraguild predation predicts that species will coexist
              because one species is superior at attacking unparasitized hosts while the
              other species is superior at attacking hosts already parasitized by the first
              (multiparasitism).  Temporal niche partitioning predicts that species will
              coexist because each is superior at attacking hosts at different times of the
              year.  Predictions for the two hypotheses will be tested via manipulative field
              experiments.  Understanding how coexisting parasitoid species influence host
              population dynamics will be the domain of mathematical models that explore the
              impact of parasitoids on host abundance and variability under different
              mechanisms of coexistence (IGP vs. TNP).  
This research is novel because it
              investigates how multiple consumer species influence the dynamics of a shared
              resource, a poorly understood issue that is critical to the maintenance of
              species diversity.  It also has applied significance.  The decision to release
              single or multiple natural enemies to control a pest, an issue at the heart of
              biological pest control, depends crucially on the mechanisms by which natural
              enemies coexist on a given pest species.  Linking mechanisms of resource use
              with population dynamics allows us to predict which combinations of natural
              enemies provide the most effective control of a pest. 



