Title       : Metal-Metal Bonded Compounds of the Transition Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  2002  
File        : a0129785

Award Number: 0129785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381201             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Corbett jcorbett@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project explores the synthesis and physical and chemical characterization
              of a new class of materials, viz., ternary chalcogenides of the group 3 and
              group 4 transition and lanthanide metals. Many of these condensed cluster
              phases appear to be uniquely stabilized by strongly bound, late transition
              metals as interstitials in nominal clusters of the early metals, which is a new
              concept in solid state chemistry to be explored in this project. These
              cluster-interstitial combinations also allow insight into local interactions
              present around impurities in enigmatic intermetallic and pure metal systems,
              which is a new direction in chemistry.  Physical properties of these will be
              defined by crystal structure studies, electronic conductivity, and magnetic
              susceptibility measurements, and with parallel extended-Hckel and density
              functional theory (band) calculations. Explorations for new examples of
              aperiodic quasicrystals and a new method for their direct structural definition
              are also planned. These studies afford advanced students training along new
              frontiers in techniques and chemistry. Participating undergraduate, graduate,
              and postdoctoral students will get valuable training and experience in advanced
              methods in solid state chemistry. Half of the personnel have been women in
              recent years, and the proportion is presently two-thirds. 

The discovery and
              development of new materials, utilizing synthetic explorations to uncover new
              and unprecedented solid compounds, structures and properties is crucial to
              advancing materials science. Successful syntheses often involve specialized
              techniques, conditions, and exotic containers that are not widely employed and,
              since the availability of new materials is a high priority in both industry and
              academia, students trained in these areas typically compete very well in the
              job market. 



