Title       : The Study of Gene Exchange During Recent Speciation Events among Cichlids of
               Lake Malawi
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0129724

Award Number: 0129724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $404000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emanuel B. Hey hey@biology.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
	There are over one thousand species of fish in the family Cichlidae
              (Cichlids) throughout the world,  but surprisingly most of this diversity
              occurs in the great African lakes, Malawi (Nyasa), Tanganyika, and Victoria. 
              These lakes are not of great age, in evolutionary terms, and biologists are
              puzzled over how the hundreds of unique Cichlid species, that exist in each of
              these lakes, could have arisen quickly.  The traditional model of species
              formation assumes that separate species first begin as isolated populations
              that do not exchange genes.  However, an important alternative model that could
              apply where there are not sharp barriers to migration, is that species arise
              without population separation.  This model includes gene exchange between newly
              forming species, as well as natural selection acting to cause divergence.  It
              is an interesting model, but difficult to test.  In this project, researchers
              will test the model by applying  a newly developed genetic procedure for
              detecting recent gene exchange between several Cichlid species from Lake
              Malawi.  
	The Cichlids of Lake Malawi have become a model system for many
              researchers studying speciation.  Yet the critical question here, as in other
              cases of recently formed species,  is whether natural selection has caused the
              divergence directly, or whether species arise as completely separate
              populations that diverge separately.   This question is fundamental to the
              understanding of how biological diversity arises. 

