Title       : RUI: Functional Convergence in the Venom Delivery System of Snakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0129805

Award Number: 0129805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Young youngab@lafayette.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lafayette College
	      High Street
	      Easton, PA  18042    215/250-5000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Snakes have one of the most specialized feeding mechanisms among vertebrate
              animals. One of the key aspects of snake feeding is the presence of a venom
              delivery system in roughly one-fifth of the living snakes. Molecular and
              anatomical studies suggest that a venom delivery system has evolved
              independently in at least four snake lineages. The Viperidae (including
              pit-vipers and true vipers), the Elapidae (cobras and sea snakes), the
              Atractaspidae (Stiletto snakes from Africa), and several taxa - such as the
              boomslang - within the Colubridae have all evolved venom delivery systems. In
              recent years a suite of techniques were developed to study the mechanics of
              venom injection in one representative viper, the western diamondback
              rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox). The purpose of this grant is to apply these same
              techniques to the mechanics of venom delivery in representative elapids. This
              will be the first experimental analysis of venom expulsion in an elapid, and a
              comparison with the earlier studies will highlight the degree of functional
              convergence among snake venom delivery systems. The venom delivery system will
              be examined through four integrated projects on the kinematics, neuro-muscular
              control, functional morphology, and behavioral ecology of venom injection. The
              kinematics of venom expulsion will be studied using high-speed digital
              videography and computer-based image analysis techniques to document the degree
              to which the monocled cobra (Naja kaouthia) modulates its strike depending on
              such factors as the size of the target and the behavioral context of the
              strike. The kinematics of venom "spitting" by the red spitting cobra (N.
              pallida) will also be documented. In snakes the venom is expulsed through
              skeletal muscle contraction; by regulating the contractile state of the muscle
              the snake could control the amount of venom injected. The extrinsic venom gland
              musculature will be studied in N. kaouthia using anatomical techniques to
              document the gross and microscopic structure of the muscle and its innervation.
              Subsequent experimental analyses will combine muscle stimulation with
              measurements of venom flow and pressure to document any spatial functional
              specialization within the muscle, and the motor units within the muscle will be
              mapped using glycogen depletion. In cobras venom forced from the venom gland by
              muscle contraction flows through the venom duct into a series of soft tissue
              chambers which are surrounded by the fang sheath, a drape of connective tissue
              and epithelium. The functional morphology of this region will be studied in
              both N. kaouthia and N. pallida using gross and microscopic anatomy, radiopaque
              tracers (used to document venom barriers), cannulation experiments, and
              recordings of venom pressure. The behavioral ecology of venom injection will be
              studied by chronically implanting transonic flow probes onto the venom duct of
              N. kaouthia. Venom flow (measured with flow probes) will be synchronized with
              high-speed digital videography while the cobra strikes a variety of defensive
              and predatory targets. This will document the kinematics of venom flow during
              the strike and reveal the extent to which cobras inject differential volumes of
              venom depending on target size or behavioral context.
