Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Flow and Resuspension of a Suspension in a
               Pipe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0129079

Award Number: 0129079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20238              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey F. Morris jeff.morris@che.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 5918,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              0129079
Morris

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in chemical
              and transport systems involves researchers and students at Georgia Institute of
              Technology, University of Florida, University of Marseilles, and the Ecole
              Polytechnique.  The US investigators, Jeffrey F. Morris and Jason E. Butler,
              and the French investigators, Elisabeth Guazzelli and Paul Manneville, will
              collaborate on theoretical and experimental studies of fluid transport and
              suspension of solid particles in pipes (tubes).   The suspension mechanical
              perspective  - in which particles impact the flow processes - and the role of
              inertia will be studied.  Particle fraction and velocity distributions in
              pipes, flow structures and stability, bulk stresses in particle-laden liquids
              are emphasized.

The collaboration merges experimental and theoretical
              expertise of the US and French research teams.  Both types of expertise reside
              in the US and French groups.  Jeffrey Morris is known for his quantitative
              theories.  This is complemented by the French investigator's experimental
              expertise.  The collaboration provides access to some unique French
              experimental facilities equipped with a functioning experimental loop for pipe
              flow suspensions. This collaboration advances understanding of engineering
              problems related to particulate transport.  These problems are important in
              numerous industrial and geotechnical areas and processes, including fluvial and
              oceanic sediment transport and deposition. 
 
This award represents the US
              side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover travel
              funds and living expenses for the US investigator and students.  The CNRS will
              support visits by French researchers and students to the United States. 

