Title       : Viral Influence on Freshwater Cyanobacteria and Toxin Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0129118

Award Number: 0129118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300147             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven W. Wilhelm wilhelm@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0129118
Wilhelm
Cyanobacteria in freshwater environments respond to a variety
              of well-studied physical factors as well as changes in the chemistry of their
              environment. Overlying this is the influence of cyanophages, which persist in
              thousands per mL and regulate cyanobacterial production, proliferation and
              diversity. As blooms of toxin-producing species are increasing on a global
              scale, and evidence is emerging that suggests chronic, low-level exposures to
              cyanotoxins may be tumorogenic or carcinogenic, it has become critical to
              develop a basic understanding of the ecological relationship between freshwater
              cyanobacteria and the viruses that infect them. This project is a coordinated,
              interdisciplinary lab and field study designed to examine the ecology and
              diversity of lytic freshwater cyanophages at research sites in the Tennessee
              River and in one of its tributaries. Augmented by a cruise of opportunity in
              the western basin of Lake Erie, this study will provide a fundamental insight
              on the cyanophage-host relationship in freshwaters as well as provide new
              insight on the role of viruses in the release of cyanotoxins in both lab and
              natural systems. The laboratory component will further this work by providing
              insight on the diversity of the lytic cyanophages from these systems. This
              program of research contains a significant educational component that will
              train both graduate and undergraduate students (including those from
              underrepresented groups) in the interdisciplinary aspects of microbial ecology,
              limnology and molecular biology. The final scientific product of this study
              will be information that will enhance our understanding of cyanobacterial
              proliferation and cyanophage dynamics in freshwater systems. It will provide a
              critical insight on the role of viruses in the flux of toxins into
              the
dissolved phase of potable water supplies. It will also serve to provide
              broader information for those interested in water management for both
              consumable and recreational activities.

