Title       : LTREB: Exotic Pests, Nitrogen Saturation, and Nutrient Cycling in a Northeastern
               Forest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2003   
File        : a0129138

Award Number: 0129138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Lovett lovettg@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive G. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1196      LONG-TERM RSCH IN ENVIR BIO
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Lovett
0129138
This LTREB project will support sustained research on the
              direct and indirect effects of two exotic pests that threaten the forests of
              the eastern US, the gypsy moth and the hemlock wooly adelgid. The gypsy moth is
              the most important defoliator of eastern forests. It preferentially attacks
              oak-dominated forests and causes widespread defoliation during periodic
              outbreaks. The hemlock woolly adelgid is a more recently introduced pest that
              is devastating hemlock trees in the mid-Atlantic states and New England. It is
              an aphid-like insect that feeds exclusively on hemlocks, and generally results
              in 100% mortality of trees within several years after infestation. The research
              questions here involve the effect of these pests on the nitrogen cycle of
              forests. Both of these pests are occurring against the backdrop of elevated
              levels of nitrogen deposition due to nitrogen oxide emissions from fossil fuel
              combustion and ammonia emission from agricultural activities. These is a strong
              probability of a complex interaction between nitrogen deposition and the
              effects of these pests on the nitrogen cycles of the forest ecosystems under
              study. This LTREB project will continue measurements of forest productivity and
              nutrient cycling in long-term study plots in Millbrook, NY. The plots include
              both oak plots in the zone likely to be affected by the gypsy moth, and hemlock
              plots in an area soon to be infested with hemlock woolly adelgid. In addition,
              a long-term N-addition experiment in an oak forest will be maintained, as well.
              This work has direct relevance to management of eastern forests, in that gypsy
              moth and hemlock woolly adelgid are two of the most devastating pests in the
              region. The phenomenon of nitrogen saturation and its effects on forest health
              and the quality of surface waters, is an emerging management and policy issue
              in the eastern US. Thus, the study of the interaction of these two stresses is
              of both scientific and practical importance.

