Title       : Investigating Synaptic Growth Through Live Imaging and Genetics.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0129867

Award Number: 0129867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graeme Davis gdavis@biochem.ucsf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Francisco
	      3333 California Street
	      San Francisco, CA  941430962    415/666-9000

NSF Program : 5500      NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1190,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Davis will combine live imaging techniques with Drosophila genetics to
              visualize synapse remodeling in vivo and analyze the underlying molecular
              mechanisms that control synapse remodeling in real time.  Synaptic connections
              are the sites of communication between neurons. The precise modification of
              synapses is essential to the correct wiring of neuronal circuitry during
              development and to the modification of neural circuits during adult plasticity.
               Despite the identification of myriad synaptic proteins, the mechanisms that
              control synaptic bouton formation, stabilization and retraction are still
              poorly understood.  Dr. Davis will characterize, with fine temporal resolution,
              the sequence of events by which new synapses are assembled, stabilized and
              disassembled.  Combined with a genetic analysis, these studies aim to identify
              important molecular mechanisms underlying the events of synapse remodeling.  In
              previously published studies, Dr. Davis has demonstrated that mutations in the
              cell adhesion molecule Fasciclin II and the microtubule associated protein
              Futsch impair synaptic growth.  Dr. Davis will now examine how these and other
              molecules affect synapse growth in real time.  Preliminary data from Dr. Davis
              demonstrate that new presynaptic varicosities can be added to the nerve
              terminal as rapidly as 2 to 5 minutes and can be eliminated during normal
              development.  These data challenge previous hypotheses regarding synaptic
              growth at this synapse, the Drosophila NMJ, that suggest that synaptic boutons
              are added slowly over the course of hours and, once added, are not eliminated.
              Dr. Davis now hypothesizes that presynaptic varicosities can form very rapidly,
              but only a subset of the newly formed varicosities become stabilized to form
              functional boutons.  Dr. Davis further hypothesizes that, once stabilized,
              synaptic boutons are rarely eliminated.  Thus, an essential growth regulatory
              event may be the determination of whether a new presynaptic varicosity is
              stabilized.  The live imaging experiments proposed in this study will address
              this possibility in detail.  Dr. Davis will also investigate the molecular
              mechanisms that determine whether newly formed synaptic boutons are stabilized
              or retracted.  Preliminary data implicate the dynactin protein complex as an
              important regulator of synapse stabilization.  Inhibition the dynactin complex
              causes the elimination of synaptic terminals at the NMJ.  Live imaging combined
              with genetic analysis will precisely define how synapse elimination occurs in
              the dynactin mutations.  Finally, Dr. Davis will use well characterized
              mutations that alter nerve and muscle activity to determine the roles of pre-
              and postsynaptic activity in the process of synaptic growth and elimination
              using live, in vivo imaging.  


