Title       : SGER: Alkaloid Transport in Nicotiana Tabacum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0129943

Award Number: 0129943
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69956              (Estimated)
Investigator: John G. Jelesko jelesko@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to characterize a Nicotiana tabacum membrane
              transporter that
may be responsible for the transport of alkaloids from their
              initial site of biosynthesis in roots to
xylem tissue and for their final
              accumulation in leaves. This will be accomplished by using a gene
fragment
              previously isolated during transcriptional profiling experiments as a
              hybridization
probe to isolate the full-length cDNA. With this cDNA in hand,
              an extensive effort will be made
to determine the tissue and intercellular
              localization patterns of the putative alkaloid transport
protein, using both
              RNase protection assays and transgenic reporter gene fusions.
              Biochemical
confirmation of alkaloid transport activity will be accomplished
              by heterologous expression of
the putative alkaloid transporter in Xenopus
              oocytes and directly measuring alkaloid transport
kinetics. Finally, in vivo
              modulation of the putative alkaloid transporter gene expression levels
will be
              achieved using overexpression and antisense transgenic hairy root cultures to
              assess the
effect on overall alkaloid accumulation levels. These experiments
              may lead to the first
identification and molecular characterization of a
              postulated alkaloid transporter that is
responsible for mobilizing alkaloids
              between their site of biosynthesis in specific root cell types
towards their
              site of action in the leaves. This would be a significant contribution
              to
understanding both how and why the site of biosynthesis of many plant
              secondary metabolites is
often spatially separated from the site of action of
              these important defense compounds.
