Title       : Dissertation Research: Defending the Homeland: The Cultural Construction of U.S.
               Defense in Everyday Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  2001  
File        : a0129762

Award Number: 0129762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Rubinstein rar@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Since the late 1990s, people in agencies at multiple levels of government have
              sought to prepare for terrorist attacks. Attempts to form a functional response
              structure have been hampered by communication and coordination problems among
              practitioners unaccustomed to their new roles in national defense. This
              dissertation research project by a student of cultural anthropology is a
              multi-sited, ethnographic study of homeland defense in the United States. The
              research will be conducted in a policy-based community comprising those
              individuals working in local, state, and federal level organizations operating
              in the Boston, Massachusetts area.  Based on network and domain analyses in
              conjunction with ethnographic interviews, the study will examine (1) how
              practitioners from varied backgrounds (police, medical personnel, FBI agents,
              firefighters) construct their models of homeland defense, (2) how those models
              affect interactions, and (3) how local experiences intersect with and
              potentially transform policies. It examines homeland defense as an area of
              daily practice and discourse through which traditional ideas of defense are
              challenged and either maintained or transformed. The project advances
              anthropological knowledge of defense as a culturally constructed institution,
              expands the application of practice theory, and addresses the methodological
              challenges of studying multi-sited organizations as parts of daily social life.
              Of particular relevance, the research has the potential to offer practical
              insights into communication barriers that hamper coordination of homeland
              defense efforts.
